---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol9 - MONDAY 20 JANUARY 1964'
layout: debate
year: 1964
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 20 JANUARY 1964</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1964-01-20T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

<debateSection name="vacancy">

<heading>VACANCY</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that a vacancy had occurred in the representation in the House of the electoral division of Vanderbijl-park owing to the resignation to-day of Dr. C. de Wet.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#bills_to_be_introduced_in_the_senate">

<heading>BILLS TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE SENATE</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>In accordance with the provisions of Section 32 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I wish to announce that the under-mentioned Bills will, be introduced in the Senate during the present Session of Parliament:</p>

<ol>

<li>(i) Land Settlement Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(ii) Aviation Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(iii) Carriage by Air Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(iv) Air Service Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(v) Vocational Education Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(vi) University of South Africa Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(vii) Nature Conservation Bill;</li>

<li>(viii) Bantu Special Education Bill;</li>

<li>(ix) Mines and Works Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(x) Weeds Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xi) South African Tourist Corporation Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xii) Wine and Spirits Control Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xiii) Marketing Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xiv) Fruit Export Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xv) Agricultural Warehouse Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xvi) Electricity Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xvii) Fuel Research Institute and Coal Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xviii) Indian Laws Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xix) Evidence Bill;</li>

<li>(xx) Teargas Bill;</li>

<li>(xxi) Immovable Property (Removal or Modification of Restrictions) Bill; and</li>

<li>(xxii) Soil Conservation Amendment Bill.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#first_reading_of_bills">

<heading>FIRST READING OF BILLS</heading>

<p>The following Bills were read a first time:</p>

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation Bill.</li>

<li>Financial Institutions (Investment of Funds) Bill.</li>

<li>University of Port Elizabeth Bill.</li>

<li>Wool Amendment Bill.</li>

<li>Sea Fisheries Amendment Bill.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committees">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEES</heading>

<p>The following Select Committees were appointed:</p>

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Internal Arrangements.</li>

<li>Select Committee on State-owned Land.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Public Accounts.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Change in the Coinage.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Railways and Harbours.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Pensions.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Library of Parliament.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Irrigation Matters.</li>

</ul>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1964-01-20T14:30:00">2.30 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

