---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol9 - FRIDAY 17 JANUARY 1964'
layout: debate
year: 1964
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 17 JANUARY 1964</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Pursuant to Proclamation No. 160 of the State President, dated 28 June 1963, summoning Parliament to meet on this day for the dispatch of business, members met in the Assembly Chamber of the House of Assembly, Parliament Houses, Cape Town, at 11.30 a.m.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess vacancies had occurred in the representation in this House of the following electoral divisions:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Karoo, owing to the death of Mr. G. S. P. le Roux on 16 July 1963; and</li>

<li>(2) Beaufort West, owing to the resignation of the Hon. E. H. Louw on 16 January 1964.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced further that the following vacancies had been filled during the recess:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Wynberg, on 31 July 1963, by the election of Mrs. Catherine Dorothea Taylor; and</li>

<li>(2) Karoo, on 21 October 1963, by the election of Mr. Graham Sutton Eden.</li>

</ol>

<p>Mrs. C. D. TAYLOR, introduced by Mr. Hughes and Mr. Connan, made and subscribed to the oath and took her seat.</p>

<p>Mr. G. S. EDEN, introduced by Mr. Hughes and Mr. Timoney, made and subscribed to the oath and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members proceeded to the Senate House to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_speech">

<heading>OPENING SPEECH</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the Third Session of the Second Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">Parliament&#x2019;s main concern during the coming Session must be to extend the measures taken to ensure the proper development of the various communities in the Republic, and to stimulate still further the remarkable growth and prosperity of all sectors of the South African economy. From this, internal strength, peace and order and improved external relations will follow. These various matters therefore deserve some attention as a background to the legislative programme.</block>

<block name="quote">The process of guiding the various Bantu nations in our midst on the road to self-government <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0016"/>has reached an important stage by the recent election in the Transkei and the constitution of its first Parliament and Cabinet. Most impressive was the orderliness which characterized the election and the democratic spirit in which the choice of a Chief Minister and his Cabinet was accepted. This, and the goodwill between Black and White in South Africa which was manifest at all stages of this development, has amply proved the wisdom of the legislation which set out to give a whole nation, step by step, the experience and opportunity to control its own destinies as a true democracy.</block>

<block name="quote">The Transkei will be served to an ever-increasing extent by its own people. Owing to the educational advantages enjoyed by the Xhosa people in the past, a wide range of posts in their own civil service could be filled by them from the outset. Experienced members of the Civil Service of the Republic have, however, been placed for this transitional stage at the disposal of the Chief Minister and his five Ministers to promote the development of the Transkei, to aid in training the Bantu officials who will gradually replace them and to lay the foundations of a healthy Civil Service tradition on which the Bantu can build as and when they undertake full responsibility for the efficient functioning of the various Departments.</block>

<block name="quote">Further legislative provision will be made during this Session for the financing and administration of this development, as well as in connection with the administration and socio-economic development of the Bantu in urban and rural areas, and in the other homelands.</block>

<block name="quote">A Bill will be introduced to deal with the education of handicapped Bantu children, such as the blind and the deaf. This service, together with the many services rendered by the Department of Bantu Education, is necessary if the Bantu are to participate to the utmost in the service of their own people.</block>

<block name="quote">The next step is also to be taken in the community-building of the Coloured population. Parliament will consider a Bill providing for a Council with legislative powers to deal with certain matters affecting the Coloured people throughout the Republic. It will be proposed that the Council consist of both elected and nominated members, and be representative of the Coloured people throughout the country.</block>

<block name="quote">The first steps are being taken to aid the Indians in South Africa in community-building on similar lines, in both the local and national spheres. An advisory body is being appointed for the purpose of official communication and consultation.</block>

<block name="quote">Another important duty facing Parliament is to continue to promote the economic welfare of the country. The investment climate is one of optimism, and the economy has shown remarkable activity. This activity in both the primary and secondary sectors, combined with fairly stable prices, has provided the consumer with a high real income and this in turn has ensured an increased commercial turnover and general economic prosperity.</block>

<block name="quote">Imports were considerably higher during 1963. A noteworthy improvement in exports was achieved. This occurred notwithstanding the falling tendency in international prices of certain primary products. It is becoming increasingly important to concentrate on the refinement of our primary products and to seek a wider geographical distribution of South African exports.</block>

<block name="quote">The internal market can also be expanded. Population growth, immigration rate, higher standards of living and better wages for all sections of the population are factors stimulating demand.</block>

<block name="quote">The State-assisted Immigration Scheme has been particularly successful during the past year, and every effort will be made to increase the rate of immigration in the future. The low emigration figure clearly indicates confidence in the economic progress and the future of the Republic.</block>

<block name="quote">Further measures are being taken to encourage the decentralization of industry. Progress has been made and valuable experience gained in the implementation of this process.</block>

<block name="quote">Gold production is still on the increase in spite of the closing down of some of the older mines on the Witwatersrand. No sudden fall in production need be feared. The Government&#x2019;s decision to provide financial aid for mines threatened with abnormal quantities of underground water through the closing of adjacent mines, is an important indication of measures continually being taken to prevent untimely closing.</block>

<block name="quote">Legislation will be introduced dealing with coinage reform. This is the second phase of the process of decimalization. The Bill will be referred to a Select Committee after the first reading.</block>

<block name="quote">Amending Bills will be placed before Parliament dealing with Electricity; Companies: Weights and Measures: Sea Fisheries; Hire Purchase; the Fuel Research Institute: Development of Inventions; the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research; Standards; Mines and Works, and Pneumoconiosis Compensation. There will be Bills on Precious Stones; Authors&#x2019; Rights; Trade Coupons; Price Control and on the institution of a Gas Control Board and Distribution Organization.</block>

<block name="quote">Farming conditions were reasonably favourable during the past year although certain parts of the country were drought-stricken for long periods. Unfortunately such conditions still prevail in certain areas.</block>

<block name="quote">After years of comparative inactivity, the locust plague appeared in several extensive areas, particularly in the Cape Province, in the beginning and again at the end of 1963. By <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0017"/>means of effective measures taken by the State, the plague was brought under control. The necessary assistance was also given to South West Africa to combat the locust plague there.</block>

<block name="quote">Although large parts of the country had good late summer and early winter rains and agricultural production and income increased on the whole, the drought of the past year caused damage to a considerable part of the farming industry, particularly in the stock-breeding sector and Government assistance was rendered on a generous scale.</block>

<block name="quote">It would appear that the application of scientific and more efficient farming practices has been accepted in the industry as reflected in the increasing production per unit.</block>

<block name="quote">In spite of decreasing prices on export markets the ratio of agricultural exports to total exports has considerably improved.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government is giving serious attention to problems in connection with agricultural financing and uneconomic farming units. Where necessary legislation in regard to the problem of the uneconomic sub-division of land and the re settlement of farmers occupying uneconomic farms, will be submitted to Parliament as soon as practicable.</block>

<block name="quote">A feature of the forestry industry of the country is its sustained afforestation programme together with the increased timber production which is being made available for further processing. As raw material this timber offers attractive investment possibilities for secondary and tertiary industries. In the sphere of chemical processing, progress has already been made to such an extent that the country will be practically self-sufficient in the foreseeable future as far as its need of printing and other kinds of paper, cartons and fibre board is concerned. South Africa has indeed recently become an exporter of timber products to the extent of almost R20,000,000 per year.</block>

<block name="quote">In the field of labour the Government&#x2019;s endeavours to maintain satisfactory relations between employers and employees once again met with success. There were no industrial unrest or labour disputes of any serious nature.</block>

<block name="quote">The measures taken by the Government to provide a favourable climate for economic expansion, caused a rapid revival in the labour market. There is indeed a shortage of certain types of skilled manpower and attempts are being made to cope with the situation.</block>

<block name="quote">The Scientific Advisory Council is at present investigating training facilities for scientists and technologists at Universities in view of their importance to the economic development of the country.</block>

<block name="quote">It is intended during this Session to amend the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Act in some respects, in order to eliminate certain deficiencies, and it is also the intention to go ahead with the Shops and Offices Bill, which was referred to a Select Committee during the previous session.</block>

<block name="quote">There is a great demand for housing for families in the group with an income hot exceeding R180 per month, especially in the larger centres where a housing shortage arose as a result of rapid development in the commercial and industrial field and the influx of more immigrants.</block>

<block name="quote">Not only are the responsible local authorities encouraged and urged to provide the necessary housing out of advances from the National Housing Fund, but the Government itself undertakes the direct provision of homes in centres such as Johannesburg, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Durban, Bloemfontein and Kimberley, where there is the greatest demand, thereby supplementing the efforts of the local authorities concerned.</block>

<block name="quote">Legislation will be introduced to grant greater power to the Department concerned and to reduce, as far as possible, delays in connection with the establishment of residential areas and the provision of essential services for housing projects.</block>

<block name="quote">On the Government&#x2019;s instructions a thorough investigation into modern residential building techniques and urban development in Europe has just taken place. Proposals arising from this investigation are being considered at present.</block>

<block name="quote">An amendment of the Rents Act, 1950, will be introduced to restrict certain malpractices.</block>

<block name="quote">Despite a certain decrease in tension during the past few months, especially since the successful negotiations in connection with the Treaty for the ban on nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water, the international stage is still being dominated by the opposition between the communist and the non-communist world. It is probable that in the coming year this clash of interests will take on increasing importance as far as our own Continent is concerned, especially in the light of growing evidence of attempts from a communist source, relatively new to Africa, to extend its power and influence in this part of the world. It is, therefore, more than ever necessary to proceed with the task of strengthening South Africa as a strong fortress against Communism on the Continent of Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">During the past year the African states in particular continued their vendetta against South Africa in an unrestrained manner in stark contrast to the dignified behaviour of South Africa&#x2019;s representatives on all the occasions concerned. Although immoderate behaviour of this nature evoked criticism, a situation nevertheless developed at the Food and Agricultural Organization which compelled the Government to withdraw from the organization despite South Africa&#x2019;s value to this world organization, particularly in regard to technical assistance to Africa.</block>

<block name="quote"><span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0018"/>In the United Nations too, as in its specialized agencies, the attacks on South Africa were continued, although the Republic was represented by an able team of diplomats who once again clearly presented the facts. Decisions were taken there which were in direct conflict with the Charter of the United Nations and which would mean flagrant interference in South Africa&#x2019;s domestic affairs if they were to be implemented.</block>

<block name="quote">It is unnecessary to go into this matter once again. The South West Africa issue is, moreover, <i>sub judice</i> in view of the case pending before the International Court.</block>

<block name="quote">It can be expected that the attacks on South Africa will be developed and increased during 1964, as a sequel to the plans originally devised by a number of African states at the Addis Ababa Conference last May. As in the past, the position arising from these attacks will be handled with patience and firmness and such decisions as will serve the highest interests of the country will be taken. The Government is not prepared to sacrifice the continued existence of the South African nation, or the prosperity of all the country&#x2019;s inhabitants, or order and peace, not even in the face of threats in any form.</block>

<block name="quote">Influential sections of the world Press, and especially television, have continued to present a distorted picture of South Africa. However, in several countries influential and leading personalities have shown themselves prepared once again to think seriously over the solution South Africa has to offer for the separate and peaceful co-existence of widely differing national groups&#x2014;a problem which is assuming harassing proportions in many parts of the world. For the first time in years these influential individuals have been given the opportunity to put our case in the right perspective through the medium of the overseas Press and other information media. No claim is laid to a break-through, but there are undoubtedly signs of a change of opinion abroad.</block>

<block name="quote">It will remain South Africa&#x2019;s policy to be prepared to co-operate with other African states in matters of common interest, where those states, individually or collectively, show a genuine desire to co-operate with South Africa. This assurance is especially applicable to those States and Territories in Southern Africa with which South Africa has had close relations in the past and which are now moving towards self-government or independence.</block>

<block name="quote">In the same way efforts will be continued to strengthen the bonds between South Africa and those countries in the Western world, and elsewhere, with which firm political and economic relations have traditionally been maintained.</block>

<block name="quote">The report of the Commission of Inquiry, into South West Africa Affairs will be tabled shortly and legislation arising therefrom will be introduced.</block>

<block name="quote">Unhealthy domestic reactions to external pressure and incitement have been combated successfully by the State. Subversive elements and organizations are still trying, mainly with assistance from outside the Republic, to undermine the security of the State. As is known, drastic legislation was passed by Parliament last year in the form of the General Law Amendment Act. That Act, as well as other legislation passed previously, has been applied successfully to counteract communistic and, particularly, subversive onslaughts. Many saboteurs and agitators have already paid for their actions in the courts of law; others, again, have left the country. It remains the firm resolve of the Government to continue using all means at its disposal to ensure the security of the nation and the State.</block>

<block name="quote">With regard to our country&#x2019;s security, the Defence Force is and remains the final instrument for maintaining peace and preventing or opposing aggression.</block>

<block name="quote">It is gratifying to be able to mention that the programme to equip our Defence Force is proceeding according to plan, and that defence research and local production of defence requirements are progressing satisfactorily. The diligent manner in which the youth of the country is meeting its obligation to undergo military training redounds to its honour. It is also encouraging to note that the expansion of the Defence Force enjoys the general support of the nation.</block>

<block name="quote">The overall picture which thus confronts Parliament and the nation is that of a diligent, energetic and prosperous State, tackling its problems earnestly and successfully, and which is tranquil, despite attacks and pressure from outside.</block>

<block name="quote">The following legislation, not yet referred to, will amongst others be introduced: Bills on Financial Institutions; on Motor Vehicle Insurance; on Road Traffic; on Nature Conservation; on the University of Port Elizabeth; on Agricultural Research Funds; on Plant Breeders&#x2019; Rights; on the Rand Water Board; on Admission of Advocates and Attorneys; on Immovable Property; on Estates; as well as a number of amending Bills.</block>

<p>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</block>

<block name="quote">I now declare this the Third Session of the Second Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#printing_committee">

<heading>PRINTING COMMITTEE</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the Prime Minister and Sir De Villiers Graaff a Committee to <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0019"/>assist Mr. Speaker in regard to the printing of the House.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_on_standing_rules_and_orders">

<heading>COMMITTEE ON STANDING RULES AND ORDERS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the following members to constitute with Mr. Speaker the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders: The Prime Minister, the Minister of Lands, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Transport, the Minister of Social Welfare and Pensions, the Minister of Agricultural Technical Services, Sir De Villiers Graaff, Dr. A. I. Malan, Mr. J. E. Potgieter, Mr. Higgerty, Mr. Waterson, Mr. D. E. Mitchell and Mr. Bloomberg.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#condolence">

<heading>CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>Late Mr. G. S. P. le Roux</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 16 July 1963, of Mr. Gabri&#x00EB;l Stephanus Petrus le Roux, who represented the electoral division of Karoo, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>During his lifetime Mr. G. S. P. le Roux was not only a member of this House. He also rendered public service in another legislative body, namely the Provincial Council of the Cape Province, of which he was a member for nine years, that is to say, from 10 March 1949 to 2 April 1958. Thereafter, from 3 April 1958 to 16 July 1963 he was a member of the House of Assembly. We in this House learnt to know him as a lovable personality who had friends on all sides of the House and who moreover openly associated with members on all sides of the House. He came to see me personally from time to time to seek my advice in connection with problems that he had to deal with. On those occasions I learnt to know him as a lovable person, a pleasant person with whom to discuss matters or even to debate matters on which there was a difference of opinion. He was also known as a moderate person. One can practically say that in many respects his views were so non-contentious that at times it was doubtful whether he was an Opposition supporter or a Government supporter. His official career was that of a member of the Opposition, but many of his views made it difficult for us on this side of the House to accept that he quite fitted in there, because he was not aggressive in his conduct nor did he hold sharply defined views, with the result that he did not clash sharply with people who held different views. In a certain sense this might have had its disadvantages from a political point of view but when he became a representative of the Coloured community it, also had its advantages, particularly for those whom he represented so well, in whose interests he tried to act and whose interests he tried to promote under whatever policy was followed by the party in power. He tried to the best of his ability to look after the interests of those whom he represented.</p>

<p>On behalf of this House therefore I pay tribute to a person who until his death was a member of this House and who tried to the very best of his ability to do his duty towards his country and his nation and particularly also towards the specific group of the population whose interests he represented in the latter part of his life.</p>

<p>We pay tribute to our deceased friend, and I wish to express my deep sympathy with his next-of-kin. Whilst we have lost a friend they have lost a husband and a father. Their sorrow goes much deeper than the sorrow which we could feel.</p>

<p>On behalf of the House I therefore express my deep sympathy on the death of a member of this House who fulfilled his role in the service of his country and his people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>*Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>I second the motion and on behalf of this side of the House I should like to associate myself with the words which have just fallen from the lips of the hon. the Prime Minister with regard to our deceased friend, who was generally known as Tot le Roux. I think those of us who knew him outside of the House of Assembly, even before he became a member of this House, will greatly miss him as a good family man very much attached to his family circle; also as an ex-soldier who to the best of his ability did his duty towards his country; as a man who played a particular role in the community, even outside the political sphere, as a member of hospital boards and school boards; as somebody who tried to carry out his duty to his Church faithfully and who always had the interests of the man in the street at heart. Mr. le Roux&#x2019;s greatest interest was always centered in the small, poor man. I think he had the interests of the Coloureds at heart throughout his life, even long before he was elected as representative of the Coloureds in this House. He knew them well, he understood how to work with them and he knew how to get the best out of them.</p>

<p>As an individual the late Mr. le Roux was extremely friendly. He was a progressive farmer, and before he was struck down by the illness which eventually dragged him to the grave he was a particularly industrious person. I can recall that on certain occasions in the past I referred to him as a human dynamo who devoted himself to his work with practically inexhaustible energy. He was also a very modest and very approachable person but he had certain characteristics for which we shall always remember him. I think there were few people who could believe, when they <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0020"/>heard him speak, that he had an academic background. One of his distinctive qualities was that he used a kind of language which very few other people could use and which few people could quite understand. He had a wonderful sense of humour and, in addition to that, although he often expressed himself in strongly cynical terms, he was not a person who readily made enemies. We shall miss him. His family will miss him more. I think we all agree with the Prime Minister&#x2019;s words and our sympathies go out to those he left behind and particularly to his wife.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>This is a particularly sad occasion for this small group of Parliamentarians in this House who represent the Coloured people of South Africa. We mourn to-day, Sir, the loss of an esteemed colleague and a sincere friend, one who in his own inimitable way did what he considered best in the interest of the people he represented.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I would like to associate ourselves with the eloquent tributes paid to the memory of our friend by the hon. the Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition, and we identify ourselves with the motion before the House.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion put and agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1964-01-17T13:22:00">1.22 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

