---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 24 June 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2003-06-24
---

TUESDAY, 24 JUNE 2003
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We welcome the Deputy President who  is  back  from
Jordan. We hope that he had a successful visit.

                      SOUTH AFRICANS TRAVELLING ABROAD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council calls upon the Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  re-
  evaluate the bilateral travel arrangements that govern  the  movement  of
  South Africans travelling abroad, including  visa  arrangements,  and  to
  ensure in all cases that -


  (1) the imposts and constraints upon South Africans that travel and work
       abroad, including those in transit, are reduced; and


  (2) the principle of reciprocity is applied and that South Africans enjoy
       similar privileges, including visa arrangements, accorded to visitors
       to our country from particular countries on a reciprocal basis.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       BAFANA BAFANA BEAT IVORY COAST

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) joyfully notes that the South African national  soccer  team,  Bafana
       Bafana, led by its new captain Mbulelo Mabisela, beat the Ivory Coast
       in a hard-fought match at Polokwane on Sunday, 22 June 2003;


  (2) further notes that the much vaunted Ivory Coast had  boasted  earlier
       victories over Burundi and former World Cup finalists  Cameroon,  but
       fell short at the hurdle provided in the form of a determined  Bafana
       Bafana, who are now poised to move beyond Bujumbura where  they  seek
       just one point in the 6 July encounter against Burundi;


  (3) believes that Bafana Bafana will then carry the nation's flag to  the
       African Nations Cup in Tunisia in 2004; and


  (4) congratulates Bafana Bafana on their sparkling performances and calls
       on the nation to give their unstinting support to the  South  African
       coach Mr Ephraim Shakes Mashaba to "go for gold"  and  enhance  South
       Africa's bid for hosting the 2010 World Cup.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       MICROSOFT PROGRAMMES TO BE AVAILABLE IN SOUTH AFRICAN LANGUAGES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat -


       (a)  Microsoft daartoe ingestem het om sy programme nou ook in
           isiZulu, isiXhosa, Sepedi, Setswana en Afrikaans beskikbaar te
           stel;


       (b)  dié versoek deur Gideon Joubert van Vriende vir Afrikaans gedoen
           is; en


       (c)  'n tweetalige kuberwoordeboek in Engels en Afrikaans deur die
           toedoen van prof Christo Viljoen voltooi is en eersdaags bekend
           gestel gaan word en dat taalkundiges entoesiasties en
           bereidwillig is om mee te werk om die projek uit te brei na die
           ander inheemse tale van Suid-Afrika;


  (2) van mening is dat dié mylpale 'n tasbare manifestering is van die
       waarborg wat ons Grondwet gee dat veeltaligheid nie net op papier
       bestaan nie, maar ook in die praktyk Suid-Afrikaners versoen en
       bemagtig ten einde Suid-Afrika 'n wenland vir al sy mense te maak; en


  (3) hierdie en ander Suid-Afrikaners  wat  hulle  op  'n  positiewe  wyse
       beywer om veeltaligheid 'n werklikheid te maak, bedank.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Microsoft has agreed to now make its programmes  available  also
           in isiZulu, isiXhosa, Sepedi, Setswana and Afrikaans;


       (b)   this  request  was  made  by  Gideon  Joubert  of  Vriende  vir
           Afrikaans; and


       (c)  a bilingual cyberdictionary in English and  Afrikaans  has  been
           completed with the aid of  Prof  Christo  Viljoen  and  will  be
           released  shortly  and  that  linguists  are  enthusiastic   and
           prepared to collaborate to  extend  the  project  to  the  other
           indigenous languages of South Africa;
  (2) is of the opinion that these milestones are a tangible  manifestation
       of the guarantee our Constitution gives that multilingualism does not
       exist only on paper, but in practice  also  reconciles  and  empowers
       South Africans in order to make South Africa a  winning  country  for
       all its people; and


  (3) thanks these and other South Africans who are striving, in a positive
       way, to make multilingualism a reality.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

         MEDICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL'S CONTROL MEASURE AGAINST MALARIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -
  (1) notes with appreciation the programme that was  launched  in  October
       1999 by the Medical Research Council as a control measure  to  reduce
       the threat of malaria in Mozambique, Swaziland and KwaZulu-Natal;


  (2) is aware of the serious threat of this killer disease in these  high-
       risk areas;


  (3) further notes -


       (a)  with gratitude that, according to Dr Brian Sharp,  the  director
           of the  Malaria  Research  Programme  of  the  Medical  Research
           Council,  the  regional  control  programmes  have  dramatically
           reduced the rate of disease in these areas -  in  the  2001/2002
           season the prevalence decreased by 70%  in  Mozambique,  64%  in
           Swaziland and 91% in KwaZulu-Natal;


       (b)  that this dramatic reduction has been brought about by the use
           of DDT insecticide;
       (c)  that two of South Africa's most important tourist destinations,
           namely the St Lucia area and the Kruger National Park, are now
           reaping the benefits of these programmes; and


       (d)  with appreciation that the St Lucia area in KwaZulu-Natal is now
           free of malaria; and


  (4) salutes the Medical Research Council and especially Dr Brian Sharp on
       this outstanding achievement.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

        RECOGNTION FOR MR HAMILTON NAKI WHO HELPED PROF CHRIS BARNARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) acknowledges the recent recognition by the University of Cape Town of
       Mr Hamilton Naki, an experienced sweeper and gardener, who was
       finally honoured with an honorary master of science in medicine
       degree last Friday, 20 June 2003;


  (2) notes that -


       (a)  he assisted Professor Chris Barnard in his pioneering work in
           the field of heart transplants;


       (b)  Mr Naki, who has no formal education, was able to assist
           Professor Chris Barnard in the techniques of cardio-pulmonary
           bypass and open-heart surgery - a miracle of God;


       (c)  his experience in anaesthetising a variety of animals in
           research was so outstanding that he was recruited to do research
           in the laboratory with doctors and students; and


       (d)  in his time, he was the only one who could anaesthetise a pig
           and transplant its liver, virtually unaided - even in the case
           of a giraffe no side effects were experienced and the
           transplanted organs were not rejected;


  (3) thanks God Almighty that Mr Naki's gifts and talents have finally
       been acknowledged - these gifts exemplify the innate abilities of all
       people to learn and to serve this motherland of ours, even the mature
       citizens;


  (4) congratulates him on his recognition and the University of Cape Town
       on the degree that they conferred on him even though it is at the
       sunset of his life;


  (5) believes that this emphasises the value of Adult Basic Education and
       Training (ABET) and the wisdom of the elderly; and
  (6) is of the view that the lifelong experience of Mr Hamilton Naki and
       his contributions should be collected, collated, edited and
       distributed to all schools, colleges and secular institutions as a
       source of inspiration, pride and motivation.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 21 - Correctional Services; Vote No 22 - Defence; Vote No 24 -
Justice and Constitutional Development; and Vote No 25 - Safety and
Security:

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I am a member of a team
called the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security Cluster of Cabinet which
has the Interministerial Security Committee as its subcommittee. Given that
I don't see some of the members of that team here, I'll be willing to take
all the time that has been allocated them. [Laughter.]

The clusters have become a firm springboard for service delivery. There are
many success stories that have accompanied the establishment of the cluster
system. Our cluster, therefore, has ensured that the responsibility of
security planning in this country - particularly as regards all the
international and regional summits and conferences that have been held - is
designed and implemented by this security cluster since the breakthrough to
democratic rule in 1994.

Of course, there are still some weaknesses which are either a throwback to
the past or were unforeseen and which, therefore, brought about unintended
consequences. What is a success story, for instance, for the the SA Police
Service and the stabilised court system which is under the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development is causing problems of overcrowding
at Correctional Services. There are thousands of prisoners who are in
prison purely because they are unable to raise the bail resources that they
need to post in order for them to be released from prison.

While it is true that some of our projects are taking longer than expected
to be finalised, we are convinced that it is better to hurry slowly, given
the circumstances we are dealing with. Such projects include the movement
control system and the home affairs identification system which both reside
under Home Affairs, and the improvement of police forensic laboratories,
especially with regard to DNA testing. When these projects are completed,
they are going to place our country within the family of technologically
advanced countries in the world.

We are not the only ones in the world who are ringing in changes to bolster
our criminal justice system. The United Kingdom, for instance, is among
countries that have been reviewing their systems in the recent past.
Whether they were looking at England's criminal courts or rebalancing the
criminal justice system, they have not been shy to depict the process as
difficult.

The year under review has been a year of co-operation and, for that, I want
to commend the MECs in the various provinces for their valuable inputs in
the fight against crime. Much was achieved during this time, precisely
because all those concerned with leadership in Safety and Security played
their respective roles in maintaining the relationships that ensured proper
delivery. This did not end up with those people within Safety and Security;
it encompassed various stakeholders within communities. One cannot be
thankful enough to various civilian structures that have put their
shoulders to the wheel.

Community police forums continue to add value in the battle against crime
and there are clear results in many areas in which the civilian input has
been remarkable. There have thus been marked changes in this country with
regard to police civilian relationships. This is the way it should be as
police cannot be everywhere at all times. Public co-operation is crucial in
the success of our efforts against crime.

The police have not lost sight of these sterling endeavours by the civilian
population. Last August, in appreciation of these massive civilian inputs,
police in Gauteng found time on Women's Day to hand out roses to women to
mark the day with authentic thanks for these efforts. Similarly, on June 16
this year, police gave various materials to youth in various parts of the
country. Specially significant parts of these materials were large numbers
of school memorabilia which included balls, water bottles, rulers, pens,
etc that were given to children in Esikhawini, KwaZulu-Natal. These were
small tokens of appreciation from the police for the co-operation given by
communities. The efforts also improved understanding among the children
that police were friends and protectors of communities.

From the outset, our budget has to be seen as continuing to address
programmes and priorities outlined in the National Crime Prevention
Strategy and the White Paper on Safety and Security. The approach we take
is that there should be a dual emphasis: we must ensure that there is
effective law enforcement and social crime prevention measures to reduce
crime levels. This strategy brings together criminal justice system
partners in an effort to develop joint processes to remove blockages within
the system and to implement best practices around court management.

It is because of this understanding that Cabinet, among others, decided to
include the Department of Social Development in the Justice, Crime
Prevention and Security Cluster to ensure that, indeed, we have the
necessary instruments to deal with social crime. Whatever strategies we
work out to combat crime, it should be acknowledged that our efforts will
not be appreciated until we reach a position where, in many instances, we
can stop crime before it happens. To this end, our crime-combating strategy
is designed to do this over time through visibility and mobility.

This strategy, as depicted in the strategic plan that was tabled in
Parliament, displays a clear focus on combating organised, serious and
violent crimes; commercial crimes; and crimes against women and children.
It is further focused on those areas with the highest incidence of these
crimes and seeks to stabilise crime rates in those areas. Indeed, crime has
been stabilised in the majority of those areas.

Concurrent with our efforts to combat organised, serious and violent
crimes, our strategy for the improvement of service delivery and the
prevention of crime is gaining momentum. Now that the first of the new
police recruits, who were specifically recruited and trained as part of our
sector policing strategy, have completed their training, police will become
more visible and effective in the areas where they are deployed. They will
be deployed at smaller manageable geographic areas under the supervision of
a sector commander.

Sector policing is a collaborative effort by all role-players in addressing
the root causes of crime and contributes to effective crime prevention
initiatives. It is in this environment that reservists will play a key role
in both urban and rural areas. Given that we already had people who were
not adequately trained performing this function, the deployment of the new
recruits will boost both morale and performance.

Police and resource allocations are determined in accordance with a crime
analysis pattern and informed by our priority crimes strategy. This means
that as soon trends are established, either through intelligence or through
changing trends, adjustments are made to meet demand. The department's
budget has grown by an annual average of 10,3% between 1999-2000 and 2005-
06. It has risen from R14,6 billion to R26,2 billion. In practical terms,
the increase is 10,6% on average between 1999-2000 and 2002-03; and 10%
between 2003-04 and 2005-06.

As a strategic management objective, the department maintains an
approximate 78% to 22% ratio split between personnel and nonpersonnel
spending in the budget. From 2002-03 and 2003-04 expenditure on equipment
and infrastructure is expected to grow in excess of 20%. However, from the
1999-2000 financial year to the 2005-06 financial year, capital spending
has been growing and will continue to grow by an annual average of 18%.

To ensure an equitable supply of human resources to meet the ideal
workforce profile, a multiyear human resource plan has been developed. In
addition, career centres will be launched in three provinces to equip
employees for possible career pathing and planning opportunities within the
service and to promote the principles of job satisfaction and the right
person with the right skills for the right job.

The human resources plan will provide for a forecasting profile of
personnel losses, and provide guidance as to the quantity of workforce
movement and recruitment required to realise and sustain an 85% operational
workforce. In compliance with the human resources plan, the station staff
establishment will be increased from 63% to 67%. The total SAPS workforce
will also be increased this year from 131 560 to 140 560. This will provide
a thrust to improve employment equity in the service. The improvement of
employment equity in every sphere of employment of SAPS is being monitored
and evaluated to ensure reasonable progress in achieving the necessary
targets.

We are ever mindful of the need to nurture and support our most valuable
assets - the policewomen and policemen - in order to ensure their physical
and emotional wellbeing. Our employee assistance programme is designed to
do just that. We will significantly increase the number of social workers
and psychologists this year. The major focus of their work is to support
police in trauma debriefing, stress management, substance abuse, HIV/Aids
counselling, financial management and physical wellness.

In line with other major employers, the Department of Safety and Security
launched an HIV/Aids awareness campaign on 31 January 2003. The first to be
tested were the national Commissioner and the Minister for Safety and
Security. This was not just a public show, but a commitment to specific
efforts to help employees make a positive commitment to meeting the new
imperatives raised by the rampant pandemic.

While the National Crime Prevention Strategy is followed up according to
need and demand in the various provinces, great strides have been made and
significant successes scored. The implementation of our integrated
organised crime prevention strategy led to the neutralisation and
disruption of numerous organised crime syndicates. During the period April
2002 to March 2003, illegal substances and stolen goods to the value of R45
million were seized or recovered as a result of organised crime prevention
projects being implemented.

The other day we accompanied members of the portfolio committee of the
National Assembly to one of our forensic laboratories around here in order
for them to see the amount of drugs that we have confiscated around this
area and the types of drugs that are on the market. I think that we should
interest ourselves in understanding this particular issue, because it is
one of those matters that, fighting as a collective and working together,
we need to defeat.

As part of project Mochetefatse - I hope I have pronounced it properly -
the organised crime unit in Bloemfontein has, for example, recovered 27
stolen vehicles valued at R2,9 million, while the Johannesburg organised
crime unit arrested two suspects and seized more than 20 000 Ecstasy
tablets to the value of more than R1 million during a disruptive operation
in the province. My MEC from Free State tells me that, given the fact my
Sesotho is of a very high quality, he may not have understood what I was
saying. [Laughter.]

The SAPS, as part of the broader JCPS cluster, concentrated on specific
crime combating investigations during the past year in order to reduce
crime levels. These included focusing on certain priority areas, as well as
specific crimes; implementing organised crime combating projects in co-
operation with countries in the region and abroad; following a victim-
centred approach in relation to crime against women and children; and fast-
tracking our normalisation process of policing functions, especially in
relation to capacity building.

In the beginning of the year 2000, a total of 145 priority police station
areas in all provinces were identified for urgent stabilisation. The
majority of these stations have already been stabilised. The focus in the
affected areas is on crime reduction by means of continued operations such
as cordon and searches, vehicle control points, roadblocks and special
efforts to arrest wanted persons for whom warrants have been issued or
those identified by means of fingerprints on crime scenes.

During the past weekend, a suspect who was arrested in the Western Cape was
linked to nearly 100 other cases by utilising our new AFIS system. In the
year ahead, AFIS will be utilised during special operations in all
provinces to ensure the arrest of as many persons who are linked to crime
scenes by means of fingerprints as possible.

I indicated last year that the police will focus on specific crimes such as
murder, rape and armed robbery in the areas with the highest insidence of
these crimes. Although our crime statistics for the previous financial year
will only be released as part of the police annual report later this year,
I am glad to announce that these crimes have decreased during the past few
months.

Murder is down by nearly 3%. However, since November 1994 up to April this
year, the murder figure has already decreased by nearly 30%. These positive
results can be attributed to sterling work done by the police to address
faction fighting, gang violence, hijackings, farm attacks, attacks on
police members and other crime phenomena where conventional police methods
play a role. I do want, of course, to commend our people who have supplied
us with information that we needed in order for us to make these
breakthroughs that I have referred to.

Rape also decreased by nearly 3%. The ratio of rape per 700 000 of the
population is currently at its lowest level since 1994. High profile cases
of aggravated robbery such as vehicle hijackings and bank-related robberies
have, during the past financial year, decreased from their highest levels
during the previous nine years by 37% and 66,6% respectively. In the
Western Cape, for instance, public participation in the fight against crime
has yielded positive results, especially in areas of gang violence, drugs,
and crimes against women and children. Also reduced are previously high
levels of murder in certain police station areas.

You will recall that the railway police system was discontinued in 1986.
The decision was taken, amongst other things, to provide for a single
policing capacity and clarified, in the circumstances, the line functions
of the police. The outcome was that the police had to forego their policing
tasks on trains and the broader transport sector.

We created, in June last year, a division within the SAPS for protection
and security to deal with the protection of VIP's and the security of the
country's national key points. Units of the new division will soon be
deployed to the Western Cape to create conditions of safety and security
for train commuters, particularly in the Greater Cape Town area. There is
continuous consultation between the Ministers for Safety and Security and
of Transport regarding other transport sector security needs.

In the Eastern Cape, 11 projects are at various stages of completion. They
include the completed building of a community safety centre in Centane,
building of new police stations, renovation of others and the upgrading of
police holding cells. An old army base has been converted into a training
college and local labour is used in the proceeding renovations.

In Gauteng the following priorities have been identified in line with the
broad national strategy to deal with crime: prevention of violence against
women and children; social crime prevention with emphasis on youth;
community police relations and local crime prevention; monitoring and
evaluation of police services; promotion of an integrated justice system
through co-ordination, monitoring and evaluation of the criminal justice
system; and communication and information.

The North West government has decided to relocate provincial headquarters
of the police service from Potchefstroom to Mafikeng and all stakeholders
have been engaged in the relocation plan. In an effort to address the
establishment of municipal policing services, three cities, ie Rustenburg,
Mafikeng and Potchefstroom have been selected to pilot the process.

I am sure that other additions will be made by some of the MEC's for safety
and security who are here, as well as by my colleagues who are members of
the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster. [Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, the good thing that you do may be a drop
in the ocean, but the ocean will be less because of the missing drop. I am
saying all this because of the manner in which this cluster relates with
our committee. If you are like everyone else, then, what do you have to
offer?

Let me take this opportunity to thank our four hon Ministers and their
departments for making our work, as a committee, very easy. Hon Ministers,
whenever we invite your officials for a meeting or a briefing they are
always there, ready, willing and prepared. This would not have been the
case, hon Ministers, if you did not instil discipline in your departments.

It is therefore true that successful people do what failures do not like to
do. The four departments came to brief the committee. It was done so
professionally, coherently, efficiently, accurately, systematically,
adorably and fluently. Thanks to you, hon Ministers and your officials.

Let me pick up on a few things which need the attention of the hon Minister
of Correctional Services. One worrying factor is that there are so many
escapes from our prisons. Could the hon Minister brief us on how they
intend to minimise or completely stop these escapes, because they tarnish
the good job that the hon Minister is doing. During the briefing the
officials also emphasised that there are some plans to try and curb these
unnecessary escapes.

 e people being counselled? I believe that these  people  need  counselling.
Can the hon Minister comment on this other issue where it is  rumoured  that
police officers who want to take their guns home must  have  built-in  safes
to lock in those firearms and, I am told, at their own  cost?  The  question
is: What will happen when a  particular  officer  is  transferred  from  one
police station to the other or from one province to the other?

There may not be many, but we learn that there are many guns  which  are  in
the wrong hands. What can we do  to  encourage  those  people  to  surrender
these guns? I know that the Minister will enlighten us about  the  plans  or
some incentives to attract those people to surrender the guns  because  they
are a danger or doom to society.
At some point, I thought that my ears were deceiving me when I heard some
people saying that this Government is illegitimate and illegal, as well as
our courts. There is nothing wrong in dreaming, but the only problem is
when one verbalises one's dream. Such comments are unfortunate.

In our prisons there are more inmates than beds. One of the reasons is that
there are some people who are not a danger to society and have committed
petty crimes but are locked up in prison. I believe that the justice
department can play a role in this one. May I propose that the two
Departments, Justice and Constitutional Development, and Correctional
Services look into this matter?
Another cause for concern is the killings in our courts. The security
directorate needs to do something about this. Court orderlies need to be
increased. In many instances when there are shootings one will find that
the court orderly was overpowered. I will be happy if something can be done
about that.

Another positive move by the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development is the removal of admin work from magistrates so that they can
concentrate on spending more time on the Bench. This is commendable.

We are sick and tired of this escalating violence against women and
children. I want to propose the following steps. After being found guilty -
I am talking about those lunatics - let's publish their names as widely as
we can and put their names in all public buildings. If it comes to a push,
let's also have their photos published in all public buildings.

It is high time, hon Minister, that we review the law that prohibits the
Government from making known the identity of perpetrators who are under
age. In our prisons we find boys who are 14 years of age or below charged
with rape. Why treat them with kid gloves while they are terrorising our
mothers, sisters and daughters?

The reparation process is now under way. Thanks to the Minister for Justice
and Constitutional Development. It is encouraging to learn that other than
monetary payments, there will also be incentives such as monuments,
symbols, community rehabilitation and even medical benefits or assistance
to all the victims as identified by the TRC. Even though all this may not
be enough to pay for their suffering, it will go a long way in promoting
unity and reconciliation.

I want to express my thanks to our Defence Force for the role that they
play when there is a disaster in any part of the country. The practical
example of that is what happened in Mozambique.

Hon Minister, the question of commandos is always in our newspapers. The
conflicting reports as to whether they will be phased out, restructured or
retained need to be clarified. Can the hon Minister put this debate to
rest? The experience we had about these commandos, for example in
Wakkerstroom in Mpumalanga ... [Time expired.]

UMntwana B Z ZULU: Sihlalo, oNgqongqoshe abahloniphekileyo, kanye namalungu
onke ale Ndlu, inkulumompikiswano yethu namhlanje iqondene nesabelo
seminyango emine: umNyango wezokuPhepha nokuVikela, owezobuLungiswa, kanye
nowamaJele. Le minyango yomine iyona ebhekela inhlalakahle yezakhamizi
zaleli zwe.

Ukufinyelela kwale minyango esinqumeni esiyiso kuncike ekutheni uphenyo
lomsuka wendaba luphenywe ngendlela yokuthi ngabe luqukethe amaqiniso yini.
Uphenyo olungenziwanga lwaqukatha amaqiniso obufakazi obuphathekayo
ludukisa futhi lulimaze umnyango okufanele ukhiphe isinqumo. Lokhu kudala
ukuthi isinqumo esikhishwayo singenelisi.

Ukumiswa kwesakhiwo samaphoyisa omphakathi, policing forum, kube nesandla
esikhulu ekulweni nobelelesi ezindaweni eziningi ezihlala imiphakathi
yakithi. Ezindaweni eziningi ezisemakhaya, amaphoyisa awakwazi ukufinyelela
kuzo noma engaba nazo izimoto. Laphaya ezabelweni zamakhosi kunemizi eyakhe
ezindaweni lapho imoto ingafinyeleli khona. Lapho kuba inkinga enkulu
ukuletha ukuphepha nokuvikeleka kwaleyo miphakathi. Ukuba khona
kwamaphoyisa omphakathi ezindaweni ezisemakhaya kuletha ithemba kubantu.
Namuhla laba bantu bayamncoma uHulumeni ophetheyo.

IKwaZulu-Natal isifundazwe esashaywa kakhulu udlame lwezombusazwe. Namanje
njengoba amabombo abantu baseNingizimu Afrika esebheke okhethweni,
isiyezwakala futhi imvunge yokwesabisa ngodlame. Lokhu kushiwo yilabo bantu
abazuzayo kwezombusazwe ngokususa udlame.

Isicelo sezakhamuzi ezithanda ukuthula noxolo ngesokuba abezokuphepha
babonakale beseduzane nabantu, futhi umNyango wezouLungiswa ubagwebe
kanzima labo abayotholakala emacaleni odlame lwezombusazwe.

Esabelweni somNyango wezobuLungiswa sibone kuhlinzekelwe ukwakhiwa
kwezinkantolo ezintsha ezweni lonke, kepha umuntu ube nokukhathazeka nje
ukuthi ezindaweni ezisemakhaya zamakhosi zona azibalwa kulesi sabelo
sokwakhiwa kwezinkantolo.

Ubugebengu obuningi benzeka ezabelweni eziphethwe ngamakhosi. Yilapho
othola khona amasela emfuyo nalapho ufica abantu belime khona amasimu
ensangu ngenkululeko. Izikole zemfundo ephakemeyo ezindaweni zamakhosi
zibhekene nenkinga yokusetshenziswa kwensangu, icocaine nemandrax.
Okungelekelela ukunciphisa le nkinga ukuba izinkantolo zasezabelweni
zamakhosi nazo zikhuthazwe ukuba zibhekane nale nkinga yokusetshenziswa
kwezidakamizwa.

Abashushumbisi bezidakamizwa sebethole imakethe enkulu yokuzithengisa
ezikoleni zasemakhaya lapho kungekho khona amaphoyisa kahulumeni.
Kungakuhle amaphoyisa ababophe qede bagwetshwe khona ezinkantolo
zasemakhaya. Izinkantolo zasezabelweni zamakhosi ziyakudinga kakhulu
ukunakekelwa nazo uma ngempela siqonde ukuqeda ubulelesi eNingizimu Afrika.

Njengoba izwe laseNingizimu Afrika libuswa ngoMthethosisekelo owodwa,
kubalulekile ukuba amandla obulungiswa enziwe ezweni lonke ngendlela
efanayo. Amaphoyisa ayababopha abephula umthetho ezabelweni qede aphume
nabo ayobavalela emajele asemadolobheni lapho kufikwe kuthethwe khona
amacala abo.

Kunamacala angathethwa ezinkantolo ezisezabelweni zamakhosi, okuthiwa wona
awasiwe ezinkantolo zezimantshi. Lezi zinkantolo zasemakhaya ezindaweni
eziphethwe amakhosi mazenezelwe amandla okuba kuthi uma sezimgwebile
umuntu, aphoqeleke ukuba isijeziso sakhe asidonse khona endaweni
yomphakathi ngokuba asebenzele umphakathi ahlala kuwo amahora athile
ngosuku aze asiqede. Lokhu kungaphungula umthwalo omkhulu wokugcwala
kwamajele aleli zwe.

Umuntu akagxambukeli endimeni yabahluleli abaphethe umthetho wezinkantolo
zobulungiswa, kepha kubalulekile ukuba umuntu aveze lokho okubonakala
kungahambi kahle emNyangweni wezobuLungiswa. Kusenabehluleli basezinkantolo
abasebenzisa umthetho ngendlela esabonakala icindezela ohlangothini
olumnyama. Kanjalo nasemaphoyiseni, kusekhona asasebenzela ingxenye ethile
yabantu.

Kwenye yezinkantolo eVryheid kade kuqulwa amacala abantu ababili, omhlophe
nomnyama. Omnyama ubenecala lokugqekeza, omhlophe enecala lokudubula
abulale ingane eneminyaka eyi-10 eyayitheza izinkuni epulazini lakhe.
Inkantolo yaseVryheid uma isikhipha isigwebo esiqondene noSizwe Shongwe,
umgqekezi, yamnika iminyaka eyi-112 ejele. Kwathi omhlophe odubule wabulala
ingane, uBongiwe Xhakaza owayengakwazi ngisho nokuzivikela, yena
wahlawuliswa u-R4000, kwase kuthiwa akanxephezele abazali bale ngane
ngomunye u-R4000. Ngabe ubulungiswa yini lobu obenziwe kule ngane efileyo?

Abazali nezihlobo zikaBongiwe Xhakaza kanye nomphakathi waseVryheid
kabeneliswanga neze yilesi sinqumo esenziwa umNyango wezobuLungiswa.
Abazali bakaBongiwe uma bethi bafuna ukwedlulisa icala, inkantolo
yabatshela ukuthi abathole ummeli, kepha laba bantu abanayo imali ngoba
abasebenzi.

Okunye okulandelayo, kunengane enguSiphiwe Bophela eneminyaka eyi-13. Yona
yaxoshwa ngemoto umnini wepulazi itheza izinkuni. Ingane yabaleka yaze
yaphonseka emlilweni owawushiswa nguye umnini wepulazi. Ingane leyo yasha
ngendlela eyesabekayo. Uma sekuyovulwa icala, amaphoyisa athi awaliboni
icala elingethweswa umnini wepulazi owayexosha ingane leyo. Kanti futhi
kunengane yakwaDanisa eneminyaka eyi-10. Yona idutshulwe kwelinye ipulazi
endaweni yaseCoronation, yahlinzwa kwakhishwa izinhlamvu zesibhamu. Kwathi
uma abazali bayo beyovula icala emaphoyiseni, athi kawaliboni icala
angalethwesa umdubuli wengane. Zonke lezi zigameko zenzeka ngaphansi
kwesifunda senkantolo yaseVryheid.

Kuyo le nyanga nje bekunomuntu ogulayo, obelele esibhedlela laphaya
eVryheid. Lo muntu ubegula ngekhanda. Unsumpa-ke usebiza amaphoyisa uma lo
muntu esebonakala ethanda ukudlondlobala lapha ewodini. Uma efika
amaphoyisa amathathu, athola ukuthi lo muntu akalwi kodwa uyayaluza nje
lapha ewodini, lase likhipha isibhamu elinye iphoyisa elimhlophe ladubula
lo muntu kwafa iziguli ezimbili khona lapha ewodini.

Yizinto lezi ezishaqisayo ezenzeka kuleya ndawo. Umphakathi waseVryheid
ukhathazeke kakhulu. Uyacela ukuba umnyango ubaphenyele lezi zehlakalo
ezenzeka kule ndawo. Bafisa ukwazi ukuthi ngabe ngempela ubulungiswa
benziwe ngendlela efaneleyo yini.

Thina-ke njenge-ANC, lezi zabelo esiziphakamisayo zale minyango yomine
namhlanje siyazesekela. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
speech follows.)

[Prince B Z ZULU: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members of this House,
our debate today focuses on the budget of four departments, namely Safety
and Security, Justice and Correctional Services. These four departments are
charged with the responsibility of providing welfare services to the
citizens of this country.

The capacity of these departments to make proper decisions depends on
whether the root of the problem has been investigated in a manner that
provides factual information. If an investigation does not contain factual
and substantial evidence, it misleads and cripples the department that
should take the decision. This leads to an unsatisfactory decision being
taken.

The launching of the community policing forum made a great contribution to
the fight against crime in many residential areas of our communities. In
most rural areas police, despite access to vehicles, cannot reach places.
In such places it becomes very difficult to provide safety and security to
the communities. The presence of community police in rural areas brings
hope to the people. Today these people commend the Government that is in
power.

KwaZulu-Natal is a province that has been plagued by political violence.
Even at the present moment when every South African's attention is focused
on the upcoming elections, there are already muffled noises in the
background that have started to threaten with political violence. These
come from those people who made political gains out of introducing
violence.

The plea of peace-loving citizens is that the security organs interact
closely with the people and that the Department of Justice metes out severe
sentences to those who are found guilty of political violence.

We have noticed that in the budget of the Department of Justice provision
has been made for the building of new courts throughout the country.
However, one is concerned that the rural areas under traditional leadership
have been left out of this budget.

A lot of crime takes place in rural areas which fall under the jurisdiction
of amakhosi. This is where you find stock thieves and people who grow
fields of dagga freely. High schools in these areas are faced with a
serious problem regarding the use of dagga, cocaine and mandrax. What could
help in alleviating this problem is to encourage courts in rural areas
under the jurisdiction of amakhosi also to take responsibility for solving
the drug abuse problem.

Drug traffickers have found themselves a huge drug market in schools in
rural areas where there are no police service. It would be much better if
the culprits were to be arrested by the police and then sentenced by the
rural courts. Rural courts under amakhosi also need to be taken care of if
we are serious about eradicating crime in South Africa.

Since South Africa is governed by one Constitution, it is important that
the powers of the judiciary be applied nationwide in a uniform manner.
Police arrest criminals in rural areas, then go and jail them in urban
prisons where their cases are tried.

There are cases which are not tried in the amakhosi's rural courts, but
have to be taken to magistrate's courts. These rural courts must be given
more powers so that after they have sentenced a person, he is bound to
serve his punishment by doing local community service for a certain number
of hours per day until it is finished. This would help ease the burden of
overcrowding in the country's prisons.

One does not simply interfere in the field of judges in charge of courts of
justice, but it is important for a person to reveal what is not normal in
the Department of Justice. There are still court judges who apply the law
in a manner that prejudices black people. The same thing applies to the
police; there are still those who serve a certain section of the community.


One court in Vryheid recently tried the cases of two people, one white and
the other black. The black person was accused of housebreaking and the
white accused of shooting and killing a 10-year-old child who was
collecting firewood on his farm. When the Vryheid court passed sentence on
Sizwe Shongwe, the housebreaker, it gave him 112 years in jail. The person
who shot to death Bongiwe Xhakaza, a defenceless child, was fined R4 000
and told to compensate the child's parents with R4 000. Is it justice that
was done to the deceased child?

Bongiwe Xhakaza's parents, relatives and the community of Vryheid were not
at all satisfied with this verdict by the Department of Justice. When the
parents said they wanted to appeal, the court told them to get a lawyer,
yet these people have no money since they are unemployed.

Another case is that of 13-year-old Siphiwe Bophela who was collecting
firewood on a farm. She was chased by the farmowner in a vehicle. The child
fled until she fell into a fire that had been started by the farmowner.
This child suffered serious burns. When the case was opened, the police
said they could not see any grounds on which the farmowner could be
charged. There is a 10-year-old child with the surname Danisa who was shot
on one of the farms in Coronation. An operation was done and bullets were
found. When the parents opened a case, the police said they had no idea on
what grounds the person who shot the child should be charged.

All these incidents took place in the Vryheid magisterial district. Just
this month there was a mentally sick patient who was admitted to the
Vryheid Hospital. The patient became uncontrollable in the ward and the
superintendent decided to call the police. When three police officers
arrived in the ward, they found that this person was not fighting, but just
moving up and down the ward. One white policeman drew his gun and shot this
man. Two patients were killed in the ward.

These are the shocking things that happen in that place. The Vryheid
community is very worried and they request the department to investigate
these incidents that take place there. They want to know if proper justice
was done.

We as the ANC support these budgets for the four departments that are being
proposed today. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms D P MAGADZI (Northern Province): Chairperson, my Ministers, colleagues
from other provinces, hon members, in two days' time, as South Africans, we
will be celebrating the crafting of the Freedom Charter - a vision which
served as an inspiration to all of us as freedom fighters in the quest to
ensure that South Africa belongs to all of us who live in it: both black
and white. As the President of the ANC clearly postulated in the ANC Today,
and I quote:


  Though clearly a product of its times, the Freedom Charter remains to
  this day a point of reference as we work to build a new South Africa.
  There are a number of reasons for the endurance and continued relevance
  of the Freedom Charter. One of these is that it is truly a product of
  popular participation. It was drawn up on the basis of demand presented
  by people throughout the country. In a real sense, it was the precursor
  to the democratically elected Parliament which, today, is our supreme
  law.

As the youth month draws to a close, we have converged here today, in this
hallowed Chamber of the NCOP, to debate Policy on Budget Votes on Safety
and Security, and the criminal justice system as appropriated by the
National Treasury and tabled in this House by the criminal justice cluster.
In debating this budget today, we must also pay homage to thousands of
young people who paid the ultimate sacrifice to usher South Africa to where
it is today.

Safety and security is a very important matter in any democracy in order to
ensure that our people are safe and secure. I want to raise a few issues
which were reflected by the Minister in his budget speech in the National
Assembly. One of those issues is violence against women and children. Our
province is one of those which have this type of a challenge. In our quest
to ensure that our children are safe and secure, from October last year we
initiated a council which deals with wars against children.

In that council we have developed a multipronged strategy within which a
framework of a multidisciplinary approach on crime prevention will be dealt
with. This is in line with what the National Crime Prevention Strategy has
outlined. We join hands with the organs of civil society to ensure that our
voyage to curb crimes against children and to create a caring nation that
respects the dignity of our children and the need for their positive and
responsible upbringing, is upheld.

I have noted with great concern in our province that, in particular, sexual
offences are a challenge, especially in our townships and villages. Two
days before the eve of Freedom Day, a ninety-eight-year old was raped at
her home in the far north of the Limpopo province. On that Freedom Day, as
we were celebrating, a fifteen-year old was abducted and raped by four men.
A week later, a twenty-six-year old father allegedly raped his eighteen-
month old baby.

For sure, our women, both young and old, deserve to be treated with respect
and dignity like the rest of the human species in this country. It is in
this regard that we note and applaud the intervention which has been made
by the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, by bringing
into our province three measures to deal with sexual offences. We clearly
believe that the specialisation of the judiciary will be able to serve as a
deterrent to potential perpetrators, and will send a clear message to the
victims of crime that this Government is very serious about addressing the
plight of the indigent - those who have been disadvantaged.

As we analyse the national crime-combating strategy, we find that the SA
Police Service has set itself a target of reducing crime in 145 national
crime-combating zones in the country, 18 of which are found in our
province. The national crime-combating strategy hopes to achieve, by the
end of this financial year, a particular programme. This coming financial
year it will ensure that we will be able to stabilise crime.
Our assessment in our province has been that, regarding the 18 priority
police stations, there has been a top-up of five police stations and that
makes 23 priority policy stations. Therefore, in our analysis, we have been
able to make the conclusion that while we are trying to stabilise crime in
priority stations, there are challenges, particularly of social crimes, in
our province. Out of that we have been able to commission a research by the
CSIR to assist us in anatomising the challenges that we are faced with as a
province, so that we are able to deal with them in a strategic and focused
approach. We are hopeful that, as the province, we will be able to benefit
out of this. We will make sure that we interact with other provinces so
that we can be able to share this valuable research that we are engaged in
- particularly because it is about social crimes.

Our province is one of those that are challenged. The police-population
ratio is one of the challenges, and it's the highest in the country. We
have to accept that. As we are faced with this challenge we are, on a
regular basis, losing members. Between 2001 and 2003 our province lost 207
members who passed away through natural attrition and otherwise; and 125
who were lost to other provinces. We believe that since there is a national
intake and recruitment, we will be able to benefit out of this, because if
we don't, our ability to fight crime will be adversely affected.

In the budget speech the Minister indicated that they have succeeded in
making sure that 26% female representivity, in terms of employment equity
targets, has been reached. However, I must hasten to indicate that this
does not reciprocate at provincial level and, in particular, at station
level because when you ask the station commissioners, they always indicate
that deployment is done at national or provincial levels. In many stations,
employment equity targets have not been met as yet.

Other challenges which face the SA Police Service are in relation to
procurement of goods and services. The status quo to date still remains the
same, such that there is central procurement to the point that it's
detrimental to the provinces because service providers do not get
opportunities to become part of these important economical projects that
are being provided by Government. Therefore, it will be important that as
we transform, we also take cognisance of the transformation of procurement
services in Government by distributing them to the provincial levels. The
President covered that in his response to the budget speech in the national
Parliament.
The question of racism is a challenge that we cannot run away from. Last
year, in our province, we commissioned research on racism, ethnicity and
tribalism, and the impact thereof in ensuring that services are delivered.
That is real - the results and the recommendations are there. We are
grappling with the implementation of this challenging task. I must also
indicate that this is not one of the things that we can ignore. We have to
look this monster in the eye.

As I conclude, let me indicate that we have been humming a song as the
secretariat that the CPFs are unfunded mandates, both as part of the SA
Police Service and the Secretariat for Safety and Security. Even though
there are some financial constraints in provinces, this is a very important
organ of people's power. Therefore, it becomes important that, as we
promote good community police relations in provinces, we should also ensure
that we speed up the process of dealing with the mishmash that is there in
terms of the legal issues, because when you talk about the CPFs, you will
find that it is the prerogative of the provincial commissioner to set up
the CPFs. However, funding is one of those things that are a challenge. We
hope and take cognisance of the fact that, as this is one of the areas
where members are volunteering their services ... [Time Expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, due to time constraints, I am going to
concentrate on the Justice and Constitutional Development Vote, and the
Safety and Security Vote.

In respect of justice, in the past, the DA and its predecessor have
supported the Budget Votes in the justice cluster. We did so because we
thought that the Government deserved an opportunity to come to grips with
the many problems that they had to deal with. However, at some point we
need to ask ourselves: Has there been sufficient progress to justify
continued support for the Justice and Constitutional Development budget?

In the run-up to the budget policy debates and whilst briefing the
portfolio committee in the National Assembly, the Chief Justice pointed out
that 50% of crimes in our country go unpunished because of poor policing
and prosecution. The Chief Justice complained that the awaiting-trial
period for the average criminal is too long. Further, he pointed out that
the lack of capacity needed to be acknowledged in order to deal with these
problems.

As the Chief Justice pointed out, this lack of capacity may well be due to
an inadequate budget. Whilst I wish to acknowledge that there has been an
effective increase in the department's budget of some R747 million and that
this is the largest increase since 1994, however, this is not sufficient to
deal with the enormous backlog in resources that has built up over the
years.

The DA appreciates the fact that 52 maintenance investigators were finally
appointed on 1 April for the maintenance courts. This has, however, taken
far too long. The relevant legislation was enacted on 19 November 1998 and
its date of commencement was 26 November 1999. The appointments that I have
referred to are the first under the Act. It has taken far too long to
implement this Act. Further, only 69 of the promised 80 maintenance
prosecutors have been appointed.

The maintenance courts around the country are overburdened, inadequately
staffed and inefficiently run. [Interjections.] Thousands of parents,
mainly fathers - perhaps this colleague behind me is one of them - continue
to evade and escape their obligation to support their children. We should
not allow this state of affairs to continue.

The plight of victims of crime is not being addressed. The recent
withdrawal of cases because of poor performance by state prosecutors is no
comfort to the victims of crime. There is no victims' charter from the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development. Promises to set up a
victims' fund, which the DA has called for repeatedly, have been made, but
no steps to establish this fund have been taken. The criminal asset
recovery unit whose account already holds R27 million in assets forfeited
to the state, which is meant to assist victims of crime and the fight
against crime, has not paid out a cent to date.

To sum up, we have extremely low productivity in the courts - which is the
core business of the department; and long periods for awaiting-trial
prisoners which result from the very low pace of cases through the courts
for which both police and prosecutors must take the blame. This has led to
the clogging up of prisons with some 60 000 awaiting-trial prisoners and
has lead to inhumane conditions. The periods are getting longer, not
shorter, and undermine citizens' rights to a fair trial. Breaking point is
rapidly approaching. These are the circumstances that will lead to
vigilantism. We need to do something now to deflect us from the path of
vigilantism which none of us can accept.

There is inconsistency in the justice department's approach to its
problems. Pilot projects introduced to keep the awaiting-trial accused out
of jail if their offences were minor have just been dropped in an ad hoc
manner, through failure to allocate funding.

There are persistently low conviction rates in relation to the rising crime
rate. The director of national prosecution's office claims conviction rates
in the 80% range for all three levels of courts. However, this relates to
cases that eventually actually go to trial. Figures given by the department
are very different. In the district courts, because of the increase in
crime, new cases recorded by the NPA have climbed to over a million, but
only 334 880 cases were finalised. As only 142 896 remained outstanding,
more than half a million cases were withdrawn. This supports the Chief
Justice's comment that 50% of crime cases go unpunished.

Extreme shortages of personnel which are simply not addressed undermine the
operation of the courts. According to the latest strategic plan framework
for the department, a human resource audit of the department suggests that
it is both underresourced and relatively unskilled and therefore ill-
prepared to fulfil its mandate. The DA sees insufficient progress in this
budget torwards the goals of an efficient and victim-friendly court system.
We, therefore, cannot support this Vote. [Interjections.]

In respect of Safety and Security, the police force, whose job it is to
uphold the law, must be properly trained and fully equipped to do so. It is
the responsibility of the Government to ensure that the police force is
adequately and appropriately staffed. The Government also needs to ensure
that the police force is properly trained and properly equipped.
[Interjections.] Moreover, it is the Government's responsibility to ensure
that the police force is efficiently managed and that it carries out its
mandate. At the end of the day, it is the Government's responsibility to
ensure that South African citizens enjoy their constitutional rights to
security of their persons and their property.

Instead of putting emphasis where it belongs, we see the Government seeking
to hide and obscure the facts by refusing to release the appropriate
statistics until they are no longer current or relevant. [Interjections.]
Not so long ago, there was a total blackout on crime statistics. While the
department supposedly corrected certain shortcomings in the system of
collecting and collating data on crime statistics, in due course, we were
assured that the shortcomings in relation to crime statistics had been
corrected.

Mr Gibson, in the National Assembly, has pointed out that the police
statistics for the year 2000 indicated that the number of murders committed
for the period under review had been 21 683. [Interjections.] However, the
Medical Research Council put the figure for the same period at 32 482. The
discrepancy has not yet been adequately explained.

As a member of Parliament trying to assess whether the department has
allocated its budget to the correct priorities, we are entitled to know
what the true state of affairs is. [Interjections] Otherwise, we cannot do
our jobs properly. Furthermore, the citizens of this country live in a
democracy that prides itself on being open and transparent. They, too, are
entitled to know the true state of affairs with regard to the battle
against crime in their own country. To date hereof, I have not heard any
compelling reason for denying them access to this information.

If the department is incapable of providing us with current and accurate
information, then this is another reason for us to look at their budget
allocation more closely. [Interjections.] South African citizens, across
the country, suffer ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Order! There is a
point of order. Mr Lever, your time has actually expired, but let us hear
what that hon member wants to say.

Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Chairperson, I want to know whether the member wants to
take a question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): His time has expired,
but let me check. Hon member, I will give you one minute if you want to
take a question. Would you take a question? [Interjections.] Your time has
expired, anyway.

Mr L G LEVER: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): All right, if you
want to round off, just round off quickly.

Mr L G LEVER: South African citizens across the country suffer the
consequences of crime on a daily basis. It is not sufficient to tell them
that crime statistics have stabilised. They deserve something better than
that. The Government should be committing sufficient resources to this
problem to ensure that the crime rate comes down significantly and
consistently. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I W KOTSOANE (Free State): Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers and colleagues,
this budget debate takes place, obviously, on the eve of the 48th
anniversary of the historic assembly of our people, the Kliptown congress,
which shaped the vision for the creation of society that we seek to build
today. That's the society where there shall be peace and friendship, and
the society that is steeped in equality before the law and human rights
culture, as stipulated in our own Constitution.

As the first decade of our democracy comes to end, we enjoy the fruits of
those who assembled in Kliptown. Many who toiled through the years for the
achievement of our democratic dispensation in 1994 can claim, without any
fear of contradiction, that we have scored many goals in the space of ten
years. Important state institutions empowered to create the atmosphere of
peace, stability and friendship, such the SA Police Service, defence and
justice departments, now enjoy unsurpassed respect, recognition and
confidence amongst the majority of our people who, for generations, were
oppressed through these institutions.

As the dawn of our second decade approaches, we can equally look back and
claim to ourselves and everybody that lessons learned throughout the
history of exclusion, oppression, racism - which resulted in an
unaccountable government - gave way to the new culture of accountable and
consultative form of government, a government in which people are at the
centre of change, and thereby bettering their own lives.

Our people continue to take part in governance through campaigns such as
Letsema. Their preoccupation is to change the circumstances that they find
themselves in. Fighting crime in communities through community policing
forums and sector policing is one of the key strategies which have
contributed, in the case of the Free State province, to the stabilised
phase of crime. The normalisation phase that we have entered is focused on
crimes such as murder, housebreaking, residential and business area crimes,
common assault and robbery which are still prevalent in some of the police
station areas.

Three areas, in particular, in our province - Batho in Bloemfontein,
Thabong in Welkom and Maokeng in Kroonstad - still report incidents of rape
which have their roots in domestic violence. Communities in these areas,
through their community policing forums and sector policing, have embarked
in different campaigns aimed at educating people about the issues of
domestic violence and distributed pamphlets to help communities with tips
on how to take personal responsibility in the fight against crime.

We want to report that since the visit to our province by the Minister of
Defence, and Minister of Safety and Security earlier this year, with their
counterpart from the Lesotho government, crime around our borders with
Lesotho has decreased substantially. This is as a result of an increased
working relation between the SA Police Service and its counterpart in
Lesotho.

Different projects that are being established around Lesotho to combat drug
trafficking, car theft and gun smuggling are proving to be successful.
Regular roadblocks which are conducted by the police stations around the
border, including provincially co-ordinated crackdown operations, are
paying dividends to our communities who live along the Lesotho border.
Although stock theft remains a problem in the eastern part of the province,
there has been a marked decline in farm attacks and farm murders. This is
as a result of the work that our police officers, in collaboration with the
farmers and farming community, are embarking upon.

In the province, the secretariat, as well as the Human Rights Commission,
have equally embarked on programmes such as human rights training and
information sessions for both farmworkers and farmers. In keeping with our
constitutional mandate to evaluate and monitor service delivery in the
province, the secretariat has launched an annual review of the SA Police
Service which is conducted through community surveys in all police stations
by independent consultants. This, we believe, will help in shaping our
strategies in relation to service delivery in each police area.

Arising from the first results of that survey, the following could just be
shared with this House. The majority of those polled were not aware of
police stations and all community service centres. They were also not aware
how they operate and that their name is no longer charge offices but
community service centres. This counts for 85% of the population and,
therefore, it means that a lot of information distribution and work has to
be done. For example, 79% of them were satisfied with the manner in which
police discharge their responsibilities in the province. Fifteen percent of
those who were polled were of the view that bribery in the Police Service
is still a problem among some members. Thirty six percent of those who were
polled believed that racism is still an issue within the Police Service,
and that it results in their cases not being properly taken up.
I will, in due  course,  discuss  some  of  the  findings  with  the  police
officers so that we are able to seek ways  of  improving  our  work  in  our
communities. In addition to this project, we have  established  a  complaint
centre which uses a toll-free number in the  province.  This  centre  allows
our people, across the province, to phone in  in  order  to  register  their
complaints in relation to service delivery and, indeed, to  compliment  work
that is being done well by the police officers. To  date,  this  centre  has
registered an average  of  50  calls  a  day.  Community  workers  from  the
secretariat are being sent throughout the province to  follow  up  on  those
complaints that have been registered.

Since the beginning of this project, there has been, indeed, very  good  co-
operation between our communities and the  police.  Obviously,  everyone  in
the Police Service would like to be  registered  as  having  done  his  work
well. So, we think that this is a very important project, for it means  that
we allow our people to have a better service from our own police members.

The general perception survey points to a work in progress that still needs
to be done. Of course, it does point to some areas where improvement is
needed. We believe that, as we approach the second survey, which will be
conducted towards the end of this year, the results will be different from
the ones that we have since the strategies that we will embark upon will
help us in order to address issues that were raised by communities.

What inspires us most, generally in the province, is the willingness,
commitment and readiness of our people to be part of the solution. We are
confident that with time and hard work on the part of all stakeholders,
there is, indeed, a brighter future for our country.

One of the critical challenges that faces our country and obviously our
province, and the criminal justice system in particular, is around issues
of social crimes. These relate to violence against women and children,
including child rape and substance abuse which are interrelated. With the
intensification of our campaigns around these matters, we are confident
that we will win. Lessons from the founders of our Constitution indicate
that participation of all stakeholders in the community is key to such
victory.

Some among us are calling for 150 000 police officers who can police this
sort of crimes. We disagree. It has been proven, time and again, from
countries such as America and others that it's not in the numbers, but in
the quality of work. More importantly, it's through community participation
that we could be able to reduce crime. The best municipalities with money
in America employed many police officers. However, that did not build or
pay any dividends. What is key and has been proven in our own situation is
that through community policing forums and sector policing, we have been
able to build a bridge between our police officers and communities and
thereby making people confident about the work of the police. Of course,
police officers are able to get as much information in the fight against
crime.

Our approach to this central issue of social crime is and will always be to
ensure that we mobilise the masses of our people and empower them to be
able to detect and report such crimes to the police. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, members, listening to
the member from the DA, I observed that the DA simply opposes for the sake
of opposing. [Interjections.] The 2003 national Budget gives priority to
reducing poverty and vulnerability. Poverty and unequal access to resources
are the key courses of conflict.

As part of the International Relations, Peace and Stability cluster, the
Department of Defence is the leading department in the efforts to bring
peace in Africa. We believe that without peace and stability, economic
development will not fully take off. Conversely, without economic
development and justice, there cannot be peace. We believe that it is
possible to end wars in Africa and elsewhere in the world. Through Nepad,
Africans are determined to find African solutions to Africa's problems. It
is in this context that an African stand-by force, under the auspices of
the African Union, is being mooted.

The core value of a common defence policy is based on the indivisibility of
continental security. It recognises the fact that each African country's
security is linked, inseparably, to another. Another core value that forms
part of the common defence policy is the acceptance that conflict
resolution should primarily be effected through peaceful means. As
conflicts within states often spill over into neighbouring states, the
central tenet of the common defence policy, therefore, remains
nonaggression.

To meet this objective, each country is expected to assess its own doctrine
and security situation. Each country has to look at its assets, and
determine what it can contribute to the common good. It is expected that
our country, as one of those stronger economies on the continent, will
always have to carry some of the bigger responsibilities. I noticed during
the earlier session that a number of questions from this House to the
Deputy President were on the role of the SANDF regarding peacekeeping.

It is correct that members of Parliament are concerned that sufficient
funds are allocated for our peacekeeping obligations while ensuring that
our own domestic defence needs are met. The benefits of a peaceful, stable
and developing Africa make it worthwhile to invest in peace-building on our
continent. The whole of Africa is working, continentally and regionally, to
meet these challenges.

On the defence side, our approach is to create regional blocks that will
then be pooled together to form a continental body. I can report that we,
in the SADC, are in the process of finalising the SADC mutual defence pact,
and are hopeful that it will be signed at the coming heads of states summit
in August. I can also report that the African stand-by force is currently
at an advanced state of discussion. An agreement has been reached on a
number of matters. Some of the matters on which full agreement has been
reached are the following: doctrine and posture; shifts in the nature of
peacekeeping; common standards of training; interoperability of forces;
equipment and logistics; standard procurement regimes for commonly
identified equipment needs; and establishment of command structures.

The DOD continues to seek ways to align our mandate and tasks with our
budget especially, but not exclusively, with regard to our increased, yet
necessary, external deployments. These deployments are not confined to
peacekeeping in Burundi and the Democractic Republic of Congo but also
include our presence in the form of military attachés in most countries.
This presence was necessitated by our having to service 103 international
agreements, under the guidance of the Department of Foreign Affairs.

In responding to the challenges posed by the budgetary constraints, the DOD
has developed a new military strategy whose aim is to ensure that it
delivers on its expanded mandate while ensuring that we keep within the
allocated budget. This strategy is guided by the considerations to achieve
an excellent strategic direction, excellent resource management, and
maintaining effective combat forces and support forces while ensuring a
high standard of professionalism through effective command and control,
doctrine tactics and appropriate technology.

Another consideration is the implementation of the transformation process.
The DOD recognises that successful transformation is essential in order to
ensure the alignment of its policies with those of Government. These are
issues of civil-military relations, transparency, representivity, state
expenditure and security. Issues of inequality caused conflict within the
DOD in the past, and will continue to do so unless they are addressed.

The effort to increase the number of women who participate in the peace
processes must be intensified. The UN Security Council's Resolution 1325
calls on member states to ensure that women are represented at all levels
of decision-making, and in all processes and postconflict reconstruction.
In this regard, we are happy to report that our women personnel have been
deployed in peacekeeping missions alongside their male comrades right from
the beginning, and have done a tremendous job.

The chief directorate on equal opportunities intends to engage the chief of
joint operations to challenge him to encourage equal women participation in
the peace processes and peacekeeping, ensure gender mainstreaming in
training for peacekeeping, and to ensure adherence of our peacekeepers to
the SA National Defence Force's code of conduct. Respect for women's rights
and gender equity, and the protection of women and girls from rape and
other gender-based violence, are enshrined in our Constitution and the code
of conduct.

We are happy to report, also, that women soldiers are making a special
contribution to the peace process in the DRC through their participation in
the inter-Congolese dialogue. This process was initiated in the Presidency,
under the leadership of Mrs Zanele Mbeki. The DOD's own programme of
involving women in the peace processes in Africa continues to grow. This
year, the African Women's Peace Table - a forum created in the year 2000 to
initiate dialogue among women soldiers and civilian women peace activists -
will focus on the role of women in Nepad and the AU. We expect
participation by women from the SADC region's defence forces.

Another important development, this year, is the chief directorate's
production of a draft document that proposes a policy on shared values for
the Department of Defence. This new addition will strengthen the ongoing
efforts to fully transform the Department of Defence into a nonracial,
nonsexist and caring organisation.

As we strive to meet the challenges and expectations placed on us, the DOD
has developed strategies and programmes to ensure that the SANDF is
properly equipped and trained. One of these is Human Resource Strategy 2010
through which we hope to revitalise the SANDF whilst simultaneously
creating a pool for the reserves. Our force's design and structure relies
on a large pool of reserves from which to recruit when the need for greater
numbers of personnel arises. In this regard, we are happy to report that
Project Phoenix, which is aimed at strengthening and transforming our
reserve forces, is in full swing.

Through the military skills development programme, the human resources
division of the Department of Defence aims to address the issue of lack of
representivity, especially in the high technical masterings of the SANDF,
and to contribute to the national skills development programme. The failure
to get the numbers right could be attributed to the education dispensation
of the past which made and continues to make the availability of properly
prepared school-leavers difficult. Through the military skills development
programme, greater numbers of blacks and women are targeted for the navy
and the airforce. We are proud to say that this programme is one of our
flagship programmes, and not only serves the needs of the Department of
Defence and the SANDF, but also those of the country as a whole.

Our pilots are in great demand in the commercial sector. This has posed a
new challenge for the SA Air Force to find ways to retain them. The Youth
Foundation Training Programme was launched in 2001 as an urgent
intervention by the DOD to provide foundation training for school-leavers
in mathematics and science, especially for those from disadvantaged
communities. The expected end result of this programme is to produce the
critical mass of well-trained young people who have good symbols in
mathematics and physical science and who can choose to join the SANDF.

Budgetary constraints, unfortunately, prevent the intake of more students.

The SA Air Force has embarked on the Siyandiza Aviation Awareness Programme
to increase the recruitment pool of youths who come from disadvantaged
communities in order to address the problem of lack of representivity. This
project aims to improve the mathematics symbols of school-leavers in order
to make them eligible for acceptance to train as pilots, navigators, air
traffic controllers and engineers.

The Air Force board approved an academic approach to the programme which
has now expanded and given birth to the SA Air Force young falcons'
programme. This new programme which targets Grades 6 to 12 will be done in
three phases in partnership with the Department of Education and will
create a true air force identity for the participating learners.

The DOD faces challenges of ensuring that our military veterans are
assisted to reintegrate smoothly into productive civilian life. In
attempting to meet this challenge, Parliament passed the Military Veterans
Affairs Act of 1999. The Act made provision for appointment of an advisory
board to advise the Minister of Defence on issues that concern military
veterans in order to improve their quality of life and that of their
dependants.

The service corps was established in September 1995 in order to reintegrate
ex-combatants into society. A study which was ordered by the Minister of
Defence revealed that the service corps was not functioning optimally and
had not succeeded in migrating out of the SANDF, as originally envisaged.
We are happy to announce that efforts to migrate the service corps into a
national vehicle that would benefit the nation are currently under way.
This will provide general access to its immense resources such as the
Centre for Advanced Training in Pretoria. In doing so, these resources will
be made available to assist in the development of our nation.

To ensure the success of such a migration, it is crucial that, as
Government, we develop clear output criteria to ensure compliance with our
socioeconomic objectives. In this regard, we recognise the need to ensure
links with existing socioeconomic clusters, in order to ensure viability,
such as the programmes in Public Works, Trade and Industry, Labour and
Social Development. It will also link to the Nepad initiatives through
developmental peacekeeping. Developmental peacekeeping provides the SANDF
with the unique opportunity to assist in the migration of the service corps
whilst linking into existing infrastructure-related interventions that
would support Nepad.

Both the CSIR and the MOD are currently exploring the viability of a
developmental peacekeeping model. In April this year, the Minister of Water
Affairs and Forestry, the hon Ronnie Kasrils, and I, launched Operation
Vuselela. That is a project which is aimed at eradicating foreign
vegetation on SANDF-controlled land while creating jobs for military
veterans. This was in recognition of the fact that the welfare of military
veterans is not an exclusive responsibility of the DOD. Operation Vuselela
employs only military veterans, and is run under the auspices of Working
for Water Programme with funding from the Poverty Relief Fund.

The size and scope of the problem of unemployed former combatants and
soldiers, who are generally young and restless, is a problem not only for
individual defence forces, but also for the region and the continent as a
whole. We cannot sleep peacefully while tens of thousands of former
soldiers go hungry and roam around. It is our responsibility to ensure that
former soldiers are properly reintegrated into active and productive
civilian life. This we owe to them and to ourselves. We must recognise
their service and the contribution that they made to our freedom.

Previously I spoke about the importance of addressing the issue of ensuring
that our national military heritage integrates struggle and resistance
military history. In pursuit of this objective, the Ministry of Defence and
the Directorate of Military Veterans' Affairs have had discussions with the
board of Freedom Park. We are happy with the progress that is being made by
Freedom Park to honour our national heritage and the contribution to our
freedom made by the liberation armies of uMkhonto weSizwe and Apla. We
thank Dr Wally Serote and the Ministry of Arts, Culture, Science and
Technology for their continued support in this regard.
The world congress of military veterans will convene in Johannesburg in
December 2003. We look forward to this important international conference
that will be hosted, for the first time, by an African country. This
congress will provide an opportunity for military veterans to put their
issues on the agenda.

Government has realised that there was an oversight in drawing up the
Special Pensions Act of 1996. Many deserving former members of the
liberation movements were left out of the ambit of the Act. As announced by
Treasury, the Special Pensions Act of 1996 is being amended to rectify
issues that were overlooked. It is expected that the President will sign
the amended Act during the present session of Parliament.

Collateral utility is about the peacetime utilisation of defence, spare
capabilities and resources for civilian purposes. In this regard, the SANDF
continues to be involved in the fight against cholera and malaria in our
own country and in the SADC region through the SA Military Health Service
and other divisions like the army engineer corps. The SA Military Health
Service was a participant in the rally against malaria which was organised
under the leadership of the Minister of Health, Minister Tshabalala-
Msimang.

The SANDF was involved in the construction of a temporary bridge on the
South Coast following the bombing of that bridge, allegedly by members of
the Boeremag. The SANDF continues to contribute to internal security, peace
and stability in support of the SA Police Service.

HIV/Aids poses a special challenge for the Department of Defence from the
point of view that the bulk of its personnel fall in the most vulnerable
social group of the young, highly mobile and sexually active. The risk of
defence personnel on external deployment is heightened by long absences
from home. This necessitates a more extensive training for our soldiers
about the issues surrounding the virus before any deployment. The DOD has
intensified its efforts to fight HIV/Aids through its Masibambisane
Campaign. To this end, a national HIV/Aids advisor was appointed in the
Ministry of Defence.

To date, the Masibambisane Campaign has been launched in most provinces. A
total of over R4,6 million was spent on the campaign for the 2002-03
financial year. Two thousand five hundred staff members have been trained
as peer educators, occupational health and safety officers, master
trainers, health care workers and HIV programme developers. In the DOD, 71%
of staff was exposed to Masibambisane. However, in consideration of the
scale of the task of fighting HIV/Aids, more funds need to be made
available. We are very grateful for the donor funding that we have received
in aid of this programme.

At this point, I want to extend my gratitude to the personnel of the
Department of Defence who work tirelessly and who have remained true to the
department and to the people of South Africa. The people of South Africa
can rest assured that the Department of Defence will continue to serve
them. It will continue to transform itself into an instrument of peace
domestically, continentally and internationally. It will work towards the
day when, in reality, the world shall beat its swords into plough shares,
its spears into pruning hooks; when nations shall not lift a sword against
another; and no one shall endeavour to learn war anymore.

On 26 June, as other members have indicated, we celebrate the adoption of
the Freedom Charter by the Congress of the People. ``There shall be peace
and security'', says the Freedom Charter. We are happy that our budget is
orientated to achieving these noble objectives enshrined in our base
document, the Freedom Charter. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Hon Deputy Chair, hon members, hon Ministers, hon MECs,
comrades and friends, the focus this is year is on consolidation of our
gains and accelerated transformation.

Before I begin, may I apologise for the absence of my MEC who is not in the
country. Our President, the hon Thabo Mbeki, when he delivered his state of
the nation address in Parliament on 14 February 2003, repeatedly confirmed
that, and I quote


  The tide has turned. Our task is to take this tide at the flood to
  progress towards the achievement of the goals for which so many of our
  people sacrificed.

Our programmes in our province, the Northern Cape, are in line with the
broader national vision of transformation. Our crime prevention programmes,
as such, do ascribe to an empowerment and developmental approach which is
in favour of, particularly, those disadvantaged communities. It is these
previously disadvantaged black communities who still suffer as a result of
high levels of crime, violence, poverty and other social injustices, and
all legacies of the underdevelopment and disempowerment, surely, engineered
by the apartheid regime.

In the face of rape and violence against women and children spiralling
towards alarming levels, also in our province, and coupled with the
sometimes glaring negligence and obvious don't-care attitude of some
parents and community members towards the safety of our children as well as
their own, and compounded by irresponsible drinking and alcohol abuse, it
is important that we intensify all efforts and interventions to stop the
scourge that is seriously threatening the wellbeing and prosperity of our
broader communities in the Northern Cape and elsewhere.

It is, therefore, critical that we intensify our efforts to bring down the
levels of violence against and abuse of our women and children, as well as
the abuse of alcohol and drugs in our province. We will, thus, be focusing
on effective implementation and sustenance of those projects that have been
already launched in the province and seek to consolidate community buy-in
and ownership of projects at local level. Departmental resources will
continue to be focused and aligned towards our mandate to co-ordinate, lead
and champion the provisional total onslaught on crime, and with pertinent
focus on violence against women and children, and alcohol abuse.
Regarding budgetary constraints amidst service delivery needs, one can
mention, for example, the understaffed department and lean structures which
result from the inadequate budget for filling of all critical posts,
especially core function posts. A serious constraint is the unfunded posts
in the two core function subdirectorates of monitoring and oversight, and
crime prevention and community police relations that have been vacant since
the inception of the department. At present, the operations of these
subdirectorates have to be executed by a total of four officials at
provincial level, that is two per subdirectorate and four at regional
level, that is one per region. Another budget-related constraint is the
delay in the allocation and availability of budget to the SAPS in the
provinces - that is the budget from the national level.

Two months into the new financial year, the police in the province have not
yet been informed about their budget allocation for this year. It is such
delays in the budget process that cause provinces to underspend because
they can only place orders, for example for vehicles, once they know what
amount has been allocated to them for vehicles. Provinces are, however,
taking this matter up at Minmec and hope to have it resolved before the
next financial year.

The following are the challenges around the transformation of the SAPS in
our province: difficulties in changing attitudes; inculcation of the human
rights culture within the SAPS; continued resistance and insincerity
towards meeting the policy needs of the previously disadvantaged
communities, eg the skewed allocation and deployment of resources between
Galeshewe and Kimberley, Upington and Pabalello that bring on racist or
discriminatory attitudes and practices; resistance to move out of comfort
zones such as the prevailing domination of the SAPS administration and
support service units by whites; stations still being staffed according to
racial lines, eg Galeshewe which is predominantly African, Roodepan which
is predominantly coloured and Kimberley which is predominantly white; and
also the fact that experienced senior officers only work from seven to four
o'clock, Mondays to Fridays, instead of working over weekends and crime
peak hours when there is more crime and complaints, and their experience
and expertise dearly needed; difficulties around achievement of
representivity and employment equity in that not much has been achieved in
terms of this area; and the transformation processes within the SAPS,
mainly because of human resource policies which are centralised or
nationalised.
The current problem of critical mass in the department which is due to
vacancies is fast reaching alarming proportions in that it not only places
unnecessary stress and pressure on the existing staff who have to do double
their bit without extra remuneration or overtime pay because of budgetary
constraints, but it also seriously affects the morale of staff. The SAPS in
the province also experiences severe shortages, and has recorded the levels
of understaffing as at 40% in terms of human resources and a 50% shortage
in terms of vehicles.

All of the above contribute to the prevailing reactive policing approach to
our crime problems in that we are mainly only able to respond to complaints
or crime after the fact instead of having adequate resources to deploy to
the streets for purposes of crime prevention.

We have, indeed, succeeded to establish regional offices in the four
regions of Francis Baard, Namaqualand, Siyanda and Upper Karoo which are
now all operational. We will be implementing the final phase of the
departmental decentralisation process with the establishment of the third
regional office in Kuruman in the Kgalagadi node as part of the
presidential rural development programme. [Time expired.]

Ms N C KONDLO: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers ...

... malungu abekekileyo ale Ndlu, eneneni namhlanje sixoxa ngohlahlo-
lwabiwo-mali lwamasebe ayileyo phaya kwisine - elezoBulungisa, uKhuseleko,
eloLuleko lwamabanjwa kunye nelezoKhuselo. Kambe mna ndiza kuthi chu kweli
lezoLuleko.

Apha Mhlalingaphambili, sithetha ngesebe eliseshweni lokuba semsileni
kwinkqubo yezobulungisa, nto leyo eyenza ukuba lizibone lithwala nomsebenzi
wamanye amasebe. Le ngxaki ilenza eli sebe lizibone lifuna ukwaba izimali,
ukuba amanye amasebe ebesebenza ngokulindelekileyo, nge eli sebe liwuthwala
ngcono umsebenzi walo. Xa ndinaba kulo mba Mhlalingaphambili, umzekelo
ndingathi, iintolongo zaseMzantsi Afrika azizele ziyaphuphuma ngamabanjwa.
Amanani asibonisa mhlophe le ngxaki. Ami ngolu hlobo: 187 748 amabanjwa
ukuphela kukaMatshi amabanjwa asezitrongweni kodwa umthwalo weetrongo
uthatha i-110 874 amabanjwa. Loo nto ithethe ukuthi eli sebe ligqithe ngama-
78 874 kumthamo walo. Eyona nto iphinda yenze ingxaki emandla kweli sebe
yeyokuba ama-58 144 ala mabanjwa awakagwetywa, Mphathiswa wezoBulungisa.
Bambi banikwa iibheyile ezincinci kakhulu noxa kunengxaki yokuba ezinye
zazo zingabhataleki. Loo nto yenza ukuba babe baninzi abantu
abangekagwetywa abasezitrongweni. Eli sebe kufanele linikezwe ibhajethi
yaloo nto. Ke ngoko ndifuna ukuthi mhlawumbi ukuzama ukuhlangabezana neli
sebe, kunganjani na ukuba isebe lezoBulungisa, ingakumbi phaya koomantyi
lingakhe liqwalasele ngakumbi la mabanjwa anikezwe iibheyile ezincinci
ukuba akukho nto ingenziwa na ukuqinisekisa ukuba phaya etrongweni akuhlali
la mabanjwa angakwazi kuhlawula ibheyile yama-R50 kuba kaloku mhlawumbi
nesenzo esi wena asinabuzaza kangangokuba uRhulumente angachitha izimali
ezininzi ngokondla nokulalisa kwa nokugcina aba bantu ezitrongweni. Le
ngxaki yokuphuphuma kweetilongo ingathi mhlawumbi xa kunokwenziwa olu
phengululo ihlangabezeke.

Eneneni indima yeSebe lezoKhuseleko ibalulekile khon' ukuze amanani abantu
abangekagwetywa angasoloko ephezulu. Loo nto iya kuthetha ukuba namapolisa
kweliya Sebe lezoKhuseleko mawaqinise umxhelo ekwenzeni umsebenzi wawo,
ndaweninye noomantyi kweliya Sebe lezoBulungisa kuba mhlawumbi abanye bethu
asiyiqondi kakuhle into yokuba kwenziwa yintoni ukuba abantu abaninzi babe
abakagwetywa. Ingaba bethu mhlawumbi sijongene nenkqubo yezoBulungisa apho
abaye babathathi-nxaxheba kule nkqubo banengxaki neenguqu ngokwedemokhrasi.
Ukwabelwa imali ethe xhaxhe nyaka-mali nanyaka-mali kweli Sebe akusayi
kusincedisa xa onke la masebe engasebenzisani. Xa ndiphonononga iinkqubo
zokwakha ubuntu obutsha nobuphuhlileyo zeli sebe, ndifumanisa ukuba eneneni
eli sebe lijonge kabanzi ekwakheni uluntu oluphuma ezitrongweni khon' ukuze
lube lulutho eSizweni.

Aphezulu amanani amabanjwa athe aqeqeshwa kwizinwe ezininzi. Kambe kungani
ukuba amashumi amathandathu ekhulwini amabanjwa ibe ngabantu ebebekhe
basuka etrongweni ngaphambili? Bambi sele beqeqeshiwe kwezi zinwe. Ithi ke
loo nto Mhlalingaphambili, uRhulumente angazigalela izimali kweli Sebe,
baqeqeshwe abantu kwizinwe zonke babe nazo izakhono, baphume eziseleni
kodwa bafike emakhaya bengamkeleki ngenxa yezinto abazenzileyo bafike
ekuhlaleni bengafunwa luluntu ngenxa yezinto abazenzileyo, loo nto ke
ithethe ukuthi Sihlalo, umngeni uqala ekhaya apho umntu azalwa khona
ndaweninye naseluntwini jikelele apho umntu ahlala khona. Loo nto ithethe
ukuthi ke iinkqubo zikaRhulumenete kuwo onke amasebe kufanele ziqinise apha
ekumiseleni iinkqubo ndaweninye neenkonzo ezingenjongo yokujongana
nophuhliso loluntu khon' ukuze ze siqhawule eli khonkco lobundlobongela
bambi abantu bezifumana belixhoba lalo. Kananjalo isebe kufanele liqinise
indlela emalithathe ngayo inxaxheba kwiinkonzo ezijongene nokubuyisela abo
bavela ezitrongweni ukuthi mabamkeleke eluntwini.

Sihlalo, ngala mazwi ambalwa, nam ndithi siyaluxhasa olu hlahlo-lwabiwo-
mali. Liyinene elithi kweli sebe, 'Corrections is collective responsibility
of the offender, the family, the community and Government'. Enkosi Sihlalo.
[Applause.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... hon members of this House, indeed we are debating the budget votes of
four departments, ie the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development, the Department of Safety and Security, the Department of
Correctional Services and the Department of Defence. Of course, I am going
to spend time on correctional services.

Chairperson, we are talking here about a department which unfortunately
comes last in the processes of justice, which leaves it finding that it has
to shoulder the work of other departments as well. This problem makes this
department feel tempted to appropriate funds. If the other departments were
working as expected, this department would have coped better with its work.

In elaborating on this matter, Chair, I can, for example, say that prisons
in South Africa are overflowing with prisoners. The statistics in this
regard are clear. They are as follows: At the end of March the number of
inmates in prisons were 187 748. This is the case while the prisons have
capacity for 110 874 prisoners. That means that this department has
exceeded its capacity by 78 874. What is also creating a serious problem in
this department is that 58 144 of these prisoners are awaiting trial,
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development. Bail money in too low
amounts are granted even though some of them are not payable. That causes
prisons to have many unsentenced inmates. This department is supposed to be
granted a budget for that purpose.

Therefore, I want to say, perhaps in and effort to help this department,
what if particularly the magistrates of the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development could look at especially the situation
concerning inmates who have been granted low bail, to see whether or not
something could be done to ensure that prisons do not house people who
cannot afford to pay R50 bail if the offence is perhaps not so serious that
the Government should spend a lot of money feeding, providing shelter and
detaining these people in prisons. The problem of overcrowding in prisons
might be solved if an investigation could be made into this.

Indeed the safety and security department plays an important role in
ensuring that the statistics of the unsentenced prisoners are not always
high. That implies that the police must pull up their socks in doing their
job, as well as magistrates in the Department of Justice. Maybe some of us
do not understand what it is that gives rise to many not being sentenced.
Is it, perhaps, that we are faced with a justice system where some role-
players in the system have a problem with the democratic changes?

The appropriation of increased amounts of money to this department, budget
after budget, will not help if all the departments do not co-operate with
one another. On examination of this department's programmes to build a new
developed society, I find that this department has indeed looked broadly at
creating members of the community that are released from prison that mean
something to the nation.

Figures of prisoners who have been trained in many disciplines are high. In
fact, why is 60% of the prisoners people who have previously been
sentenced? Some have already been trained in these disciplines. Chair, it
is said that the Government can pump moneys into this department, have
people trained in all disciplines, develop skills and get people out of
prison, but they get home and are not welcomed because of the things they
had done; they get back to the community and are rejected because of the
things they had done.

Chairperson, this therefore means that the challenge begins at home, where
the individual was born, as well as in the community, where the individual
stays. That means Government programmes, in all departments, should act
decisively in setting up programmes, including services, that are aimed at
at dealing with the development of the community, so that we could break
the cycle of violence to which some people have fallen victim. In addition,
the department should strengthen the manner in which it plays its role in
the services that deal with rehabilitating those who come from prison so
that they are accepted in the community.

With these few words, Chair, I also want to say that we support this Budget
Vote. What is said in this department is true, and that is ``correction is
the collective responsibility of the offender, the family, the community
and Government''. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]]

Ms J L KGOALI: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers, comrades, colleagues
and fellow South Africans, it is unfortunate that hon Lever is out of the
House. I thought that the DP should be part of these deliberations as we
deliberate on important issues that affect us. None of them is in the
House, including the hon Raju who is also not here. And, I am sure that,
hon Deputy Chair, you will take into cognition that the hon members from
this party are not serious about this Government. I am not sure what they
say to their members out there and whether they do want to tell them the
truth or not.

I am pleased to stand here today on behalf of my province, Gauteng. We want
to say that there is no Government that is led by a smart party that can do
what we are doing, as this Government. The ANC-led Government has seen fit
that it should take these important Ministers and put them together to
ensure that we address the problems that we are faced with, problems that
have been neglected by the previous government.

As we all know, Gauteng is a small but densely populated province and their
problems are as much. But, one wants to say that nine years of this
democratic Government have brought change to those who want to see it,
member Versfeld. If you want to see change, there is change in this
country. If you don't want to see change, you will never see it. I also
want to say that the departments that have been brought together have made
it possible for this country to see a drop in crime. Those who cannot see
that crime has dropped in this country will never see it and they will
never recognise it.

The Gauteng Department of Safety and Liaison's budget has been increased in
this current financial year from R26 million to R33,9 million - a 23%
increase. Given the budget and history of funding in this department, this
is a significant increase. We need to note that 29% of this budget will go
towards activities that are geared towards the prevention of violence and
abuse of women and children.

I also want to say that it is not money only that can make everything
happen. The success that we have seen, as this Government, has been through
commitment and discipline. The budget, therefore, continues to address the
problems and projects as outlined in the National Crime Prevention Strategy
and the White Paper on Safety and Security.

Our approach in Gauteng is to have a dual emphasis when it comes to
addressing safety and security matters. We must ensure that there is
effective law enforcement and provision of social crime prevention
programmes to reduce incidents of crime. The Gauteng department of safety
and security has identified the following priorities, in line with the
broad Government strategy of dealing with crime: prevention of crime and
abuse of women and children; social crime prevention with elevated focus on
youth, community police relations and local prevention; monitoring and
evaluation of police services to promote trust and good services between
communities and police; promotion of an integrated justice system through
co-ordinating, monitoring and evaluation of the criminal justice system;
and communication and information.

The main highlights of the Gauteng budget are as follows: R1,7 million has
been set aside to further capacitate the service delivery desk and acquire
more resources for the Justice on Wheels Programme. This programme will
provide and assist communities who reside in the peri-urban areas with
means for addressing their complaints against police and the justice system
- as we all know that we are now correcting the mistakes and injustices of
the past. Through this allocated budget, visits to police stations and
specialised units will be conducted in order to determine the quality,
effectiveness and efficiency on the part of police, in so far as the
delivery of police services to communities is concerned.

The department has also budgeted R10 million which will mainly be used to
deal with the prevention of violence and abuse of women and children. MEC
Nomvula Mokonyane announced that Ikhaya Lethemba, a one-stop centre, will
be operational by November 2003 and this will be during the 16 days of
activism. Services such as counselling, legal advice, medical and mental
health services, transitional support services and training opportunities
will be provided to victims. With the establishment of this centre, we will
also be able to provide sanctuary and other technical service to victims of
domestic violence, rape, child abuse, neglect and all other forms of sexual
abuse.

Gauteng has targeted September 2003 to open victim empowerment rooms in
areas such as Reyger Park, Nigel, Alexander, Magaliesburg, KwaThema,
Rotunda and Carletonville. We have identified these areas precisely because
we are targeting the areas which we feel are problematic in Gauteng. In
order to make sure that women and children have access to appropriate
services, capacity building and advocacy work will be conducted for police
members and the community in areas such as Ivory Park, Orange Farm,
Mamelodi, due to serious problems identified in those areas.

Since the province discovered that the youth is highly affected by crime,
it has set aside R1,9 million to implement youth crime prevention
initiatives. Our focus in Gauteng will be in schools. We will also target
the youths who are out of school. This will be done through the
implementation of Adopt-a-Cop and Tiisa Thuto projects in identified areas
within the province. Efforts to improve police relations will be done
through strengthening and capacitating community police forums and also
through recruitment of professionals who will volunteer their services in
order to help the police with necessary expertise. The pilot of
establishing community safety forums in areas such as Tshwane and the Vaal-
Rand will continue. Various social crime prevention initiatives that are
based on local priorities, which have been identified, will be implemented.

Hon Ministers, this is a mammoth task that is faced by our province and our
country. You might have heard, hon Minister of Safety and Security, that as
we are dealing with prevention of crime the gangsters are also doing the
same. They are organising themselves to ensure that they counter what the
Government is trying to address. In the past two weeks, you will have
heard, hon Minister, that in Tladi and Moletsane in Soweto, three members
of a patrol in the community were killed by criminals. One of those members
will be buried on Thursday. One wants to recommend that the hon Minister of
Safety and Security should pay attention to one of the satellite police
stations in Soweto: Naledi. Officers deployed in there need to be looked
into as they have become something that we would not even want to mention.

Co-ordination, monitoring and evaluation of the criminal justice system
will continue with more focus on ensuring that there is an improvement in
the management of dockets and cases related to, particularly, women and
children abuse. The focus will also be on monitoring the level of
implementing plea-bargaining policy and diversion programmes. For these
programmes, an amount of R885 000 has been allocated. An amount of R1,8
million has been set aside to raise awareness on key issues such as attack
on police officers, discouraging people from buying stolen goods and
community participation in policing.

If we cannot address these problems, we surely are to increase numbers in
our prisons. The Ministers of Safety and Security and Correctional Services
have to look into that. When we arrest, keep and suspend in courts,
Correctional Services bear the brunt.

With all those words - hon Chairperson, I can see that you are threatening
me but - I want to say that the establishment of three municipal service
police stations in Gauteng has resulted in a significant increase of police
visibility in the province.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPESON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms J L KGOALI: We support the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T RALANE: Hon Deputy Chair of Committees, hon Ministers, Deputy
Minister, MECs and members, after having inspected the quarterly reports
issued by the National Treasury, the Joint Budget Committee discovered that
the national Department of Safety and Security and, of course, Parliament
are the only structures that had spent 100% of their voted amount by the
end of March 2003. As elected public representatives, it is our duty to
determine the tangible benefits derived from this spending in relation to
safety and security.

Personally, it pleases me to be able to say that it is, in my view, not
hugely difficult to determine the effects of this spending. In my
constituency, Thabong, there is ample and visible evidence, and tangible
results of the appropriations by the Department of Safety and Security. In
Thabong, Welkom, a dramatic decrease in crime has been observed and
recognised. There is good co-operation between the local police service and
the community police forum. In addition, the local CPF is equipped with
twelve vehicles in order for it to undertake the task to which it has
committed itself. Moreover, we have an extension of CPFs in every ward in
Thabong. Every step is taken to ensure that the CPF programmes reach the
full range of members of my constituency.

Particular attention has been given to schools and churches in Thabong. The
promotion of safety and security is done with the full co-operation of
police officials. The CPF structures have formed effective partnerships
with communities. This outcome, which we hope continues into the future, is
consistent with the pledge given to the citizens of Thabong by our
President, Mr Mbeki, in his state of the nation address on 14 February
2003. He said, amongst other things, that our security agencies would work
very hard at implementing the National Crime Combating Strategy which
targets and prioritises crime and police areas with the highest incidence
of serious crimes.

It is also noteworthy that the Department of Safety and Security continues
to improve the capacity of the Police Service in order to enable it to
discharge its crime prevention and crime combating responsibilities in
areas most adversely affected by crime. The residents of Thabong can, with
absolute certainty, say that the Freedom Charter is a living document which
says that all families shall enjoy security and comfort. It is appropriate
to make that statement, because on Thursday 26 June we will be celebrating
the 48th anniversary of the Freedom Charter.

I cannot avoid commenting on the eyesore DA posters which suggest that we
should put 150 000 police officials on the streets. If we were to interpret
this, literally, it could mean that the DA is suggesting that we make 150
000 police officials unemployed and redundant by putting them on the
streets. This critical misinterpretation by the DA, a group which professes
mastering the English language, is a serious indictment on their policy and
values. Moreover, the Department of Safety and Security is committed to
specialised visible policing which comprises the services of radio control,
equestrian units, dog units and diving units.

Regarding the increase of expenditure on crime prevention by the Department
of Safety and Security over the MTEF period, provision is made for the
recruitment of additional personnel and employment of entry level
constables over three years. The point is that the request by the DA to
increase policing is not their claim alone. Such a requirement has already
been budgeted for over the MTEF period. The DA, once again, tries to steal
the show even though they are not anywhere near the centre of the action.

The acceleration in the growth of this Budget Vote No 25 - Safety and
Security - reflects Government's continued commitment to ensuring, above
all else, the safety and security of all South Africans, and it ensures the
employment of additional police officers.

We of the ANC support the Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, my
colleagues, Ministers and MECs who are here, firstly, let me say to Kgoshi
Mokoena that I don't think I'll give you the answers today on your concerns
about escapes, overcrowding and the cost of APOPS. I want to make that the
subject of a briefing to the select committee so that we can, I think,
satisfy the concerns raised.

Our transition to a constitutional democracy, which signalled the break
with the arduous years of oppression, violation of basic rights of
citizens, policies of racial discrimination and general misrule directed at
black people, demanded that we engage in a radical reform of our prison
system. This penal reform process saw the promulgation of the Correctional
Services Act 111 of 1998. Efforts were made to ensure that the correctional
system operates in the spirit of our Constitution, as well as of
international conventions and treaties.

In consolidating our strategic direction, our vision remains to be among
the best in the world in delivering correctional services with integrity,
excellence and commitment. This vision will be attained through a new range
of services, namely: corrections, development, care, security, facilities
and aftercare which will be provided to offenders in carrying out our
mandate. These services will form the basis of our budget as soon as
National Treasury approval has been obtained to recognise them as
programmes. However, the strategic plan tabled in Parliament already
provides for these programmes.

This we shall attain, I believe, by placing rehabilitation at the centre of
our activities in a safe and secure environment, and strengthening our
partnerships with the people of South Africa and our global partners,
particularly the people of our continent, Africa, in the true spirit of
African Renaissance under the programme of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, Nepad. I am sure people are saying: Nepad and prisons, is he
crazy? [Laughter.]

To this effect, Cabinet has approved the first meeting of Ministers
responsible for prisons and corrections in the SADC region. The meeting
will take place in Gauteng next week on 2 and 3 July 2003. This meeting
will serve as a springboard to further talks that would involve the rest of
the African Continent on corrections. Discussions in these meetings would
set the agenda for the implementation of the African Union resolutions, and
address the peculiar circumstances of the African people in the
implementation of international conventions and treaties.

As South Africans, we believe that correction, both as self-correction and
correction of others, is inherent in good citizenship. All citizens should
contribute to maintaining and protecting a just, peaceful and safe society
in our country by upholding law and justice, promoting the social
responsibility and human development of all citizens.

Correction is therefore, as one of our members stated, not the sole
responsibility of the Department of Correctional Services, but a shared
responsibility of all individuals and social institutions such as the
family; and educational, religious, sporting and cultural institutions, as
well as other governmental entities. Of particular importance here would be
the role of provincial governments and administrations responsible for
education and social welfare. I wish to express my appreciation for the
support that the Department has received from members of the executive
council in the various provinces, in particular the MECs for safety and
liaison. I see hon member Magadzi here, and hon member Ramatlakane, and I
miss others. [Laughter.] We are appealing for more support and involvement
from the provincial legislatures and executive councils.

The Department recently took the initiative to mobilise the Social Cluster
to action regarding the transfer of children out of prisons. I appeal to
the MECs of social welfare to take this as a personal responsibility, and
to monitor the presence of children in prisons on an ongoing basis in order
to address the blockages that lead to this unacceptable situation. This is
an issue that we must all ensure remains constantly on our priority list.
We welcome the partnership forged by the KwaZulu-Natal legislature and
Ukhozi FM in assisting us with projects in that province. The work of the
Social Cluster of Government in strengthening social cohesion and promoting
social justice will make a major contribution to the Department's
rehabilitation and correction efforts, both through providing guiding
ethical values to those already convicted, and ensuring the revival of the
South African ethos and ethic of ubuntu/botho in our communities.

In cases where social institutions and society have failed, the criminal
justice system and the Department of Correctional Services take up their
responsibilities. At this level of correction, rehabilitation and the
prevention of recidivism are best achieved through a person correcting
their offending behaviour and developing themselves.

We are also deeply disturbed by the high influx of young people into our
correctional or prison system. Statistics indicate that we have
approximately 26 000 young people between the ages of fourteen and twenty-
one years in our system, and about 49 000 who are between the ages of
twenty-one and twenty-five years. The patterns in the nature of serious
offences committed or allegedly committed by about 4 500 children under the
age of eighteen years, who are awaiting trial or sentenced, are alarming.
There are about 2 000 economic related offenders under the age of eighteen
years, 1 800 aggressive crime offenders, 500 sexually-related offenders
under the age of eighteen years, and 200 offenders for drug-related and
other types of offences.

In addition to the numbers that I have already mentioned, we have 208
innocent children under the age of five who live with their mothers in
prison. Faced with these trends, and in the context of dysfunctional
families combined with the disjuncture between our constitutional values
and the society that we have inherited, the community and social
institutions must take on a more significant role in the development of a
correcting and caring environment for children and youth. We need to pool
our resources together in order to give particular and special attention to
the youth of our country.

In a special Youth Day event for young offenders which was held in KwaZulu-
Natal on 17 June 2003, that is last Tuesday, His Majesty, King Goodwill
Zwelithini kaBhekuzulu, led the way in guiding the youth of today when he
said the following - that is, when he visited the prison with us. He was
the keynote speaker in prison when he spoke to the young people in that
province who came from all prisons in KwaZulu-Natal. This is what he said:


  Criminal activities such as car hijacking, armed robberies, rape,
  housebreaking and laziness all underlie the extent to which this
  beautiful and powerful nation has lost its respected cultural and
  traditional values from which real socioeconomic development should take
  place. A return to social and traditional values of mutual respect,
  respect for human rights and dignity, in my opinion, is quite possible.


  Young people in particular are the ones who should take a bold and
  courageous step, and say never in their lives will this day be
  commemorated without them defining and giving the direction with regard
  to how the nation should rid itself of the problems that hinder
  socioeconomic development and threaten lives of citizens.


  As we commemorate this Youth Day, we should also appeal to each citizen
  of our province to remain an agent of peace, harmony and stability. We
  expect young people to be in the forefront in this crusade. Whilst you
  apply for jobs, try to do something for a living. If you do not do this,
  the temptation would be great for you to turn to crime that currently
  remains one of the most worrying problems in this country.


  The Government is doing its best but unless citizens also do something on
  their own, the Government would certainly find it impossible to provide
  every citizen with a job.

The King ended by saying that:


  Young people would need to declare an all-out war on social evils such as
  HIV/Aids, crime, bribery, corruption and other forms of criminal
  activity.

I have quoted this at length as an inspiration, and I appeal to other
traditional leaders in our beloved country to join hands with the
Government in the campaign for social crime prevention, moral regeneration
and rehabilitation.

On average, the budget for rehabilitation increases by 8,3% per annum, that
is from R264,8 million in 1999-2000 to R427,5 million in 2005-06. It must,
however, be stated that with the focus and emphasis on rehabilitation, this
budget would not be adequate. I think that hon Kondlo made this very clear
to us.

As part of our rehabilitation initiatives in 2002, a total of about 22 360
offenders were trained in a variety of skills. Further establishment of
training centres in the various provinces is aimed at equipping offenders
with basic technical skills in a variety of fields such as brick making,
bricklaying, woodwork, welding, garment making, etc. We also provide
training in business skills in order to equip individuals to operate their
own small businesses upon release, that is if you allow them out there. I
would like to thank the Department of Labour for their assistance and
financial support in this regard.

We also plan to enhance the utilisation of prisoner labour for self-
sufficiency of the prison system, especially in food production, and to the
generation of some income for the state. The Department estimates that it
will generate approximately R80,2 million revenue during this financial
year, and that this revenue will grow at a rate of about 4,5% per annum.
All income generated is deposited into the National Revenue Fund. At this
point, I simply want to pause and say, maybe, hon members, you want to
debate in future that this kind of fund may assist in the education of the
children of victims, and even the children of prisoners themselves because
the children didn't ask them to go and offend.

In pushing back the frontiers of poverty, Correctional Services  engaged  in
a number of poverty alleviation projects to the value of approximately  R496
000 in the past financial year. However, the biggest value we  achieved  was
in engaging  offenders  in  projects  that  had  a  direct  benefit  to  the
community through agricultural and  building  projects.  We  wish  to  thank
community leaders, mayors,  makgosi/amakhosi/marena,  and  members  of  this
House who supported our efforts in the various communities. The  championing
of  the  need  for  rehabilitation,  social  crime  prevention   and   moral
regeneration that has been articulated by these leaders is a  reflection  of
the niche that the Department is beginning to establish on the  ground.  The
sustainability of such  projects  depends  on  the  continued  collaboration
among communities, community-based institutions and ourselves.

The Department also has a range  of  programmes  that  are  offered  through
partnerships with a range of  NGOs.  These  are  aimed  at  equipping  young
offenders with life skills in order to  make  a  difference  to  themselves,
their communities and their world. The Department has continued  to  develop
a better understanding of its role  in  the  implementation  of  restorative
justice, and participated in a  joint  conference  titled:  From  theory  to
implementation. That conference was led by the Department  of  Justice.  The
Department has also  benefited  from  various  activities,  including  joint
training sessions conducted by officials from Canada  who  are  regarded  as
leaders or experts in  the  implementation  of  this  approach  -  that  is,
restorative justice.

The Department of Correctional Services is also constitutionally obliged  to
provide for the health care and physical needs of  prisoners  in  compliance
with national and international norms and  standards  on  the  treatment  of
offenders.  Health  and  physical  care  expenditure  is  also  expected  to
increase due to an increased provision for  prisoners'  primary  health  and
related health care to counter the  spread  of  HIV/Aids  and  opportunistic
infections in prisons, such as tuberculosis.  As  a  part  of  our  HIV/Aids
strategy, we intend to conduct a prevalence and attitude survey  which  will
be completed  in  12  months  from  now  in  order  to  have  the  necessary
information  available   to   aid   decision-making   and   facilitate   the
implementation of our HIV/Aids strategy amongst personnel and offenders.

Prison medical and dental services have up to now been rendered at  no  cost
by  the  provincial  health   departments.   However,   due   to   financial
constraints, this is apparently no longer feasible for the provinces.  There
is therefore a need for the Department to employ either sessional  or  full-
time prison medical practitioners to render medical care to prisoners.  This
will have an impact on our budget, I believe.

The latest available figures indicate that our prison population  stands  at
about 190 000, whereas our capacity is about 110 000 to 111 000. This  means
that we are overpopulated by about 79 000 people, or 71% at  this  point  in
time.  It  is  public  knowledge  that  overpopulation  of  prisons  impacts
negatively on staff morale, on the health of offenders,  on  effective  safe
custody, and  on  the  ability  of  the  department  to  allocate  resources
effectively for the rehabilitation of  offenders.  Moreover,  it  results  -
that is overpopulation - in abnormally  high  maintenance  costs  of  prison
facilities,  and  therefore  a  JCPS  overcrowding   task   team,   led   by
Correctional Services, monitors the  performance  of  the  criminal  justice
system in order to identify blockages  that  result  in  increased  prisoner
numbers.

A key mechanism in addressing  the  optimal  utilisation  of  the  detention
facilities of  Government,  and  avoiding  overcrowding,  is  the  effective
functioning of  the  integrated  justice  system  at  provincial  and  local
levels. It is also expected that the projects for the construction  of  four
new facilities, which will have capacity of  about  3  000  prisoners  each,
will begin later this year. These facilities  will  be  built  in  Leeuwkop,
Nigel, Kimberley and Klerksdorp.

The repair, renovation and maintenance programme, which is called Ramp,  has
focused on 12 prisons in KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape,  and  North  West  and
resulted in the accommodation of about 863 more  offenders.  And,  contracts
have been awarded for 33 more prisons, of which 14 have been  completed  and
the remainder to be completed during the current financial year.  A  further
146 prisons have been identified for the awarding of contracts.  In  future,
it is our intention to involve prisoners in undertaking most of the  repairs
as part of their training programmes. I  hope  hon  members  could  help  in
these efforts.

If we have to be successful in dealing with renovations and repair  work  on
buildings, I believe that we need to move away from just being  bogged  down
by unnecessary red tape of the so-called Ramp.  The  effectiveness  of  this
programme would need to be evaluated to enable us to maintain  the  expected
standards in the humane detention of offenders. We  cannot  afford  to  wait
for a contractor from outside to fix a leaking tap,  or  water  pipe,  or  a
broken toilet when we have the requisite skills to do so.
I appreciate the fact that my colleagues in SAPS would  not  do  this.  They
would have to work through Ramp, and my colleagues in justice would have  to
work through Ramp. But, who are we fooling in Correctional  Services  if  we
say we are training offenders in skills such as  plumbing,  engineering  and
all those skills and then have to wait for months for somebody  to  come  in
and fix a toilet when these fellows can do it? This is why  I  am  saying  I
hope hon members would help in enforcing this. I don't want even to  mention
that we have problems with these Ramp programmes.

The promotion of community correctional supervision within the JCPS  Cluster
is a vital part of  our  strategy  against  overcrowding.  Success  in  this
entails the encouragement of communities to create an environment  in  which
community correction is a viable option for sentencing. The Department  aims
to ensure that there is an integrated support system, a system  of  referral
and networking that supports the offenders in their residential  areas,  and
facilitates their reintegration into the communities from  which  they  have
come. Hence the importance of  the  establishment  of  community  correction
forums, which are functioning only in Limpopo, at this stage. We  hope  that
this would spread and we do emphasise that they  should  be  established  in
all provinces.

The responsibility for debating the value of alternative sentencing lies
not only with the Department of Correctional Services, but also with us as
members of Parliament. The conditions for South Africa to lose our status
as the fourth most aggressive jailer in the world, after the United States,
Russia and Belarus, have still to be created.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: May I ask the Minister to wrap up,
please.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I am winding up, Sir. Through the
slogan, ``Every member is a rehabilitator'', the Department has asserted
that the manner in which each and every staff member performs his or her
task either contributes to creating an environment which promotes
rehabilitation, or it militates against rehabilitation and correction of
offenders. The ideal correctional official should find a high degree of
compatibility and synergy with the code of conduct and the core mandate of
the Department.

It is also appropriate for me, at this stage, to restate our commitment, as
a department, to good governance and ensuring compliance with Government
and departmental policies. The work of the Jali Commission, the
investigations of the Special Investigative Unit, the anti-corruption
campaign that I undertook, the work of the Inspecting Judge in the National
Council of Correctional Services and other organs of the State, are
beginning to bear fruit in the establishment of a clean and transparent
administration. NGOs, and even ordinary citizens, family and friends of
offenders share their concerns and perceptions with us, and enable the
Department's management to redress noncompliance with policy.

In conclusion, I must emphasise that while we have not been able to deliver
everything that we had hoped to achieve in the past financial year, there
have been successes achieved on our programmes. The updated strategic plan,
the new organisational structure, the White Paper process that is under
way, and the commitment of the dedicated personnel in the department bode
well for the development of a more effective and focused administration of
the department.

At this stage, I wish to thank our commissioner, Mr Linda Mti, management
and staff for the excellent work that they deliver with diligence and
commitment under strenuous conditions of our prison system. I also wish to
thank Kgoshi Mokoena, the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Security
and Constitutional Development, and his committee for their support in the
work that we do as a department. With these words, I want to say: God bless
this House, God bless Correctional Services, and God bless South Africa.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, Mr Minister, for blessing
our House.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Deputy Chairperson, hon MEC and hon Ministers, when we
boldly proclaimed in May 1992 that we were ready to govern, we were largely
informed by the extent of work covered since the then levelling of the
ground in the political landscape in the country. We were also mindful of
the clear declaration of the congress of the people that, and I quote,
``there shall be work and security.'' How I wish that this debate was held
two days later than today - for obvious reasons, of course.

We also upheld that stance in our Constitution. Community safety and
security is therefore a human right. We put in place various structures and
programmes in order to ensure that these commitments are realised and
maintained. Among others, these structures deal with the demilitarisation
of the Police Service; civilian oversight in policing matters; formation of
community partnerships; and the establishment of an independent body to
deal with possible abuse of human rights which manifests itself in the form
of injuries sustained or death which occurs in police custody.

These initiatives had to be executed by a transformed Police Service that
works coherently with role-players in the community. As drivers of the
programmes, the police had to reflect the requisite attitude for the
transformation process to move faster. Attitude here can be defined as
one's perception of a particular situation which influences one's conduct
to move in a certain direction, in a given situation. In oder for
transformation to yield the required result, it has to be driven by
optimistic management, willing foot soldiers and underpinned by a healthy
community partnership.

We are all aware of the inherent fear for change by mankind. Thus,
pessimists would always try to swim against the tide, while optimists ease
their progress by swimming in tandem with the tide. These are the officers
from whom we derive a deep sense of pride for they advance the people's
contract for development. These officers realise that change will not just
come on its own or by accident while they are just idling but they grab the
bull by the horns knowing full well that, at times, change comes with
turbulence, just as rain often comes with thunder.

The SA Police Service has covered a lot of ground in forging relationships
and trust with the broader community by way of community policing forums.
Indeed, fighting crime has become a joint effort by police as well as the
community. I am very sure that the decline in crime can be attributed to
this partnership. The overall activities and focus of the CPFs attest once
more to the fact that safety and security is not just the only structural
fortification of premises but the absence of fear and discomfort. Security
entails the assurance that one is provided for, now and in the future, in
all aspects of life.

A cause for concern though, hon Minister, is the assigning of CPF matters
to junior officials in the SAPS, or the assignment of those matters to
questionable characters in the service. In my area, I had a police officer
who was fresh from suspension - due to some atrocities - who, immediately
after the suspension was lifted, was made the contact officer for the CPF.
This tendency kills this partnership. This also confirms the existence of a
backward mentality and attitude that relegates CPF matters to mere
sidelines to be attended to at leisure.

Some service centres have been without a functional CPF for over a year in
my area. Of course, I am acutely aware of my role as a public
representative in this regard. The absence of a CPF creates a void in the
partnership of Government and community since community structures such as
school governing bodies, ward committees, local economic development
forums, etc also operate in some form of a cluster. When we declared that
we were ready to govern, we also observed that, and I quote:


  Developing the economy will in turn provide the basis for overcoming the
  divisions of the past without creating new ones.

Having progressed so well with regard to sectoral policing, one is, surely,
not clear why the neighbourhood watch is still relevant in this regard. Of
course, there are other parallel structures which are equally questionable.

In the latest report by the Independent Complaints Directorate, it is
indicated that deaths of suspects in police custody have declined by 12,3%.
Of course, we can do better than that. With the continued empowerment of
officers through briefing sessions, support visits and workshops, we will
surely arrive at a situation of overall ethical conduct and behaviour by
police officers, and thus enable this country to report in the next few
years a zero incidence of police killings and or suicide.

I appeal to you, hon members, to do the right thing by supporting this
Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE (Western Cape): Chairperson, Ministers in the criminal
justice cluster, colleagues and members, as I speak in this debate of the
criminal justice cluster, we are, indeed, in a position to report back that
progress is being made and that progress has been recorded in various
clusters regarding efforts to push back the waves of crime in various parts
of our country, particularly in the Western Cape.

The challenges that confront our society, after a decade of freedom,
continue to occupy a priority position within our Government's overall
mandate of creating a better life for all. The challenge of ensuring peace
and stability in our community, regarding the most vulnerable sector in our
society, will continue to occupy the centre stage of our deliberations and
actions as we conclude 10 years of democracy in April 2004.

In the Western Cape, over the past 18 months, we have made tremendous
effort in ensuring that the eradication of crime is not a sole
responsibility of those who occupy public office. If we were to allow that
situation to arise, that we as leaders become the sole custodians who
determine the correctness of our actions in relation to crime, our
victories would be short-lived. Therefore, it was with the concerted effort
and determination that we launched various projects to mobilise our
community to soldier on with the men and women in blue in order to bring
peace to our streets and our towns.

The partnership that we have identified requires communities and local
police to work in tandem to complement each other in bringing peace to the
locations, suburbs and towns. I can report to this House that our Bambanani
against crime campaign has been an overwhelming success. We have drawn in
communities from the isolated pockets of our province in the Cape Town
Metropole who have come out in their hundreds in support of this campaign.

This mobilisation drive by the Western Cape against crime does not only
seeks to expose the wrongs of the police, but it simultaneously seeks to
find a joint solution on which we can count. There is no denial that our
police stations face challenges both in terms of personnel as well as
operational capacity. This is the reality that many of our communities have
acknowledged as something that we, collectively, have to work on in order
to find a solution.

We will continue, in the coming month, to act in solidarity with our police
in bringing stability to our streets so that we can be proud of them. By
the same token, we acknowledge that unless we are prepared to put more
people on the streets, in terms of visible policing, our campaign might
well be in vain. To this end, with the support of the national Minister,
Charles Nqakula, and National Commissioner Selebe, we have been able to
deploy scores of police into the Cape Flats and our vulnerable areas in
order to root out elements that continue to plague our communities.

Operation Tswikila is part of the provincial government's overall strategy
which aims to deal with organised crime and gangs, in partnership with our
national counterparts, so that we can bring stability to our area. The
results of operation Tswikila, thus far, have been tremendous. To date, our
police have arrested over 2 000 suspects for various crimes. The majority
of those suspects have committed serious violent crimes. Many of us would
not be aware of the fact that whilst Operation Tswikila was under way, our
police were further supported by hundreds of local community policing
forums, neighbourhood watches and communities. This confirmed that crime
prevention initiatives which are supported materially, will go a long way
in cementing the work that is being done.

The strengthening of the secretariat's and CPFs' capacity is a very
critical task. Reservists also participated in this partnership and that
highlights the foundation that we have laid in the community. I want to
assure members of this House that we will continue to implement and work
together in Operation Tswikila in the province in order to ensure that we
take back the streets.

Regarding the third phase of our programme, which concerns ensuring
convictions and jail terms for the most notorious criminals, the success in
the Western Cape is also by and large attributed to the high level of
integration between our security agencies. In the past few months we have
witnessed a number of high-fliers being arrested, and some have been
sentenced to long prison terms. Work continues in order to make the life of
criminals unbearable in the Cape Flats and is supported by our national
Government.

These victories have not come about purely because of the good work of the
prosecutorial system, but through being part of the long chain of events
that involved all sectors of the criminal justice system working in tandem
with one another. It is this level of commitment to supporting and working
within the collective environment that we in the province are extremely
proud of. We will continue to ensure integration at the highest possible
level and, thus, afford all our communities unprecedented levels of
delivery across the board.

Ensuring delivery to all communities has been a further achievement in our
province, for example the establishment and opening of two courts which
will service the communities of Khayelitsha and Blue Downs areas, and
thereby bring justice to their doorsteps. We believe that the opening of
these courts will allow the communities greater access to justice. However,
more importantly, it will allow the communities to participate in the
process of ensuring that justice is being done.

While our courts have an independent role to play in dispensing justice, we
cannot ignore the reality that our community also have a role in supporting
the overarching functions of the criminal justice system, as contained in
our Constitution. The establishment of our courts in Hermanus will ensure
that those who commit crimes related to marine coastal life are prosecuted.
That, indeed, will allow the economy of this local community to be
restored. The proliferation of wild life in the area has been disturbed,
and all aspects of community life such as schooling, health, welfare and
economic growth have also been affected. We believe that the establishment
of these courts will begin to turn back the tide against criminals that
have preyed on these communities.

In conclusion, the challenge that confronts our province are the challenges
that, I believe, we will collectively succeed to overcome. The co-operation
that the provincial government has received from the national Minister and
National Commissioner, is one that will continue to afford us opportunities
to deliver better life for all, and service. It will also afford us an
opportunity to create more success stories in ensuring that peace and
stability reign for all the people of our province. We will continue to
work collectively as a criminal justice agency that serves one nation, and
serves one people.

We will ensure that the partnership that we have developed across all
communities continues to grow and bear the fruits of our struggle to live
in peace and harmony. As we will be celebrating the 48th anniversary of the
Freedom Charter in the coming days, we are reminded of the commitment that
we made to our people which continues to remain our objective: the total
liberation of our country; and to ensure security, peace and liberty for
all South Africans - both black and white. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chair, the overwhelming majority of all people, if not in
fact all people, are against crime. Even criminals themselves are against
crime if they are the victims. [Laughter.]

The fear of crime, especially violent crime, against oneself or one's loved
ones, is one of the most basic fears of everyone. To effectively prevent
and combat crime in our country remains a difficult and risky task with
many facets, including addressing the root causes of crime. This is in
spite of the many fully committed policemen and women and officials of the
other departments in this cluster.

Although substantial progress has been made in the fight against crime, the
levels of crime in our country, unfortunately, are still unacceptably high.
It is, however, encouraging to note the many positive developments in the
fight against crime. This observation is based on information gathered from
the briefings of the cluster departments. We really want to thank them for
that because all of them made exceptionally good briefings this year.
Of course, the DA did not even bother to attend two of those briefings,
namely the briefing by the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development - that was yesterday - and the SA Police Service's briefing on
9 June 2003. [Interjections.] They really do not like their propaganda
plans to be confused by the facts. I am also encouraged by the commitment
of the leaders and the vast majority of officials in these departments who
work tirelessly to constantly find new and better ways of fighting and
preventing crime. I wish to apologise to them that I cannot refer to all
these positive developments today. However, I am sure they will understand
that due to the negative speech by Mr Lever, I have to use some of my time
to react to him and his party. [Interjections.]

Whilst all the officials and NGO's such as Business Against Crime refer to
the Government, and members and political parties who want to build a
better future for all our people work very hard to create a safe
environment for all our people, what does the DA do? True to their
philosophy of ``what is bad for the country is good for the DA'', their
spin doctors put together a propaganda plan to hone in on this basic fear
of people for crime and exploit it for their own selfish political gain,
just like the old swart gevaar and fightback tactics. [Interjections.]

They came up with a petition in which, according to my information, they
asked people to sign, ``if you are against crime.'' Of course, they were
implying that they are the only ones who are against crime, and that the
other parties such as the ANC and the New NP are not against crime, knowing
full well that this is blatantly untrue. Knowing full well that they could
not put one policeman or policewoman on the street, they put up thousands
of posters that said: ``Put 150 000 cops on the street where you live.''

Whether that is what is required now or not, or whether it is in reality
the most important priority for all areas, does not concern them. As long
as it's catchy and it serves to mislead the voters into believing that if
they vote for them, the DA, they will put 150 000 cops on the streets
``where you live.'' [Interjections.] They, of course, do not tell the
people the truth, namely that only the ANC-led national Government can, in
fact, put more SAPS members on the streets or anywhere else. In the case of
municipal police, only the executive or mayoral committees, on which they
no longer serve, can do it.

However, they went further in a pamphlet and told  a  blatant  untruth  that
the only way to prevent crime is to put more cops on the  streets  where  we
live. On the outside of that pamphlet is a  photograph  which  depicts  Tony
Leon with two policemen in a way which looks as if he is on duty with  them.
[Laughter.] Inside the pamphlet he is shown in a photograph which was  taken
in a patrol car and has the caption: ``Tony Leon on patrol with the SAPS''.

They went on and told a further half-truth with  the  intention  to  mislead
voters. They said: ``Since 1994, there has been  an  increase  in  attempted
murder, rape, assault and robbery.'' However, they did not  say  that  there
has been a substantial decrease  in  murder  by  30%  -  as  stated  by  the
Minister today - and some other crimes such as rape over the past year,  and
certain robberies, as pointed out. [Interjections.] They  went  further  and
said  ``we''  -  but  who  is  ``we''?  They   can   beat   the   criminals.
[Interjections.]  I  wonder  whether  the  Minister  should  not  have  this
pamphlet investigated because, in my opinion, it clearly constitutes  fraud.
[Interjections.]

The fact of the matter is that the DA cannot do  anything  about  the  crime
situation in South Africa.  [Interjections.]  They  do  not  even  have  any
influence whatsoever on this Government. [Interjections.] At best, they  can
be ignored. This whole campaign by the DA must be the most  cynical  attempt
at politically defrauding the people of this country. Sadly, there are  some
people who are gullible and naive enough to  believe  them.  What  an  utter
disgrace. I hope and trust that the vast majority of South Africans will  be
able to see through this despicable and fraudulent plot and  reject  the  DA
with the contempt that it so richly deserves.
There is ample and sufficient reason, which clearly came  out  of  the  very
good briefings that we have had from the departments, for real hope that  we
will - as a country that is under the leadership of the ANC  Government  and
with the constructive co-operation of parties like the New NP -  succeed  in
our fight against crime; not because of, but in spite  of  all  the  efforts
aimed at the undermining  thereof  by  the  DA.  I  thank  you.  [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chair, as the chairperson of the backbenchers  association,
we demand more speaking time. Ten minutes is too little. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: You have a long speech!

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chair, I really don't know  what  is  it  that  Mr  Matthee
wants me to say after he has  spoken.  [Laughter.]  However,  let  me  speak
about this: the DA says that we should ensure  that  specialist  courts  and
prosecutors are in place for sexual offences. The impression that they  give
to everybody out there is that the Government, which is led by the  ANC,  is
not doing anything about this matter. In terms  of  the  briefing  from  the
department, the department made it clear  that  we  have  established  those
courts and that we have prosecutors who  are  being  trained  from  time  to
time. I don't know where the DA was.

However, on a consistent  basis,  I  have  said  to  Mr  Lever  that  it  is
necessary for him to read. After reading, it is necessary  for  him  to  ask
questions. And, when he is answered he must listen,  and  listen  carefully.
[Laughter.] So, I'm not sure why Mr Lever is not doing what I requested  him
to do. [Laughter.] You know, him and his party, on a consistent basis,  want
to lie to the general public. [Interjections.]

Mr  P  D  N  MALOYI:  The  hon  Rev  Moatshe  will   agree   with   us   ...
[Interjections.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary  to  use
the word ``lie''? [Interjections.]

The  CHAIRPERSON  OF  COMMITTEES:  Hon  member  Maloyi,   please   continue.
[Interjections.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: It's satanic to be very economic with the truth, Mr  Lever.
[Laughter.]

Mr Lever went on to say that the Department of  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development has taken too long to implement  the  Maintenance  Act.  I  have
told him, on a consistent basis again, that we are not  running  a  shebeen.
We are running a country.  You  don't  just  wake  up  in  the  morning  and
implement. It means you need to plan and ensure that whatever you  implement
is sustainable. This is exactly what  we  are  doing.  However,  because  Mr
Lever doesn't listen, he doesn't even know what the department is  doing  in
order to address this particular problem. He is not  even  willing  to  tell
the general public about the good which this Government is  doing.  However,
this is the DA of today and there is nothing we can do about it.

In our last encounter with them, I said that we are from the  same  province
with Mr Lever and that we are friends because we are of the same age  group.
[Laughter.] When I speak to Mr Lever, he is so  positive.  When  he  attends
meetings of the department he is always progressive. However, when  he  sees
his leaders, he talks something else. I don't know whether this  is  because
of his inconsistency, but I don't think so. I think  what  he  is  doing  is
very near to political prostitution. [Laughter.]

As the ANC, we have said that the Department of Justice  and  Constitutional
Development should transform  the  judiciary  in  order  to  create  a  more
representative, competent, sensitive, humane  and  responsible  institution.
From the discussions that we had  with  the  department  and  its  competent
officials, we can confirm here, today, that we are on  course  and  that  we
have done a lot for this country. We can also  confirm,  today,  that  there
are other things that still need to be addressed and that we  are  going  to
address them. We know where we are going, and we are sure  that  our  future
is bright. Unlike the DA, we know that we are very proud of our  past.  They
can't say the same.
The other important thing that we have been  speaking  about  is  the  court
services. We have agreed as a committee and as an  organisation  called  the
ANC - the gigantic one - that it will be necessary for us to agree with  the
department that splitting  up  administrative,  judicial  and  prosecutorial
processes will assist a great deal in  ensuring  that,  amongst  others,  we
increase the time of the magistrates on the Bench from four  to  five  hours
or so. We think that this is a step in the right direction. We  support  the
Minister for that because we wouldn't like a situation  where  our  judicial
officers concentrate on administrative work.

I  raised  three  questions  to  the  Minister  before  I  went  to  London.
[Laughter.] That was about the implementation of  the  Equality  Act.  I  am
happy to say that  I  think  the  department  is  also  on  track  with  the
implementation of  that  particular  Act.  The  department  did  assure  our
committee that most of the sections of that particular Act would  have  been
implemented by the end of this year. This  is  very  good  and  it  is  very
great.
Secondly, Mr Ralane who participated in the debate  earlier  today,  is  the
chairperson of the budget committee. Mrs Mahlangu is  also  the  chairperson
of the finance committee. I'm starting the process of lobbying  now.  It  is
also  necessary  to  ensure  that  this  department  gets  enough  financial
resources in order for it to fulfil its mandate because you can't just  have
a lot of functions without financial resources for those functions.  Do  you
get what I mean? Lovely! [Laughter.]

The other matter is that of child maintenance. I'm not sure as  to  why  our
people, particularly the menfolk, make kids  when  they  don't  want  to  be
fathers. Regarding the womenfolk: why do they  make  kids  when  they  don't
want to be mothers? However, because this thing is happening already. It  is
therefore incumbent upon this ANC-led Government to  ensure  that  when  you
bring kids onto this earth, those kids must survive.  Those  kids  must  eat
and there must be food on their table. If you are not  willing  to  do  that
voluntarily, we will help you to  do  it.  That's  the  importance  of  this
particular Act.
We have visited the North West and  the  Eastern  Cape,  particularly  those
offices which have a number of problems. I  think  that  the  visit  to  the
North West must have  been  from  2  to  3  April.  Minister,  because  your
department is competent, it has addressed some of those problems, and it  is
still addressing others. It therefore goes without saying that it  would  be
naive and too  stupid  not  to  support  this  Budget  Vote.  I  thank  you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:  Chairperson,  next
year we shall have the third general election,  and  I  know  that  when  an
election is approaching you begin to see some of the worst tendencies  which
are exhibited by some of us in the vain hope that we will capture the  votes
of the petrified, the undecided and the doubting Thomases. So,  we  will  be
inclined to see and do all sorts of funny things.

We will even, by the way, be  inclined  to  tell  absolute  lies,  and  tell
people that there is no  delivery  of  clean  potable  water  in  Bryanston,
Northcliff, Lower Houghton etc. Some of us will say, by the way, that  those
who live there - the Mrs Suzmans etc - have never had this sort of  problem.
So, there will be no need for delivery there. They have  always  taken  this
for granted: for instance, where Tony Leon grew up in a judge's  house  when
my father was a garden boy in Johannesburg.

Most probably they had flushing toilets  in  the  houses  while  the  Bantus
``moes nog buitekant gaan kak'' in the townships. [Interjections.] They  had
a number of bathrooms and toilets in their houses. Mom and daddy  had  their
own. There was a guest toilet. There was everything  and  all  of  them  had
cold and hot water, which was completely inaccessible  to  the  Bantus.  So,
indeed, when you tell people who live  there  that  there  is  no  delivery,
honest and intelligent ones among them will tell you that there is  no  need
for that. Resources ought to move to where they  are  solely  needed,  where
they don't exist because of the past policies.

When you then go to people who were victims  of  the  erstwhile  system  and
tell them that there is no delivery, the honest and intelligent  ones  among
them will tell you that  the  ANC  has  built  schools  where  none  existed
before; that the ANC has built clinics where none existed before;  that  the
ANC has built roads where none  existed  before;  that  the  ANC  has  built
courts where none  existed  before;  and  that  people  now  travel  shorter
distances, at less cost, to  access  justice  because  the  ANC  took  power
through the vote in 1994. They will tell you that in 1994 the  ANC  found  a
situation where  electricity  was  only  accessible  to  31%  of  the  total
population, and may I say,  I  knew  of  no  white  person  who  never  took
electricity for granted. I never knew of one. However, I can tell  you  that
today over 72,5% of our people have access to electricity.

People will also  tell  you  that  a  waterborne  disease  such  as  cholera
afflicts blacks primarily, if not absolutely, in areas which have yet to  be
reached by way of providing them  with  clean  potable  water  and  sanitary
conditions. Those are areas which were  ignored  by  the  powers  that  once
were. It's not because this disease is so endowed with intelligence that  it
can discriminate on the basis of race. No! It afflicts blacks  because  they
live in those conditions.

It will never hit you in Tony Leon's Lower Houghton - never! It  will  never
hit me in Bryanston, because I am one  of  the  most  fortunate  people  who
should be very grateful for the  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  this
country. [Interjections.] It will never afflict me.  I  take  clean  potable
water for granted. I don't even have to think twice about it. However,  this
was a preserve of the lily-white people not so long  ago.  We  are  changing
these conditions.

I will give you a very simple Zulu Nguni saying  which  goes  thus:  Ukwanda
kwaliwa ngumthakathi. [Interjections.] Loosely  translated,  it  means  that
progress is actually hated by the most evil people. You know, when  you  say
that you will not support a Budget  Vote,  some  of  us  say  we  are  lucky
because we don't need your  support.  [Interjections.]  We  have  the  right
numbers behind us. If we did not have the numbers  then,  indeed,  we  would
create a situation where there would be no money to do these  very  selfsame
things that you say are not being done while we say they are done.

In other words, you take this stance deliberately to make  sure  that  there
is no money to do those tasks  because  we  can't  spend  Government  money,
state money, without approval by this  institution,  Parliament.  We  can't.
All expenditure beyond that point would be  irregular.  That's  it.  So  you
have these ill intentions which you hide behind  the  so-called  nondelivery
and we need to  address  that.  We  work  with  some  of  the  finest  South
Africans.

I now want to start with corrections. There is not a single  person  who  is
in jail today who is an angel. All of them  have  committed  some  crime  or
other; young and old, black and white, and male and female. They  are  there
and none of them is there because they have not, at one  point  or  another,
had to be investigated and were found guilty. None of them would wake up  in
the morning say, ``I just want  to  go  to  jail.  I'll  bypass  the  police
stations, the Scorpions, prosecutors, and the  courts.  I'm  just  going  to
knock hard on Minister Skosana's and Linda Mti's doors and tell them that  I
now have a change of  heart.  I  have  committed  a  crime''.  Bayaxhathisa,
mfondini. [They resist.] They resist in the courts because they  don't  want
to go there. They go there because hard work preceded their convictions.

Those are not some of the finest people you  would  comfortably  live  with.
Some of them are there because they have cut  off  people's  throats,  raped
children, and have done all sorts of things. They are  not  saints.  So,  we
have had to work very hard and we are  working  very  hard  to  rehabilitate
them so that in the fullness of time, when  they  are  released,  hopefully,
they will go back to communities and play a much  more  useful  role  there.
This is what is being done.

Let me come back to the police. These are the selfsame people, sir, who  are
being killed by these thugs. The Minister and I were taken by the police  to
the seaside where they showed us videos, Minister,  of  police  officers  at
war with organised crime. They were fighting over our marine  resources,  to
which a speaker before me alluded. There is war  over  these  resources.  If
these people did not do the bit that the Minister and  I  were  allowed  and
privileged to see them do, I shudder to think what would be  happening  now.
Those elements would have long taken over. So,  I  would  never  agree  with
anyone that the system is dysfunctional.

Yes, we do not deny or dispute the fact that the system  has  problems,  but
show me, in this world that is occupied by men and women,  a  country  which
has a perfect criminal justice system. It does not exist. The  best  one  on
earth with the powers of the FBI, the CIA and a  whole  lot  of  things  was
defeated by people who allegedly crawled out of the  caves  of  Afghanistan.
[Interjections.] That's it.

I can tell you that here, in case you have forgotten, bombs exploded not  so
long ago. We put out the selfsame men and women of Intelligence, Safety  and
Security, the Scorpions, and they rounded them all up  and  were  prosecuted
by  these  very  selfsame  failing   prosecutors.   Now,   they   are   all,
uncomfortably so, guests of this  Minister.  All  of  them  are  doing  long
sentences and up to life sentences and yet, indeed, in the  small  minds  of
some people the system is dysfunctional.

There were bombs that exploded only last year in September, in Gauteng.  I'm
proud to say that there is now a Boeremag case before court, again,  because
Intelligence, which according to  some  people  is  dysfunctional,  did  its
work; because the SAPS did their work; and, again, because  the  prosecutors
are doing their work. I am personally proud to  have  been  associated  with
these people who work, may I say, for a pittance. What you and  I  get  from
Parliament here, they don't get there. Yet,  these  men  and  women  of  the
Republic of South Africa wake up in the morning and face these elements  who
have resources that are actually bigger  than  theirs.  [Applause.]  We  who
operate in this institution, should be the last ones to say that they are  a
failure. The safety and security that we enjoy, the growing economy that  we
can brag about are, indeed, by and large, all ascribable to the  efforts  of
these people because they do their best.
This country is not the crime capital of the world.  It  has  all  sorts  of
problems. It has, as has been said, a high crime  rate,  but  it's  not  the
leader. If you look at the figures put out  by  the  UN,  by  Interpol  etc,
South Africa would turn out to be the least of their worries. I  will  tell,
as I'm about to conclude, the story  of  a  very  interesting  young  police
officer. The Minister has heard the story so many times  but,  Minister,  if
you don't want to hear it again, please block your ears.

The story goes thus: There is a big man whom we arrested and who  is  called
Papas. He brought a tonnage of drugs into this country that was  worth  over
R210 million. When that young police officer collided with him in a  room  -
and it was just the two of them - the man opened a briefcase which  had  all
sorts of exotic watches which the Ministers  and  I  saw:  Rolexes,  Omegas,
whatever, and he said, ``Take these  and  go''.  The  young  police  officer
said, ``I am also arresting you for attempting to bribe me''.  He  took  the
briefcase, closed it and it's going to be an exhibit  before  our  court  in
respect of a charge of bribery. [Applause.]
The story of that young man does not mean that there  is  no  corruption  in
the system. There is corruption, and whenever we find the  corrupt  elements
we deal with them. Indeed, unlike those who sit on the pavilion  and  scream
that the system is dysfunctional, we make sure that  the  good  elements  in
the system succeed. Thankfully, they are the  majority  in  the  system.  We
recognise and reward the efforts that they make and we shall always do so.

I am saying, in conclusion, that this country is very fortunate in  that  it
is led by the ANC majority, because if it was led by other people  we  would
not, indeed, be enjoying the bit that we have enjoyed in the past  nine  and
a half years.

Indeed, I am saying to the people of the  Republic  of  South  Africa:  Many
spirits will creep out or crawl out very soon. Put them to  this  one  test:
Ba be ba le kae? [Where were they?] Where were they in those  days  when  it
was tough in this country; when, indeed, to serve in the  struggle  for  the
emancipation  of  our  people  from  the  ravages  of  apartheid   was   not
fashionable? Where were they? Can they be trusted now, post  the  demise  of
apartheid, when they not only  worshipped  or  glorified  it,  but  actually
benefited from it, and some of them are still  clinging  to  the  privileges
thereof? They will tell  you  all  sorts  of  things  that  are  wrong  with
affirmative action and transformation, because transformation  is  producing
the sort of society that they never wanted to see.

They will scream their lungs dry very soon and say ``fight back''  in  order
to reverse even the bit that is happening.  Those  who  have  now  seen  the
restitution of their land without any unnecessary  socioeconomic  disruption
are grateful to us, because there was no restitution programme prior to  our
coming into office. They will never agree with you when you say there is  no
delivery because, as we deliver to those, we begin to rekindle the hopes  of
those who are still waiting in the long queue to  see  delivery.  They  say:
``Iyeza nakum le mini  yokusondezwa  kweenkonzo.  Le  nqwela  iyakude  ifike
nakwesam isitrato''. Ndiyabulela. [The day of delivery will come to me  too.
This wagon will eventually come to my street. Thank you.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, hon Matthee, I  come  from
a tradition and experience that is shared  by  the  great  majority  of  the
members of this  house.  We  understand  the  difficulty  of  making  people
understand concepts that were very very  foreign  to  them.  They  were  not
eager to help us establish democracy in this country. However, we had to  do
something extraordinary and we  had  to  bring  them  along  through  proper
teachings and logical arguments.

The consequence is that what we had already made preparations  for  in  1955
only became reality in 1994 because there were so many people  that  we  had
to bring along, as I say, through argument  -  logical  argument.  We  have,
once again, agreed among ourselves  that  we  should  continue  to  persuade
people, particularly during this time, in order for them to  understand  the
concept of democracy.

In that spirit we are quite willing to assist people like the hon Lever  and
I am going to assist him. [Laughter.] He has come  to  this  House  and  has
told us that the hon Douglas  Gibson  raised  a  question  in  the  National
Assembly. I am not going to quibble with him about the  fact  that  the  hon
Gibson ought to have indicated to him that there was a response to  what  he
raised. I want to help him understand, in his  own  right,  so  that  nobody
will then tell him an untruth.

He has quoted here figures that he  says  come  from  the  Medical  Research
Council. Indeed, this is  their  third  annual  report  which  is  called  a
Profile of Fatal Injuries in South Africa. Regarding  this  report,  if  the
hon member had read and internalised its contents, he would have  understood
the difference between the figures that are provided in this report and  the
figures that the police provide. In this report, the first  thing  that  the
researcher did was, in the  first  instance,  to  take  an  unrepresentative
sample of  mortuaries,  randomly,  and  then  made  estimates  of  unnatural
deaths; not only murder, but unnatural deaths.
Hon member, let us say you go to a mortuary and see three  people  who  have
died from gun wounds. Because those people died  from  gunshot  wounds,  you
can't say that they were murdered because one person could easily have  died
while cleaning their weapon and accidentally a shot went off and they  died;
or they could have committed suicide. Thirdly, they may  have  been  killed.
However, when you see those corpses in the  mortuary  that  story  is  never
told. You cannot rely on surveys like  that  above  real  figures  that  the
police provide, because those real figures relate  to  real  incidents.  The
police deal with incidents and they go on record  those  incidents.  So,  in
the end, the real results will be those that relate to the police.  However,
if you read this report properly, you would have come across  the  following
sentence:


  Because the registered cases were not adequately representative of  rural
  areas, the data were not used to calculate national rates.

What we talk about is a national figure and  these  people  could  not  have
arrived at national figures because their  own  survey  has  weaknesses,  as
they themselves say. If you have an understanding of  these  things,  please
read properly and then come to the House and place true facts and figures.

They talk all the time about statistics. Hon  Lever,  unfortunately,  I  did
not anticipate that there are still  people  who  pose  this  as  a  serious
question. If I had anticipated this, I would have brought the annual  report
that we put out last year that talks to these various statistics  that  they
say they want.

Another one is coming out in August. They say  that  they  don't  want  that
one. I ask them the question: ``What do you want?'' To date, they  have  not
told me what they want. I don't know to what extent we  can  help  them,  at
least, understand propaganda. The same thing that they talk about when  they
say, ``Put 150 000 police on the streets'' is the same thing  that  my  son,
who is seven years old, can say. It's unscientific.  He  can  say  the  same
thing, ``Put  150  000  police  on  the  streets.''  However,  we,  who  are
scientific, are going to ask you questions. When we adjourn here, please  go
to whomever is a member of the DA and ask them  separately  what  they  mean
when they say, ``Put 150 000 police  on  the  streets.''  They  won't  know,
because this is unscientific and nobody has talked to it.

However, let us just assume what they  possibly  mean.  They  possibly  mean
that we must add 150 000 police officials to  what  we  already  have.  They
are, possibly, saying that. Or they are saying, let us take  more  than  150
000 police officials that we will have and let them do  nothing  else:  they
must be on the streets. Maybe they are saying that. We don't know what  they
are saying. Or they are doing what my son can easily do.  A  seven-year  old
can stand there and say: ``Put 150 000 police officials on the street.''

Hon Matthee, you have spoken about the  possibility  of  preferring  charges
against them for fraud. There are many charges we can prefer  against  them.
I said in the National Assembly that they have  made  themselves  guilty  of
plagiarism because  they  have  produced  something  that  they  say  is  an
alternative to our policing strategy,  meanwhile  it  is  our  strategy.  We
could easily do that.

Secondly, there is a law that says - and here is my  lawyer  and  there  are
other lawyers over there - that outside of election  campaigns,  you  cannot
put the kinds of posters that they have in the streets, as we  speak.  There
is a law like that. We could charge them with that as well.  Of  course,  we
won't charge them. We want to help them understand what democracy is  about.
We want to ensure that we bring them up to, at least,  a  respectable  level
of political understanding. [Interjections.]

Let me just refer to this and I want him to go  and  read  it.  This  is  an
article which appeared in the Business Day yesterday.  When  you  read  this
report you will learn what a person  who  is  a  former  journalist  of  The
Guardian in Britain says about these things that they  talk  about.  In  the
end the person says:


  On a broader level, this country is stable, if anything too  stable.  The
  African  National  Congress  set  out  its  table  in  the  form  of  the
  Constitution and there is no danger of  either  it  or  the  Constitution
  being overturned in the foreseeable future. The rule of law is impeccably
  observed.

This is a long article that he must  go  and  read  in  order  that  he  may
understand what is happening here. Thank you. [Applause.]

IPHINI   LIKANGQONGQOSHE   WEZOKUVIKELA:   Sihlalo,   kuqediwe.    Mhlawumbe
engingakusho nje ukuthi i-DA ikhethe ukuthi  kule  nkulumo-mpikiswano,  kule
Ndlu,   ingakhulumi   ngezokuVikela   ngoba    bayazi    ukuthi    bakhuluma
emaphephandabeni.

Bayasigxeka emaphephandabeni. Abafuni  ukuthi  umNyango  wezokuVikela  wenze
umsebenzi  wawo  wokuletha  ukuthula  e-Afrika.  (Translation   of   isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chair, it's done. Perhaps  what
I can say is that the DA chose not to talk about security  in  this  debate,
in this House, because they know that they talk to newspapers.

They are criticizing us in newspapers. They don't  want  the  Department  of
Safety and Security to do its job, that of bringing peace in Africa.]

They know that they oppose us through the media and that  they  will  oppose
us in the National Assembly. However, as Ministers Nqakula and  Maduna  have
said, it doesn't really bother us because the people of  this  country  have
very good memory. They know that the founding fathers and mothers of the  DA
said that the former SA Defence Force was right for going into  Botswana  to
kill our people, and I can name them.

Today they want to be known as people who fought for  our  freedom,  but  we
were here in this country when they condoned the raid  on  innocent  people:
the Batswana and Basotho that were killed. Those are  the  founding  fathers
and mothers of the DA. We said that  the  history  is  always  present.  The
founding fathers and mothers of the DA supported a  qualified  franchise  in
our own country. They said that it was all right that rich blacks  could  be
allowed to vote - a  qualified  franchise  -  while  the  majority  of  this
country were not allowed to vote. I think that they should be ashamed.

Okokugcina-ke, ngiyayibonga le Ndlu. ngibonga nale nkulumo-mpikiswano  esibe
nayo.  INkosi  uMokoena  uphakamise  umbuzo  ngamakhomando.  Siyazi   ukuthi
ngesinye isikhali leso asebefuna ukusisebenzisa  njengesikhali  sezepolitiki
ukuze  bathole  amavoti  abantu,  ikakhulukazi  labo   bantu   abangabalimi.
Siyabonga-ke uma, kule  Ndlu,  sibona  abamhlophe  abazimisele  ukuhambisana
nenqubekela-phambili. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Lastly, I thank this House. I also say thank you for this  debate  that  we
have just had. Kgoshi Mokoena raised the  question  of  commandos.  We  know
that that is another political weapon they want  to  use  to  gain  peoples'
votes, particularly those who are farmers. We are grateful, in  this  House,
if we see white people who are committed to progress.]

It's always encouraging to listen to the  debate  in  this  House,  such  as
manner in which the hon Mr  Matthee's  debated.  It  really  makes  us  very
confident to see that there are whites in this  country  who  want  to  move
forward and build a united, nonracial, democratic and nonsexist country.  We
really applaud them.

Akukaze  kube  nokudideka  kuHulumeni  mayelana  nokuthi   yini   esiyenzayo
ngamakhomando.  [There  has  never  been  confusion  on  the  part  of   the
Government as to what it is doing with commandos.]

In the state of the nation address, the President  informed  the  House  and
the country that the role of the commandos in policing is being  phased  out
over a period of five to six years. That is what we  are  doing,  and  we've
made it very clear that that is what we are doing. The  JCPS  cluster,  that
is led by Minister Nqakula, has had presentations from the department  where
they explained to us how this process is going to unfold.

Of course, the commandos, as you know,  belong  to  the  army  reserves.  It
doesn't mean that since we are pulling them out  of  policing  we  are  then
going to throw them into the streets. They belong to the army  reserves  and
will be used in a manner which will be determined by the chief of  the  army
and the Chief of the South African National Defence Force.

Therefore, it is propaganda to go to the  farming  community  and  say  that
this Government does not care about rural communities. When I  went  to  the
rural communities, the hon Prince Zulu said that ...

... ikakhulukazi  ezindaweni  zamakhosi,  sithola  lapho  ukuthi  amaphoyisa
awafinyeleli  ngokwanele.  Akuphi  amakhomando  lapho  ezindaweni  zamakhosi
ngoba amakhomando siwathola esebenza  ikakhulukazi  ezindaweni  zabamhlophe?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... particularly in traditional leaders'  areas,  we  understand  that  the
police do not access those areas as they should. Where are the commandos  in
the traditional leaders' areas,  because  we  find  them,  particularly,  in
white areas?]

Of course, what they have done more recently is  to  take  a  black  member,
give him a camouflage  uniform  and  say  that  they  are  transforming  the
commandos. When I visited Paulpietersburg, I stopped  one  of  such  members
who was in an SANDF uniform. I asked him questions which he couldn't  answer
regarding the leadership of this country. I asked myself, ``Where  did  they
pick this man from?''

Sengisho ukuthi-ke lokhu kudideka kuyinto engekho.  Kudalwa  yilabo  abafuna
ukusebenzisa  inqubo  kaHulumeni  ngokuyiphendulela,  baqambe  amanga  futhi
babeke kube  sengathi  thina  silwa  nabalimi.  Asilwi  nabalimi.  Ukuphepha
ezindaweni  zasemakhaya  kungumsebenzi  woMnyango  wezokuPhepha  nokuVikela.
Zikhona nezinhlelo zokwandisa izinhlelo  zokuphepha  ezindaweni  zasemakhaya
nasemapulazini. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[I'm saying that this confusion is unfounded. It  is  caused  by  those  who
want to distort the Government's policy and they lie, and also make it  look
like we are fighting against farmers. We are not fighting  against  farmers.
Safety  in  rural  areas  is  the  Department  of  Safety   and   Security's
responsibility. There are structures for  increasing  safety  programmes  in
rural areas and on farms.]

Those are the few words  that  I  wanted  to  say.  Finally,  regarding  the
question of the sexual offences courts, I am surprised.  In  fact,  the  hon
members have explained to us that the problem of the  hon  member  Lever  is
that he neither reads nor listens.  He  doesn't  even  watch  television.  I
don't know where he is  when  this  Minister  and  his  Deputy  open  sexual
offences courts, one after another. Why doesn't he watch  television?  Maybe
during that time he is in the bar, because a lot of their  members  spend  a
lot of time drinking and come to the House drunk, and make a lot  of  noise.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, briefly, in  defence  of
Mr Lever, I was informed that, because you leave this House  late  and  some
of you do not have anything in your own fridges  for  tonight,  our  fellows
have prepared  some  bites  for  you.  That  is  in  defence  of  Mr  Lever.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Apart from that, I simply want to thank all the hon members  who  took  part
in the debate and mentioned  all  these  aspects  of  the  criminal  justice
cluster. I've already made an agreement with Kgoshi  Mokoena  that  we  will
deal with the points that he raised in a briefing.  I  also  want  to  thank
Prince Zulu for some of the  points  that  he  mentioned  in  terms  of  how
overcrowding really occurs in prisons and how he wants  to  see  that  being
alleviated.

I want to thank the hon Kondlo for what  she  said,  explicitly,  about  the
need to raise budgets and have more resources for Correctional  Services  in
order to deal with those aspects, especially  rehabilitation,  the  training
of our own staff and pursuance of the ex-offenders in co-operation with  the
NGOs.

I know that the Budget Votes will be coming next year and, from now on,  you
are going to miss my two colleagues who are orators. You will see them  next
year. These are real orators and I can't keep up with them. Thank  you  very
much. [Applause.]

USIHLALO  WAMAKOMITI:  BoNgqongqoshe  abahlonophekile,  Baba  uMaduna,  Baba
uNqakula,   Mama   uRoutledge,   Baba    uSkhosana,    asinibonge    kakhulu
ngokusethulela inkulumo enisethulele yona namhlanje. Masibonge  ukuthi  izwe
lethu sifuna ukuthi liqhubekele phambili.  Noma  bayathanda  noma  abathandi
... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Ministers, hon Maduna, hon Nqakula,  hon
Routledge, hon Skhosana, thank you so much for the speeches  that  you  have
delivered for us today. We are grateful that  our  country  is  progressing.
Whether they like it or not ...

... we will go forward. Thank you very  much  for  your  commitment.  I  say
thank  you  to  the  hon  members.  As  you  have  heard,  the  Minister  of
Correctional Services wants to correct  our  stomachs.  Therefore,  you  are
then invited to have some bites  at  Marks  Building.  I  am  sure  that  Mr
Kolweni will arrange that members are taken  home  safely.  Thank  you  very
much for participating in the debate. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 18:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            TUESDAY, 17 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Referrals to committees of tabled papers:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to  the  Select  Committee  on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:
         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African  Human
              Rights Commission for 2001-2002, including the Report  of  the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002.


         (b)      Strategic  Plan  of  the  South   African   Human   Rights
              Commission for 2003-2006.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to  the  Select  Committee  on
         Education and Recreation:


         (a)     Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Foundation  for
              Education, Science and Technology, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for the  period  1
              April 2002 to 30 November 2002 [RP 38-2003].


         (b)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  South  African
              Geographical Names Council for 2001-2002.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to  the  Select  Committee  on
         Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


         (a)      Southern  African  Development   Community   Protocol   on
              Forestry,  tabled  in  terms  of   section   231(2)   of   the
              Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Southern African  Development
              Community Protocol on Forestry.

                           WEDNESDAY, 18 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills:


     (i)    Geoscience Amendment Bill [B 7 - 2003]  -  Act  No  11  of  2003
         (assented to and signed by President on 3 June 2003).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Insert doc "rep-bud" from disk

                           THURSDAY, 19 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills:


     (i)    Bophuthatswana National Provident Fund Act Repeal Bill [B  13  -
           2003] - Act No 13 of 2003 (assented to and signed  by  President
           on 14 June 2003); and
     (ii)   Sefalana Employee Benefits Organisation Act Repeal Bill [B 14  -
           2003] - Act No 14 of 2003 (assented to and signed  by  President
           on 14 June 2003).

2.    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Health:


         (i)     National Health Bill [B 32 -  2003]  (National  Assembly  -
              sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice  of  its
              introduction published in Government Gazette  No  23696  of  8
              August 2002.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on  Health  of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral  to  the  Joint  Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule  160,  on
         20 June 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the  classification  of
         the Bills may be submitted to the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


         On request of the Minister the following Bills were  introduced  by
         the Select Committee on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs  in  the
         National Council of Provinces on 19 June 2003:
         (i)     National Environmental Management Amendment Bill  [B  29  -
                 2003] (National Council of Provinces - sec  76)  [Bill  and
                 prior notice of its introduction  published  in  Government
                 Gazette No 24935 of 30 May 2003].


         (ii)    National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Bill [B  30
                 - 2003] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76) [Bill  and
                 prior notice of its introduction  published  in  Government
                 Gazette No 24935 of 30 May 2003].


         The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee  on  Land  and
         Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.


              NOTE:  These  Bills  were  introduced  by  the   Minister   of
              Environmental Afffairs and Tourism on 10  and  11  June  2003,
              respectively,  but  he  has  since  requested  that  they   be
              introduced in the National Council of Provinces.
              As the Bills introduced today have not been printed again, the
              information relating to the House of introduction  and  person
              in charge of the Bill, as reflected on the front pages of  the
              Bills, is incorrect. As mentioned above, the  Bills  have,  in
              fact, at the request of the Minister of Environmental Afffairs
              and Tourism,  been  introduced  in  the  National  Council  of
              Provinces by the Select Committee on  Land  and  Environmental
              Affairs.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council  of  Provinces  in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council:


     (1)     Bills  passed  by  National  Assembly  on  19  June  2003   and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 35B  -  2002]  (National
                 Assembly - sec 75).


         (ii)    Financial and Fiscal Commission Amendment  Bill  [B  21B  -
                 2003] (National Assembly - sec 76).


         The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Finance  of
         the National Council of Provinces.


         (iii)   Mining Titles Registration Amendment Bill [B  24B  -  2003]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75).


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Economic  and
         Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

                            FRIDAY, 20 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 19 June 2003  in  terms  of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as  a  section  76
         Bill:


         (i)      National  Road  Traffic  Amendment  Bill  [B  31  -  2003]
              (National Assembly - sec 76).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     (a)    Water Tribunal Manual published in Government Gazette  No  24626
         dated 28 March 2003: Manual for the purposes of section 14  of  the
         Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


     (b)    Government Notice No 568  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         24794 dated 2 May 2003: Transformation of the Citrusdal  Irrigation
         Board, Magisterial District of Clanwilliam, Western Cape  Province,
         into the Citrusdal Water User Association,  Water  Management  Area
         Number 17, Western Cape Province, in terms of  the  National  Water
         Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (c)    Government Notice No 715  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         24920 dated 6 June 2003: Prohibition on the making of fires in  the
         open air, the destruction by  burning  of  slash  and  clearing  or
         maintenance  of  fire  belts  by  burning  and  the  execution   of
         blockburns: Districts  of  (A)  Ermelo,  Eerstehoek,  Carolina  and
         Waterval-Boven; (B) Piet Retief and Wakkerstroom, in terms  of  the
         Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


     (d)    Government Notice No 716  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         24920 dated 6 June 2003: Prohibition on the making of fires in  the
         open air, the destruction by  burning  of  slash  and  clearing  or
         maintenance  of  fire  belts  by  burning  and  the  execution   of
         blockburns: Districts of Nelspruit, White  River,  Pilgrim's  Rest,
         Lydenburg, Belfast,  Waterval-Boven,  Carolina  and  Barberton,  in
         terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).


     (e)    Government Notice No 717  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         24920 dated 6 June 2003: Prohibition on the making of fires in  the
         open air, the destruction by burning  of  ground  cover,  including
         slash, the clearing or maintenance of a fire  belt  by  burning  or
         the execution of blockburns: KwaZulu-Natal, in terms of the  Forest
         Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

                            MONDAY, 23 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:
     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 19 June 2003  in  terms  of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following  Bills  as  section  75
         Bills:


         (i)     Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Bill [B 27  -  2003]
                 (National Assembly - sec 75).


         (ii)    Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B  28  -  2003]  (National
                 Assembly - sec 75).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 19 June 2003  in  terms  of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following  Bills  as  section  76
         Bills:


         (i)     National Environmental Management Amendment Bill  [B  29  -
                 2003] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76).


         (ii)    National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Bill [B  30
                 - 2003] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76).

2.    Translations of Bills submitted:


     (1)    The Minister of Transport:


         (i)     Nasionale  Padverkeerwysigingswetsontwerp  [W  31  -  2003]
              (National Assembly - sec 76).


         This is the official translation into  Afrikaans  of  the  National
         Road Traffic Amendment Bill [B 31 - 2003] (National Assembly -  sec
         76).

                            TUESDAY, 24 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Withdrawal of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Finance:


         On 18 June 2003 the Minister withdrew the following Bill:


         (i)     Financial  Services  Ombud  Schemes  Bill  [B  13  -  2002]
              (National Assembly - sec 75).

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council  of  Provinces  in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council:


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 24 June 2003 and transmitted
         for concurrence:


         (i)     Appropriation Bill [B 8 - 2003] (National  Assembly  -  sec
              77).


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee  on  Finance  of
         the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     The President of the Republic submitted the  following  letter  to  the
     Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces  informing  Parliament
     of the employment of the South African National Defence Force:


     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE  FORCE  IN  COMPLIANCE
     WITH THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  SOUTH  AFRICA
     TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANISATION


     This serves  to  inform  the  National  Council  of  Provinces  that  I
     authorised the employment  of  South  African  National  Defence  Force
     (SANDF) personnel in order to fulfill the international obligations  of
     the Republic of South Africa towards the UN in The  Eastern  Democratic
     Republic  of  Congo  as  part  of  disarmament,   demobilisation,   re-
     integration, repatriation and the resettlement programme of the UN.


     This employment was authorised in accordance  with  the  provisions  of
     Section 82(4)(b)(ii)  read  with  Section  227(l)(b)  and  (c)  of  the
     Constitution of the Republic of South  Africa,  1993  (Act  No  200  of
     1993), [which Sections continue to be in force in terms of  Item  24(l)
     of Schedule 6 to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
     (Act No 108 of 1996], read further  with  Section  3(2)(a)(iv)  of  the
     Defence Act, 1957 (Act No 44 of 1957).


     A total of 1 268 personnel, will be deployed for a period of one  year,
     making a provision for a rotation after every six months, as follows:


     (a)    950 X Infantry Battalion Group
     (b)    100 X Support Element
     (c)    175 X Engineer Company
     (d)    15 X Ferry Unit
     (e)    12 X Water Well Drilling Unit
     (f)    16 X Military Police


     The expected costs for the deployment of personnel to the mission  area
     as from January 2003 to end of financial year 2005/2006 are as follows:


     2003/2004


     Personnel Allowances:   R171,552
     Initial Non-Inventory:  R169,511
     Logistic Support: R128,083


     TOTAL COST   R469,146


     LESS 2003/2004 ALLOCATION     R-28,731
     To be Supplemented      R440,415


     2004/2005


     Personnel Allowances:   R171,552
     Logistic Support: R178,936


     TOTAL  R350,488


     The total estimated reimbursement from the UN for Initial Non-Inventory
     Equipment, for Personnel Allowance  and  for  Logistical  Support  will
     amount to R200 million.


     The National Treasury advised that the shortfall  should  be  addressed
     through the normal budgetary process.


     I will also communicate this report to  the  Members  of  the  National
     Assembly, and wish to request that  you  bring  the  contents  of  this
     report to the notice of the National Council of Provinces.


     Regards




     T M MBEKI

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

SEE HARD COPY ATTACHED


