---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 June 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-06-13
---

FRIDAY, 13 JUNE 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 9:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members  to  observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                            SADF RAID IN BOTSWANA

(Member's Statement)

Ms M P MENTOR (ANC): Madam Speaker, on 14 June 1985 the apartheid security
forces illegally invaded Botswana. Their mission was to hunt down and
murder patriotic South African members of the ANC and combatants of
Umkhonto weSizwe. Ten patriots fell during that attack.

As part of the 18th commemoration of the SADF raid in Botswana a wreath
laying ceremony will take place on 14 June 2003 in Gaborone. These
activities are organised in honour of those heroes and heroines who paid
the ultimate price for the liberation of our country. As we remember this
sad day in our history we will also recall other countless murders and
assassinations carried out by the colonial apartheid state against the
majority of South Africa's citizens. We will recognise that the blood of
these combatants nourished the tree of freedom. We will use this solemn
occasion to rededicate ourselves to the cause of building a truly
democratic, nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous country. And as we do so,
we will continue to say never again. Thank you. [Applause.]

                       40 YEARS OF DESTRUCTIVE NP RULE

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr W J SEREMANE (DA): Madam Speaker, a reflection on healthy political
banter and the abuse thereof; The New NP is in danger of abusing their
Damascus road experience and endangering reconciliation and forgiveness in
South Africa following 40 years of destructive NP rule.  We, the former
prisoners and victims of the Nationalists, find it strange to be lectured
on democracy, justice, ``verligtheid'' [liberalism] and ``verkramptheid''
[conservatism] by the architects and disciples of the abominable apartheid
ideology.

We are ready to forgive, reconcile and build a new society different from
the one the apartheid regime forced on South Africa. Note the serious and
sensitive work to be done to nurture our young democracy to heal the hurts
and hate of yesterday. But the New NP must remember that peace, justice and
reconciliation do not come cheaply. We must be sincere and responsible in
the way we behave. [Interjections.]

Their cheap shots and outright hypocrisy insult the goodwill of South
Africans and threaten to destroy what we are building. Ours is a long
journey which can only be undertaken by those who believe in the
destination. I thank you.

                        E-SCHOOL INITIATIVE LAUNCHED

                            (Member's Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Madam Speaker, an e-school initiative has been
launched under the aegis of the New Partnership for Africa's Development at
the World Economic Forum, Africa's economic summit in Durban. The
initiative is aimed at bridging the digital divide between Africa and the
developed world by bringing computer literacy into African schools.

Literacy in information technology cannot be overemphasised in this day and
age of globalisation. Seminars can now be held through teleconferencing and
patients can receive international health treatment through telemedicine
through which medical experts can share information and advise each other
on patient diagnosis.
We appreciate this initiative as it will equip all learners with invaluable
skills which will empower them in their adult and employment life to
compete with the necessary leverage in the local and international job
market. I thank you.

                    THE DEMAND FOR CRIME STATISTICS BY DA

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC notes with disgust the blatant
opportunism displayed by the DA, led by the hon Douglas Gibson when they
marched to Minister Nqakula's office demanding crime statistics. The demand
for these statistics is a ploy by the DA to score cheap political points
and is driven by electioneering on the eve of the third democratic
elections. They are not committed to the battle of fighting crime. The
problem of crime confronts all South Africans, especially the poor whom the
DA does not represent.

The ANC Government and the people of South Africa have built partnerships
and are achieving success in fighting this battle. The ANC calls on the DA
to desist from its practice of seeking to score cheap political points out
of the hardships of our people and to join the partnership of fighting
crime and poverty in our country. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         REDUCTION OF INTEREST RATES

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr W A ODENDAAL (Nuwe NP): Agb Mevrou die Speaker, die Nuwe NP is van
oordeel dat alle ekonomiese aanwysers, sowel as die fout deur Statistiek SA
met die berekening van die verbruikersprysindeks, daarop gedui het dat die
Suid-Afrikaanse Reserwebank die repokoers oor die korttermyn met 'n volle
twee persentasiepunte moes verlaag. Omdat so 'n relatiewe groot eensklapse
sprong egter onnodige onstabiliteit in die finansiële markte kon
veroorsaak, is ons tevrede met die verlaging van 150 basispunte waarop die
bank besluit het.

Die Nuwe NP is egter van mening dat 'n verdere verlaging van minstens 100
basispunte in die repokoers voor die einde van Augustus 2003 noodsaaklik
is, om die onlangse verlangsaming in die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomiese
groeikoers teen te werk en die rentelas waaronder veral jonger Suid-
Afrikaners wat nog skuld het, gebuk moet gaan, verder te verlig. 'n Verdere
geleidelike verlaging van tot 3% in die repokoers voor die einde van 2003
blyk op hierdie stadium moontlik te wees. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Dr W A ODENDAAL (New NP): Hon Madam Speaker, the New NP is of the opinion
that all economic indicators, as well as the mistake made by Statistics SA
with the calculation of the consumer price index, showed that the South
African Reserve Bank had to lower the repo rate by a full 2% in the short
term. Because such a sudden, relatively big jump may, however, create
unnecessary instability in the financial markets, we are satisfied with the
reduction of 150 basis points on which the bank decided.

The New NP is, however, of the opinion that a further reduction of at least
100 basis points in the repo rate before the end of August 2003 is
essential, in order to curb the recent deceleration in the South African
economic growth rate and further relieve the interest burden on especially
younger South Africans who still have debts to pay off. A further gradual
financial reduction of up to 3% in the repo rate before the end of 2003
seems to be possible at this stage.]

                       DEVELOPMENT OF FREE TRADE ZONES

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (ACDP): Madam Speaker, three years ago Government ambitiously
announced four designated free-trade zones which were aimed at encouraging
large investment projects in South Africa, would allow duty-free imports
and a zero rate on VAT for locally produced goods and would offer a number
of investment incentives such as no restriction on foreign equity ownership
and repatriation of profit, no social service tax and low corporate tax
rates.

The intention with establishing these industrial development zones was to
help economic growth and job creation through export-orientated
manufacturing investments - which is commendable. To date the East London
industrial development zone is the only one developed according to plan. It
has received commitments from 15 foreign investors in the car
manufacturing, timber, pharmaceutical and textile industries and this is
expected to create 40 000 much-needed jobs in the Eastern Cape in the near
future. Could Government explain, in particular the Minister of Trade and
Industry, why the other free-trade zones are taking so long to develop
their potential?

            RAMPANT PROBLEM OF ABUSE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN ABUSE

                            (Member's Statement)

Mrs T P SHILUBANA (ANC): Madam Speaker, in one village in Limpopo in 1998,
a man brutally assaulted his wife and cracked her skull. Her name was Anna
Kosa. Although this case was reported to the police no prosecution took
place, because the victim withdrew the case. In 2002 the same man injured
his wife's neck with an axe. She later was admitted to the Letaba Hospital
where she remained in a coma until she died on 4 June 2003, leaving behind
six children of whom four are still minors. She will be buried tomorrow on
14 June 2003.

 This incident tells the story of hundreds of women who are exposed to
physical and psychological abuse. It also tells the story of a society that
still needs to undergo fundamental transformation so that the psychological
pressure which results from a vicious cycle of poverty does not translate
into extreme forms of male aggression and women abuse. As South Africans we
must boldly confront the rampant problem of women and child abuse. This
incident is a gross violation of human rights.

The ANC condemns this barbaric and cowardly act. The ANC calls on the
criminal justice system to ensure that the full might of the law of the
democratic state descends upon the perpetrator of this horrific crime. We
further call on all women of South Africa to report all incidents of women
and child abuse. [Applause.]

                 PRESIDENT MBEKI'S ADDRESS TO ILO CONFERENCE

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms E THABETHE (ANC): Madam Speaker, President Thabo Mbeki addressed the
91st session of the International Labour Conference in Geneva, Switzerland
on 11 June 2003. The conference started on 3 June and will end on 19 June
2003. The President was accompanied by the Minister of Labour, the Deputy
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Cosatu representatives and Business SA.

The ILO is a structure set up  by  the  United  Nations  to  promote  social
justice and human rights in the work place. President Mbeki's  participation
in this conference has a greater significance in view of the  recent  Growth
and Development Summit. It is also an acknowledgement of the  strides  which
the ANC Government has made in the first decade of  freedom  to  uphold  and
promote  social  justice,  human  rights  and  workers'  rights.   The   ANC
appreciates the participation of President  Mbeki  at  this  conference  and
wishes all delegates good luck in their deliberations. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I want to remind the ACDP and the  ANC  that  they
will have an opportunity for an additional statement, because there are  two
slots now available. [Interjections.] DA, you come in the roster.

                       HIV/AIDS IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE

                            (Member's statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Madam Speaker, the Minister for Public Service failed to
mention HIV/Aids during her Budget Vote speech. As the single biggest
employer of over 1 million people, the Aids disaster is taking its toll on
the Public Service. Within the department's own report it is said that
without treatment service delivery will suffer. A total of 250 000 public
servants are set to die from Aids by 2012.

The report further states that skilled and highly skilled employees are at
the highest risk of infection. The current HIV-infection level in the
Public Service is 14%, but higher in key areas. The rate among student
nurses is 30%; teachers 18%; social workers 19%; and the infection rate
within the Defence Force is at least 22%. This is the first year when Aids-
related deaths in the Public Service will outnumber non-Aids deaths.

The Government's refusal to treat the cause while spending billions on the
symptoms such as TB and pneumonia is nonsensical. The DA's actuarial study
into only the direct costs to the state in terms of the sick leave and
death benefits for teachers confirms what every sane South African is
saying: It is cheaper to provide antiretrovirals. It is time for sanity
within the ANC as well. I thank you.

Hon MEMBERS: Hear, Hear!

                              CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

                            (Member's statement)

Mrs L R MBUYAZI(IFP): Madam Speaker, children are a gift from God. They
need our care and love so as to grow and become responsible, loving and
caring adults. They are the future of our country, in the hope that what we
have can be sustained to the next generation. It is unfortunate though,
that such treasure is sometimes neglected and abandoned by those who
brought them into this world. Most of these children end up on our streets,
some even in jail, at a tender age.

Some parents have the nerve to abandon their children as they  are  seen  to
be an obstacle to their development. However,  another  issue  is  the  fact
that  the  problem  becomes  a  vicious  cycle  of  early  pregnancy,  which
sometimes leads to abandoned children. This is because most  of  these  teen
mothers are not equipped emotionally and physically to deal with  motherhood
and they sometimes find the whole experience of motherhood overwhelming.

There is therefore a need for training in this field for our  youngsters  so
that when they are faced with a situation they know how to deal with it.  It
is a  reality  that  in  this  country  we  have  a  large  number  of  teen
pregnancies and so something needs to be done. I thank you.

                   BERTRAMS' DEVELOPMENT BRIGADE PROGRAMME

                            (Member's statement)

Mr L M KGWELE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Foundation for Education and
Production is embarking on a Bertrams' Development Brigade Programme. This
programme provides education and training to the youth. It empowers them to
have the opportunity to gain full-time employment by providing the
necessary skills.
This programme aims to achieve this mission by providing training to young
people by engaging them in renovating existing and building new homes, and
thus providing affordable housing to low-income families. The ANC welcomes
the initiative by the Foundation for Education and Production. We believe
that programmes of this nature encourage the spirit of community service
among young people and expands their horizons by providing opportunities
for full-time employment.

The ANC calls on other community development activists to emulate this
example and to work tirelessly towards empowering the country's youth for a
brighter future and better life for all. I thank you.

                              COMRADES MARATHON

                            (Member's statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (New NP): Madam Speaker, every year the world's best runners
gather in South Africa for the Comrades Marathon. A little over 12 750
competitors will face the starter in Pietermaritzburg for the 78th annual
Comrades Marathon this year. This year there is a 17% increase in novice
involvement and 20% more female entries in the top-quality field of
international and national stars.

However, the Comrades is not only about running. It is also about charity.
It raises funds for cancer, conservation, the community chest and Aids. The
obvious favourite is the defending champion, Vladimir Kotov. The New NP
wonders if Kotov knows about the fierce fight-back team. We here in the New
NP hope that Tony Leon, his sidekick Douglas Gibson and the rest of his
bratpack also take part in the Comrades this year, seeing that they have
perfected the art of running away with everything. [Laughter.]

The New NP would like to wish all participants good luck and believe that
the South African runners will do us proud. I thank you. [Applause.]

                       GAS FUELS FOUND OFF WEST COAST
                            (Member's Statement)

Mr A BLAAS (ACDP): Speaker, we take note of the extensive gas fuels that
have been found off the West Coast. We sincerely hope that these fuels will
be developed, or that the necessary capital will be found to develop these
fuels to their full potential. This will alleviate the increasing demand on
energy resources.

The vision of linking these gas lines with PE to stimulate the existing
momentum in the economy and growth in PE is a dream that we hope will be
realised, and we hope that these gas fuels will supplement our requirements
for additional energy. Thank you.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL YOUTH SERVICE PROGRAMME

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr S B NTULI (ANC): Madam Speaker, hon members, the organised formation of
young people in South Africa and the National Youth Commission are
proposing the implementation of the National Youth Service Programme. The
aim of this programme is to engage young people in a systematic programme
that provides them with vocational skills and educational training, while
contributing to reconstruction and development and enhancing their
employability.

This programme will also encourage young people to embark on community
service in line with the spirit of Vukuzenzele and volunteerism. These
programmes will provide skills and opportunities for young people.

The Growth and Development Summit decided, among other things, that the
Expanded Public Works Programme must have a national youth service
programme component in order to tackle the problem of youth unemployment.
The ANC endorsed the National Youth Service Programme at its 51st
conference, and the ANC Government has also accepted the proposal for the
establishment of the National Youth Service Programme. The ANC calls on all
role-players to move speedily to the implementation stage of the National
Youth Service Programme. I thank you.

                         RELEASE OF CRIME STATISTICS

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, the hon George is
correct when he describes the hon Gibson's antics as a publicity stunt. In
fact, we would have laughed it off as a joke were it it not for the fact
that it was serious. [Interjections.] It was a serious matter because the
hon Gibson was deliberately misleading the public and the media.
[Interjections.] But we'll let the facts speak for themselves.

Firstly, the hon Gibson asked me, in his requesting document, to make
available or release the statistics for the years 2000, 2001 and 2002. Last
year we came before this honourable House and submitted this report. It
covers the financial year 2001-02 and embodies the statistics that the hon
Gibson says we must release. [Interjections.] Not only that, this document,
as all hon members of the ANC know, is also a comparative study of all the
statistics since the very first financial year of 1994-95, until 2001-02.
[Interjections.] This is a public record. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, the hon Minister has said that the DA - the
hon Mr Gibson - was deliberately misleading the House. [Interjections.]
That, I contend, is unparliamentary. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I will check if it was deliberate. I will ask you to
call on that.

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, I think the allegation was that those words were
uttered in respect of events that took place outside of this House.
[Interjections.] The allegation is not that the House is being misled.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Mr Nel, will you take your seat. [Interjections.] Order! I
will look at the Hansard and give a ruling. Please proceed, Minister.
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: As I was saying, members of the ANC
who have been interacting with this report are aware that it not only
speaks to the statistics that the hon Gibson wants, but also makes a
comparative study of all the statistics from the very first financial year
of this democratic House - 1994-95 to 2001-02. [Interjections.]

Now, the hon Gibson, as an hon member of this House - and, I am saying, as
a lawyer - is fully conversant with the Promotion of Access to Information
Act. He must have revisited this particular stipulation for the purposes of
his publicity stunt. It says: "If the information officer of a public body
decides to grant a request for access to a record, but that record is to be
published within 90 days ... "

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, I'm sorry but even allowing for the points of
order, your time in which to give a response has expired. [Interjections.]
There is a limit ... [Interjections.] [Applause.] Order! There is nothing
to call a point of order on because nobody has spoken.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 22 - Defence

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, members of the House, ladies and
gentlemen, the Defence Secretariat, Chief of SA National Defence Force and
command structures of the SA National Defence Force, Amnesty International
has said rather than making the world safer from terrorism, the war on
terror has actually eaten away at collective security by making the world
more dangerous. Actions in the name of the so-called war on terror have
undermined international law and shield governments, including the United
States of America, from scrutiny as they curtail the application of human
rights. This suggests that the global security environment today requires
very sober assessment if we are to correct the damage that has been done to
the global system of collective security.
The new United States security doctrine has expressed a very clear goal of
maintaining their current military superiority as a tool to leverage
political, strategic and economic interests. As the editor-in-chief of
Military Technology, Ezio Bonsignore, has observed, the invasion of Iraq
has shown that while Washington would prefer to obtain international
approval for any moves it may wish to implement in the pursuit of its own
interests, at the same time it is quite ready and willing to act outside of
and indeed against all established international institutions if sanction
is withheld. This poses a direct threat to the world's order and stability.

 The invasion of Iraq inflicted great damage on the United Nations system
as a means of cushioning the world against interstate armed conflicts. The
end of the Cold War exploded the old way of doing things, and we have seen
a resurgence of violence and insecurity in many parts of the world. This is
characterised by civil war, ethnic and religious disagreements, and a
decline in politically induced international aid that has led to an
increase in social insecurity which has inspired violence over scarce
resources as well.
Whilst we agree that the integrity of the United Nations has been affected,
we are nevertheless of the view that it is not redundant. Recent events
emphasise the need to speed up reform of the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular. There is growing consensus that there is a
need for increased representation for Africa and the developing world in
general. The world cannot tolerate a situation in which the few most
powerful nations hold the majority of nations of the world to ransom.

Ongoing discussions on the above must inform what needs to be done to re-
establish collective security. What is no longer in doubt is that the world
has to remould and re-enforce collective security arrangements.

The fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the Cold War promised a long
millennium of peace and, yet, 13 years later that promise has evaporated.
Rather than gravitating towards greater stability, the world situation, in
a great measure, has become increasingly more uncertain and threatening.
This is true for Africa too.

Africa inherited several conflicts from the Cold War period: the civil war
in Angola; the conflict in the DRC; the bloody strife in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and in other parts of West Africa; the collapse of states in the
Horn of Africa encompassing Somalia, Eritrea and Ethiopia; as well as the
strife in the Sudan. The challenge here was to contain and resolve these
conflicts.

Instead, even before September 11, Africa experienced ghastly terrorist
actions in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania and Nairobi, Kenya. The war on terror,
inevitably, would spill into our continent. As consequence Africa has now
become one of the theatres of international terrorist activity - witness
the recent attack in Morocco. This consequence has imposed fresh
obligations on African countries singly, regionally and continentally, to
equip themselves to respond to all of these threats in a world which is
becoming less secure as a result of unilateral actions by the great powers.
Raised tensions have deepened levels of insecurity, and global unease is
also felt in Africa.

The Afghanistan war and the invasion of Iraq have increased the sense of
unease on our continent, thus tempting Africa to increase defence spending
and to siphon off attention and resources from other areas of security like
piracy, environmental degradation, disaster relief, search and rescue, etc.
Africa has been robbed of the chance not just of attending to these wider
security concerns, but of even putting building blocks in place.

The situation today does not allow us to use the concept of a peace
dividend either in defence planning or in the defence budget. The countries
in our region and on our continent face the same challenges. We therefore
need to pool our resources. We need to deal with these problems
collectively, and regional collectives like SADC become more important. It
is in this context that we are looking at a collective approach to defence
on the continent of Africa under the auspices of the African Union, through
the development of a common doctrine and the establishment of an African
standby force.

We are agreed in the African Union that a common defence policy is not a
single policy for all of Africa, but a policy on how to respond
collectively to threats. The core value of this common policy is summarised
by the indivisibility of continental security. The security of each African
country is inseparably linked to that of others and Africa as a whole.

The other core value that has been re-emphasised is that conflict
resolution should principally be effected by peaceful means. Intrastate
conflicts often impact and spill over into neighbouring states.
Nonaggression therefore remains a central tenet of the common policy.

A common security and defence policy means that all existing regional,
continental and international instruments should be identified and
coherently integrated into this policy. This could include instruments on
terrorism, landmines, small arms, child combatants, mercenaries, health
refugees, etc.

Whilst we concentrate mainly on challenges that relate to landward defence,
it is clear that the new security environment encompasses a significant
maritime element that we must study and incorporate where possible. Besides
disturbing evidence of increased sophistication and activity of pirates at
sea, we must note recent developments that place far greater emphasis on
international obligations for the security of ports and installations at
sea such as oil and gas platforms. Furthermore, countries' obligations to
protect their economic exclusive-zone assets, including the ocean floor and
marine-based infrastructure, pose particular challenges. As a recent study
noted, it is not so much the protection and security of maritime trade
itself that is a major concern, but the security of the whole system that
enables the trade to take place.

Each country has to look at what its doctrine and security evaluation are,
what assets it has, and what it can contribute to the common good.
Parliament and the electorate must remember that each of the state parties
participating in collective security does so in keeping with what resources
it possesses. As the biggest economy of the region, our country will always
have to carry bigger responsibilities. The strategic issue then becomes how
we organise ourselves regionally through SADC; and continentally through
the African Union.

The whole continent is working at meeting these challenges. On the defence
side, our approach is to create regional blocks which when pulled together
form a continental body. As a result, we as part of SADC are in the process
now of the last stages of the finalisation of the SADC Mutual Defence Pact.
My counterparts in the region and I have actively participated in the
process of assessing issues of detail. We are now satisfied with the
results of a complex process, and I am optimistic that the defence pact
will be signed at the next heads of state summit in August.

Each country has to look at whether its logistical lines are adequate,
whether its communications equipment is compatible with that of its
neighbours so that we can talk to each other. We have to look at how we
transport our troops; we have to look at a military doctrine that
differentiates between peacekeeping and peace enforcement; we have to look
at how our military institutions assist and support civil authorities.
This, in turn, entails an awareness on the part of every member of a
military force of understanding civil-military relations. The predictable
difficulties faced by the United States and the UK military forces in Iraq
today merely serve to underline these points.

The African standby force is currently at an advanced stage of discussion,
but I can inform the House that we have reached full agreement and
consensus on a range of matters. These include issues of doctrine and
posture, shifts in the nature of peacekeeping operations, interoperability
of forces, common standards of training, equipment and logistics, standard
procurement regimes for commonly identified appropriate equipment needs,
the establishment of command structures, and so on. More precise details
are included in the printed version of my speech, which has been circulated
amongst the members and which is available to members of the media as well.

Work is already in progress around all these issues, and we expect a
detailed report when the African chiefs of staff meet again in 2004. These
are but some of the continent's generic issues that we are forced to
examine on a daily basis. These are the challenges facing our military
planners. The SA National Defence Force has to align itself more coherently
with these new developments.

As I turn now to examine a number of concerns, developments and initiatives
that we face within the Department of Defence here at home, I suggest that
we keep in mind the larger issues I have just outlined. By so doing, we are
able to develop a tighter appreciation of what our priorities should be,
and how our actions promote longer-term success than the quick-fix kneejerk
response that we are sometimes urged to pursue by well-meaning, though
sadly misinformed, observers and commentators.

 Whilst our constitutional mandate remains the same, our increased regional
commitments have brought about additional spending which brings pressure to
bear on our budget allocation. These were not foreseen and cannot be
accommodated all the time. The fact of the matter is that it costs much
more to send a soldier on a peacekeeping operation, in which he or she
receives an additional allowance, purchases rations at a higher cost, etc,
than it does to maintain that soldier in a base in South Africa.

Against this backdrop of the co-ordinated efforts of the SA Police Service
and of Defence, we welcome the decision of Government to progressively
reduce our involvement at home over the next five years, and to make those
resources available for our peacekeeping work in the region and for support
of the diplomatic work in Africa. This change of focus has necessitated a
thorough re-examination of our force structure and design.

We continue along the difficult path of aligning our mandate and tasks with
our budget, especially, but not exclusively, with regard to our increased
yet necessary external deployments. We are deploying twice as many members
of the SA National Defence Force as was anticipated in the Defence Review,
whilst our budget, as anticipated in the same Defence Review, has not been
increased. Defence is still only allocated 1,62% of the GDP and amounts to
6,74% of Government expenditure. Over and above the deployment of the SA
National Defence Force in the DRC and Burundi, which was outlined in detail
yesterday by the Chief of the SA National Defence Force, our daily work in
the region continues. In line with Cabinet priorities and guided by our
Department of Foreign Affairs, we are servicing 103 international
agreements with 50 different countries. As a result, our foreign relations
division is increasing South Africa's presence in 31 countries. Not all of
these countries will have a defence attaché residing in its country, but
there will be accreditation.

In light of the challenges outlined above, the SA National Defence Force
must be oriented so that it is attuned to meet its obligations. Training,
equipment and personnel must be aligned for peacekeeping operations.

Efforts to rightsize without an employer-initiated package have had to
depend on natural attrition. But the problems of an aging defence force,
with not enough new, young blood coming in, is beginning to impact on our
operational readiness. These difficulties will be met partly by the
adoption of the Human Resource Strategy of 2010.

We need to effect further transformation of our military justice system,
both in terms of its efficiency and in its capacity to deliver fairness and
justice. Together with the international community of the Red Cross, the
teaching of international humanitarian law is now taught at every level in
the SA National Defence Force.
Work on the reserve force is beginning to bear fruit, and the parliamentary
defence committees have played an important part in the role of oversight
in this regard. I would like to thank the chairperson, the hon Ms Thandi
Modise, for her leadership in this regard. [Applause.]

We are now at a stage in our transformation in which we are on an even keel
and out of the rough seas. Our ship, the SA National Defence Force, has
kept afloat, and we can see our way forward. This momentous achievement,
whose success is directly attributable to the commitment of the men and
women in the SA National Defence Force and Defence Secretariat, is now
enabling us to plan for the future in an organised and systematic way.
Succession planning is a key area and a top priority which must now be
incorporated into our planning.

The transformation of the Department of Defence is ongoing. Our policy and
planning division is working through the regulatory framework emanating
from the Defence Act. One example of the practical consequences of this
work will suffice. The differences between peacekeeping and peace
enforcement result in differences in training, posture and equipment. The
degree of flexibility inside the department to be able to adjust training
to meet our continental challenges has been tested owing to certain
capacity problems in the Defence Secretariat.

 On 25 April 2003 the old SA National Defence Force emblem was phased out
in a retreat ceremony. The old SA National Defence Force flag was lowered
and handed back to the Chief of the SA National Defence Force, Gen Siphiwe
Nyanda. On 29 April 2003 Gen Nyanda presented the new SA National Defence
Force flags and emblems to the senior echelons of the SA National Defence
Force. [Applause.]

This constituted a very visible identity change for the SA National Defence
Force. It symbolised an important step forward in our transformation. Our
nation can now be truly proud of its national Defence Force whose
professionalism and discipline are recognised the world over. The SA
National Defence Force will be participating fully in whatever our country
calls upon it to do in our quest for peace and stability. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, it is clear that the 6% increase in the
defence budget is being usurped by the special defence account responsible
for the cost of the arms deal. In addition to a 9% increase in the salaries
of personnel, in accordance with the Public Service Bargaining Council
resolution, the repayment of the arms deal has increased by approximately
R1 billion to inflate the special defence account to R8,8 billion or
approximately 43,8% of the defence budget. It is therefore clear that the
budget of the Department of Defence has, with the exclusion of the special
defence account, decreased in real terms. To add to the department's woes,
commitments by Cabinet in terms of external peace enforcement deployment in
the DRC, Burundi, Ethiopia and Eritrea has increased, despite no increase
in funds.

Ek kan dit nie anders stel as om te sê dat die Departement in die
spreekwoordelike knyptang vasgevang is. Dit is duidelik dat die amptenary
en veral die finansiële beamptes hul bes probeer onder die omstandighede.
Dit is ook duidelik dat, gegewe die al groter wordende probleme binne die
departement gemeet teenoor die Kabinet se politieke besluit om die Weermag
te betrek by Afrika-geskille, die Kabinet en die Minister van Verdediging
geen benul het van die dilemma waarin die departement hom bevind nie, óf
vanweë 'n gebrek aan belangstelling, óf vanweë 'n blote tekort aan kennis.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

I cannot put it any other way than to say that the department is caught in
the proverbial vice. It is clear that the officialdom and especially
financial officials try their best under the circumstances. It is also
clear, given the ever increasing problems within the department measured
against the Cabinet's political decision to involve the defence force in
Africa's conflicts, that the Cabinet and the Minister of Defence do not
have a clue as to the dilemma in which the department finds itself, either
because of a lack of interest or because of a bare lack of knowledge.]

There is a disparity between the funding of the department, excluding the
special defence account, and the required commitments requested from the
SANDF. This cannot be allowed to continue. Financial problems are being
foreseen with regards to the funding of the Hawk fighter aircraft, more in
particular the Grippen fighters on which Cabinet has to take a decision
within the near future. The current Mirage F1 fleet of which apparently 21
are currently unused, can in future be upgraded at a cost of less than one
third of the total Grippen deal - leaving billions of rands available for
more urgent priorities within the department. This would provide a solution
to the SA Air Force for the next ten to twenty years, as well as creating
"dip-and-nip" opportunities.

The severity of the SANDF position is reflected by the fact that the
Ysterplaat and Bloemspruit runways, as well as runway lighting is in dire
need of repair and replacement. Media reports yesterday disclosed threats
by the Tshwane Local Council to close 1 Military Hospital outside Pretoria
due to fire safety. Unsuitable medical conditions and disgusting hygiene
standards indicate the crisis the SANDF is currently facing.

The required funding of R600 million for the completion of the Rooivalk
project is still outstanding, with the critical delay ensuring that the
Rooivalk is not able to be marketed or sold. Surely this project must be
regarded as important because of the billions of rand already spent on it.

The total confusion following the announcement of the President to phase
out the commandos within a period of six years has not only left the
Departments of Defence and Safety and Security in bewilderment, but has led
to insecurity in the rural areas at the cost of the alienation of all those
affected communities.

The Democratic Alliance unequivocally opposes the phasing out of the
commandos. These commandos have delivered excellent service to the
communities and have as recently as yesterday, during a briefing to the
media in respect of South Africa's foreign deployment, been praised for
having done an excellent job. Yesterday! In addition, the hon Minister is
on record as stating in Parliament that the commandos are doing a good job.
What has happened? The decision to phase out the commandos is purely an ANC
political decision and has nothing to do with looking after the best
interests of those communities. Military doctrine provides commandos with
the role of rear area defence during times of war. Most alarming is that
haphazard planning is being conducted by individuals who have very little
knowledge as to the sphere within which commandos operate and that which is
required. Some units have already been closed.

With the intended formation of the African standby force, it is important
to ensure that a reserve officers' association for the African continent is
established. In this regard the African Armed Force Journal has in the past
few years actively promoted this concept and should receive our support.

Groter belangstelling in die reserwemagte is tans noodsaaklik, gegewe die
gebrekkige standaard van paraatheid van ons troepe. Volgens die nuutste
aanduidinge, of is dit die oudste aanduidinge, word die HIV-infeksiesyfer
steeds gebaseer op 'n betreklike klein opname uitgevoer gedurende 2000.
Hierdie aspek dui op nalatigheid aan die kant van die departement, of is
dit die Regering, om presies vas te stel wat die werklike toestand van die
HIV/Vigs virus-epidemie binne die SANW is. Slegs 53% van ons troepe is tans
GlKl geklassifiseer vanweë hoë ouderdom, siekte, ens. Dit is in die lig
hiervan dat die beoogde onttrekking van die elf firmas uit die rol van
ondersteuning vir die polisie gesien moet word, naamlik 'n gebrek aan
genoegsame paraat troepe om buitelands ontplooi te word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is essential that a greater interest is shown in the reserve forces
now, given the poor standard of preparedness of our troops. According to
the most recent, or is it the oldest, indications, the HIV-infection rate
is still based on a relatively small survey executed in 2000. This aspect
shows negligence on the part of the department, or is it Government, in
determining exactly what the actual situation is regarding the HIV/Aids
virus epidemic within the SANDF. Only 53% of our troops are currently
classified G1K1 because of age, illness, etc. It is in the light of this
that the intended withdrawal of the eleven companies from their support
role for the police must be seen, namely a lack of enough prepared troops
to be deployed outside the country.]

We have a Minister who, due to negligence, has failed to declare his
financial interests to Parliament. It is inexcusable that a Minister who
presides over a department whose Chief of Acquisitions, Mr Chippy Shaik was
fired following the arms deal, who emanates from a party whose chief whip -
the previous Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence - was
found guilty of fraud for falsely declaring that he had received no benefit
in respect of the arms deal, not to mention Ms Winnie Mandela, who was also
charged with failing to disclose her interests, would even attempt to
indicate that he had merely committed a mistake by not declaring his
financial interests to Parliament. This is untenable position to believe.

As stated before, a review of the Defence Review is critically needed. Not
only has the strategic environment dramatically changed since 1998, but
also the requirements and tasks which the SANDF should be ready to
undertake. An exit mechanism for all those approximately 15 000 troops who
have to make way for young, fit and healthy troops to be deployed wherever
required, is urgently needed. No progress of any note has been made in this
regard. HR2010, the Human Resource Strategy for the department should be
followed to its fullest extent in order to create a viable and sustainable
Defence Force.

 In conclusion, I venture to say that the solution to all these issues is
heavily reliant upon a willing and keen Minister of Defence actively
committed to ensuring that the problems and position of the Department of
Defence be brought to the attention of Cabinet and Government. It is
disappointing to say that this commitment has not been forthcoming from our
current Ministry of Defence. As stated last year, there has been a lack of
political and management commitment to resolve these major issues by both
the hon Minister of Defence and Cabinet, and I maintain that view. I
therefore regret to say that the Democratic Alliance is not in a position
to support this Budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms T R MODISE: Madam Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, it is
three days before the 27th anniversary of June 16. Allow me therefore to
dedicate my simple speech to the young people who leaped overnight out of
youth and became defenders of the people. Armed with nothing but stones and
courage, they resolved to fight the might of the apartheid regime.

Allow me to dedicate myself to the young women of the June 16 Detachment.
They are unknown, unsung, unplaced but forever respected and loved,
challenging, defiant and ever willing to enter into new and unchartered
terrains. [Applause.] We stand tall, and we are proud because we
contributed to a dream which has become a reality, that is, a South Africa
that belongs to all, a nonsexist, nonracist and united South Africa.

I do, to some extent, agree with hon Schmidt. The defence budget, if you
take away the special defence packages, has in real terms decreased. But
central to the threat of the 2003-04 budget of the Department of Defence is
the contribution that this department must make towards a stable, peaceful
and developing Africa.

Upon this contribution lies the dream of Nepad and the reawakening of
Africa as a continent. It is important that we, the elected representatives
of the people in this House, remember and honour the memories and the
sacrifices of the members of the SANDF who fell in the line of duty in the
DRC and Burundi in the peacekeeping operations and also in the line of duty
internally, here in South Africa. Our respects go to the families and loved
ones who understand and allow these brave men and women to go abroad to
bring stability and peace so that development and growth can take place on
the continent.

South Africa has been asked by SADC, the AU and the UN to assist in peace
and security operations in Lesotho, the Comores, Burundi, the DRC, Eritrea
and Ethopia. This department has risen bravely and successfully to each
challenge. We have risen courageously to assist in the disasters in the
region, for example, the Mozambican floods and now the Algerian earthquake.


As the current Chairperson of the AU and as a strategically placed regional
power we will be called upon to contribute more personnel to stop the
bloodshed in Bunia, in the eastern region of the DRC. We are also expected
to increase the personnel in Burundi to assist with the implementation of
the peace accord. The big question is, can we sustain the current
deployments? Can we afford to increase the contingents? We have learnt a
number of lessons in the recent war against Iraq. One of them is the need
for accurate and up-to-date intelligence and the utilisation thereof - the
status, the size and the age of technology and equipment, the morale and
the state of readiness of the deployable forces and the role and the
support the media gives to the troops.

We have looked at this, and we have to honestly ask ourselves whether we
are in shape. We are learning from the recent events, the attempted coup in
the Central African Republic, the attempted coup in Mauritania, the entry
of Liberia's two guerrilla forces into the capital and the continuing
anarchy in Somalia. In all these instances the need to deploy a rapid-
reaction peacekeeping force becomes vital. The need to have popular support
cannot be overemphasised. The question is, can South Africa afford to
deploy effectively, efficiently and rapidly to the region and to the rest
of the continent without leaving the Republic vulnerable?

 When we look back at the September 11 events, can we continue to hold the
belief that the traditional threat analysis and identification period of
five to 15 years is enough to rely on or should we not do what the
Constitution enjoins us to do in section 100? The Department of Defence has
been allocated R20,05 billion for the year 2003-04. This is expected to
increase to 20,4% next year and 20,5% in the following year.

It is interesting to note that the budget stood at 2,5% of the GDP in 1994
and began dropping in 1995 to just under 1,5% of the GDP in 1998. My
colleagues will talk about the impact of this decrease. We agree with the
need for balance in public spending. We agree that the nation has other
priorities. We agree that we enjoy relative peace and political stability
now. We must however remind this House of an oversight performed by this
particular House.

When we expected the defence force to integrate eight armed forces, we did
not put aside a dedicated fund. When we did that integration, we expected
an increase in numbers in military cultures, languages, religions and that
the medical facilities of the Defence Force would be overloaded because we
were putting in more members.

In fact, in 1994 the Defence Force rose to 101 000 members and yet we did
not put aside a dedicated fund to make sure that integration and
transformation happened. We expected that the South African National
Defence Force would cope and to some extent they coped. But we are all
paying very heavily because the increase in personnel expenditure meant a
decrease in operational and capital expenditures.

We have had several incidents, perhaps some directly linked to the
financial frustrations; some purely linked to the confidence and trust
building phase of the Defence Force and some purely arising from a refusal
to change within the department. Integration could have gone, as I've said,
quite a lot smoother had we put in the systems. But now we speculate
because we could not foretell. And our systems say that we cannot budget
for the unknown. Yet some of the things could have been avoided.

We knew that the defence increase to 101 000 meant that those people would
need to be demobilised at some point. We knew that pensions for those
people getting demobilised would have to be paid. We knew that the medical
facilities would be overloaded. We knew that during the negotiations we
recognised the services of the nonstatutory force members.

We also knew that with the increase of cultures, races, sexes and languages
it meant more administration and extension on the facilities and yet we
expected success. We have watched with pride when the SANDF flitted in and
out of disaster management. Yet this House has jointly condemned the
department when qualified Auditor-General reports came in. We screamed at
the services when the reports came in that training was diminishing, for
example in the airforce because there wasn't enough funds for operational
flight preparatory work. The funds had been used for humanitarian aid in
Mozambique.

It is good to note that the airforce has now turned the corner and has
plans to lord it over our skies in all our colours. Although very little in
real terms, the 4,8% increase should see the airforce through though,
enable it to retain skills and recruit young people, retain the skills it
already has and increase the reserve part of it very substantially.

We urge that the proceeds from the sales must go to the airforce for its
own programmes and activities. There are two issues that should be raised.
The Rooivalk - it is strange that we sing praises of this combat aircraft
without really showing commitment to it. If it so good, why are we not
using it? Why are we not showing confidence in South Africa's own product?
Why are we not buying it and making sure that the money circulates
internally?

The second matter, which I take issue with through the Minister to General
Beukes, is why the air force wants to be the custodians of maritime
helicopters? Surely the helicopters are just an extension of the Corvettes
and should be allowed to stay in the navy; and that would contribute
largely to the multiskilling of the National Defence Force.

 My colleagues will look at a number of other issues. They will talk about
the service called the Civil Education Programme. They will talk about
2010. A few months ago I visited 2 Military Hospital, and I was horrified
by the state of the wards. They were scrupulously clean, I must grant that,
but they were almost falling apart. A lick of paint, new beds, towels and
sheets would be very, very welcome.

In short, Mr Minister, give the facilities a face-lift. If we cannot
provide decently for the men and women who are ready to lay down their
lives for their country, how can we hope to convince the young ones to come
into their own? The South National Defence Force has been accused of not
being too upfront about the HIV/Aids statistics. All external deployments
are compelled to undergo comprehensive testing so that they leave our
shores very healthy. Rumour says that they do not often come back so
healthy. What happens? Are we sending these people out without education,
literature and condoms? Are we making sure that there are enough female
condoms during deployments? Are our troops simply without discipline when
it comes to these matters when they are deployed?

With regard to medical inflation standing at 23% - with the expected
increase in international operations, with HIV/Aids and increasing TB,
malaria and cholera in this country and with the expected retirement of a
number of old folk in the Defence Force and the entry of young folk into
the Defence Force - the 8,2% increase for the medical support is hopelessly
inadequate.

Maritime defence gets a 7,5% decrease, which relates largely to the covert
programme. With the substandard cabling on the Amathola, this has become a
mixed blessing. An increase in costs and therefore a levy for the major
contractor and a chance for the navy to make sure that the racial mix of
the crews is a little bit better. It is unfortunate that they will only
come in at the lower ranks. Mr Minister, how long does it take to produce a
Black, an Indian and a Coloured ship's captain, and what are you doing
about it?

Earlier on I referred to the gathering and the use of intelligence as vital
in modern warfare a 7,4% increase goes to that and this can be
rationalised. They must get equipment and we are more and more involved in
getting operations from abroad. The Department of Defence employs 70 000
people.

Recent briefings indicate that skills are lost because of our often not too
competitive conditions of service. The best chef at one of Kenya's elite
hotels is a former member of the South African Navy. We know that
commercial airlines are poaching from the airforce. We know that private
diving schools are poaching from the navy. This means that even though we
want to retain the colours and balance the demographics, if we do not do
something about retaining all levels of skills in the Defence Force, we
will be working backwards.

Our colleagues in Scopa annually report to us that the Defence Force fails
to decrease its surplus stocks. The question is what inventories are we
carrying? Can we unload this and get rid of obsolete stock? Can we address
the dangerous question of old ammunition before accidents happen? Have we
budgeted for this, if not, why not? If so, when can we see this demolition
depot being constructed? Such a construction would be an advantage to this
country and the region because as the Minister said about integrating
systems and equipment and standardising them, surely what is not standard
and not integrated will have to be demolished. The South African National
Defence Force can then earn some revenue in this regard.

There is often not too gentle pressure put on South Africa to play a more
interactive role in peacekeeping on the continent. This requires the
Defence Force to spend money on training, deployment and equipment.
Although the United Nations and other donor countries often pledge and pay
the money, this often happens very late. We therefore need to find a
system. I think you need to have a little talk with the Ministers of
Foreign Affairs, Safety and Security and the Presidency because our
operational budget deviated towards the commitment which South Africa
makes. We are proud of it but let us not make those commitments without
making sure that we can operate in the meantime.

The Minister referred to the Defence Review. We need to talk about that. I
think we also need to talk to the Minister responsible for public works.
All facilities that belong to the South African National Defence Force must
be given a face-lift. Maintenance must be regular. We cannot afford the
state of obsolescence that we are noticing.

I think that this budget of 2003-04 goes a long way towards ensuring that
we realise peace and stability in Africa. The ANC will be supporting this
vote.

In conclusion, I would like to thank and praise the members of the reserve
force for the efforts they are putting in. It is always uplifting to see
you in action, especially now in Algeria but we need to correct the Irish
coffee syndrome in the reserve force. Maybe MK and Apla ex-combatants need
to get their ranks and get their butts into the reserve force so that we
can deal with that Irish coffee syndrome. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Chairperson, hon members, whenever one discusses the
Defence Force with people out there, the question that is always asked is
why are you spending so much money on defence? Who are we at war with?
Depending on where you come from, there are various replies to this
question. My own reply to that is always to refer to that famous book, the
Bible, where it says somewhere that one must be prepared, because nobody
knows the time and the hour in which the bells will toll for you.

Therefore, I believe the army should be prepared at all times because
nobody knows the hour in which the bells will toll for South Africa. A
country can only be proud if it has a very proud, intelligent, disciplined
and well-trained army. The country can also then be proud. The IFP believes
that in order to defend its sovereign territory, South Africa is
constitutionally obliged to maintain a well-trained, professional,
technologically sophisticated corps in times of peace and war. We expect
that the defence policy and Government expectations must be clearly
communicated to the department, the armed forces and other concerned
agencies so that they are thus able to formulate the strategies necessary
to effect the tasks that are likely to fall to them, hence determining the
budgetary requirements accordingly.

Only when a proper defence policy is in place and the appropriate budget
allocations have been made, can the Defence Force in turn inform foreign
policy makers of the country's military capabilities and weaknesses. The
primary responsibility of the corps' defence capability must to defend the
nation against internal and external threats. They are also expected to
play a leading role in peacekeeping missions within our borders and the
neighbouring countries.

However, the IFP wishes to caution against the extensive deployment of the
Defence Force in the external peacekeeping missions. Any external Defence
Force role must be premised on a comprehensive, consistent foreign policy
as well as a structured, constitutionally regulated intelligence capacity.
The motto of our Defence Force should always be: Be prepared at all times
in anticipation of any serious threats to South Africa's security. It
cannot be expected that when this country is attacked by any forces that
our President or Minister of Defence has to go to the enemy and say:
``Please sir, just give me one month to get ready to get my arms in order
to defend myself.'' There is no such thing, because the enemy cannot then
wait. [Applause.]

Our Defence Force must be maintained within its core limitations and
readiness for the transition to being on a war footing. However, the
readiness and the defence of South Africa's sovereignty over its territory
and airspace should be based on the principle of nonaggression and the
desire to avoid confrontations and conflicts at all times. We must not lose
sight of the fact that South Africa is a major trading nation and the
leading regional power, and this imposes certain obligations on the
international community in respect of the preservation of peace and the
maintenance of orderly relations within our country.

The IFP is pleased to note that the Department of Defence is seriously
concerned with the orientation, restructuring and integration of the armed
forces to best fulfil the classic role of a deterrent force. However, such
a policy must be developed, formulated and clearly expressed to the armed
forces and other concerned agencies. In this regard, I want to say to the
Minister that the manner in which the restructuring and the integration of
the Cape Corps is being conducted leaves much to be desired. There is chaos
and concern out there. Let us not forget that we are talking about the
oldest corps in South Africa, dating back to the First World War, and the
way they are being treated presently needs your attention.

 On the budget, let me say that the allocation of R20,5 billion for 2003-04
leaves much to be desired even though this is an increase of R1,1 billion
from the previous budget. The department's budget is dominated by spending
on human resources and strategic armaments procurement programmes. The
increase of 13% in transfer payments from 2002 to 2004 is for normal
contractual payments and exchange rate variations as well as price
adjustments.

The South African army's increased involvement in peacekeeping operations
in Africa requires it to increase the combat readiness of engineer
equipment. It must be noted, however, that quality assurance, naval
weapons, acceptance and electronic warfare analysis sections in the
maritime defence programme have been allocated additional funding in
preparation for this strategic armament, though not enough. An increase of
22,6% in special operations is due to the procurement of highly specialised
equipment and ammunition, and the introduction of an incentive scheme for
special forces.

Let's not forget what recently happened in Morocco and Iraq. Let us not
forget what happened during the Second World War when many countries were
caught with their pants down because they were not ready. We have no oil in
South Africa. But let us not also forget that we are blessed with various
valuable minerals, and many people envy this. Let us not be like Rip van
Winkel who slept throughout the revolution. Here I refer to those people
who are asking why we need an army. My God, where can you have a country
without an army that is well-equipped, well-trained and well-disciplined in
order to protect the people of South Africa. [Applause.] With that the IFP
supports this budget, but must express great concern about the
underbudgeting for this department. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D M DLALI: Chairperson, the SA National Defence Force's primary
objective is to defend and protect South Africa, its sovereignty, territory
and integrity. The acquisition allows the Defence Force to be deployed in
compliance with the Republic of South Africa's Constitution and in
conjunction with bodies in other states to preserve lives, health and
property, and to provide new essential services.
Having said the above, it is also very clear that the region, the continent
and the world has high expectations of South Africa when it comes to our
region and our continent to lead in all conflict situations as a
peacekeeping force, be it international, political or otherwise. Therefore
we need to rise above their expectations and we have to prepare ourselves
and the readiness of our Defence Force as the SA National Defence Force or
face the challenge.

Challenges facing South Africa today are peace, security, stability or
prosperity. As indicated above, South Africa is expected to lead, as our
President is the leader of the African Union. Our challenge is that we need
to be ready for all aspects of defence capabilities - air defence, military
health, maritime and base support capabilities and other armed services.

On the basis of the said readiness, I was very impressed when the committee
in its oversight responsibility visited the exercise of the artillery
formation at Potchefstroom on Saturday 24 May 2003. The SA Army Artillery
Formation, regular force units and reserve force units participated in the
exercise.

Well done, guys! You are making us proud of you. This is what we also need
to do, namely to compliment the same performance by different or various
armed services. When they were part of the African Celebration Day in
Johannesburg on 25 May 2003. Again, well done, guys! We are proud of you.
[Applause.] Well done, guys! The nation is proud of you, keep it up. You
know you can do more.

I would be failing in my duties if I did not congratulate our uniformed
personnel in various countries in Africa, in particular Burundi and the
DRC; we are on your side while you are there. You must know that we are
very proud of you, including those who have come back to South Africa when
they have served there. Well done, guys! We know that you are representing
South Africans wherever you are.

When I was in the SA Army Artillery Formation we were told that it  was  the
best artillery formation on  the  continent.  Their  equipment  will  remain
oiled and up to standard if the money or budget is made  available,  because
these soldiers need to exercise regularly, therefore they need  money,  both
for exercise and for the use of the equipment. Napoleon said, in 1809, I  am
told: "It is with artillery that war is made."

The SA National Defence Force is faced with enormous responsibility  in  the
region and on the continent with regard to peace,  security  and  stability.
If the greater powers or powerful nations can do what they like, or  if  the
sovereignty of a country or state is not important  and  the  said  powerful
nation can insist on a regime change for weak nations,  that  is  hardly  an
ethical, fair or just approach to international affairs.

Judge Richard Goldstone said on 30 March 2003:


  If the powerful excuse themselves from the  international  rule  of  law,
  then  the  whole  thing  breaks  down;  the  concept  becomes  absolutely
  meaningless. One is reverting to the situation that existed in  the  19th
  century, when powerful nations could do what they wished  for  their  own
  selfish motives. Colonialism was possibly the best example  of  that.  If
  the only superpower regards itself as above the  law,  then  it  has  the
  potential of releasing everybody from the law.

I am making this quotation, because I  want  to  stress  the  importance  of
supporting our Defence Force and giving them the extra  money  they  deserve
to make sure that they are equipped to defend our country or sovereignty  at
all cost.

I would like to raise a few issues on the programmes.  The  special  defence
account is projected to take 44,1% of the department's budget for the  2003-
04 financial year. This means that other programmes such as  joint  support,
defence intelligence, and military health support,  project  an  expenditure
for the same financial year of  17,3%,  which  therefore  means  that  other
programmes will suffer in the process. I just wanted to  mention  those  few
programmes.

These are  the  measures  that  will  need  some  attention  in  the  future
budgeting processes. Having said the above, I also want to commend the  role
played and being played by the Arms  Corps  in  each  of  these  activities.
Members of the Arms Corps, at the African Defence Summit, held on 14  August
2000, said:


  I pledge Arms Corps' commitment to continue to render  excellent  service
  to our prime client,  the  South  African  National  Defence  Force.  And
  utilising the defence-related industry to achieve this goal will  be  our
  objective for the next 50 years.

This is what we need from the defence industry - to understand  their  prime
objective. It is also critical and important that joint  training  exercises
should be enhanced and encouraged between  the  region,  the  continent  and
other parts of the world with the  view  to  some  co-operation  in  certain
aspects and areas of  mutual  agreement.  The  co-ordination  of  the  joint
forces is paramount in terms of the peacekeeping force and  in  other  areas
of  mutual  agreement,  in  particular  when  it  comes   to   international
peacekeeping and other support wherever our forces are being deployed.

The reserve force is very important as part  of  the  SANDF,  but  there  is
still more work to be  done  in  this  component.  The  composition  of  the
reserve force needs more attention as things stand at  present  in  relation
to all armed services.  This  component  of  the  SANDF  is  more  critical,
because, for example, when the USA invaded Iraq, they  used  more  of  their
forces from the reserve force.

We are just coming from the reserve force indaba, which was well  organised.
Thanks to the organisers. The various  armed  services  within  the  reserve
force  need  some  more  attention,  in  particular  around  transformation,
recruitment processes and training, of course with  the  necessary  capacity
needed in the reserve force. The reserve force services need to talk to  one
another and to have a co-ordinated approach  for  all  aspects  and  in  all
respects.

As June is youth  month,  I  wanted  to  issue  a  call  to  all  the  youth
formations to the effect that the SA National Defence Force needs  them.  We
want your support. You must not just join the Defence  Force,  the  people's
army; we must build this nation. We will  build  this  nation  if  you,  the
youth, who are leaders of tomorrow, show  your  strength,  capabilities  and
your love for your country and join the Defence Force in numbers.

There are a number of areas of interest in the Defence Force,  not  only  to
carry the big guns. We need you, the youth of our country in,  for  example,
the air force, the navy and other armed services to defend  the  sovereignty
of our country.

The SA National Defence Force is embarking on a programme of  visiting  high
schools, I was told, on a mission of impressing the youth and  to  encourage
them to see the importance of the Defence Force and  also  to  endeavour  to
recruit the youth. Therefore we need to support all  these  efforts  by  the
Defence Force to take the SANDF to the people.

Part of building and recruiting new blood for the SANDF is that we  need  to
take into consideration that we need uniformed  personnel,  both  in  Africa
and elsewhere, to assist in peacekeeping in these  countries.  And  when  we
send forces  we  need  to  train  the  others  to  be  ready  for  the  next
deployment. Therefore we need more soldiers as we cannot  foresee  what  our
demands or expectations will be and what we can offer.

While we are deploying our soldiers  outside  South  Africa,  we  also  need
soldiers who will defend and protect our developed country in terms  of  the
Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa.  The   needs   and   the
expectations of the SANDF are becoming more  and  more,  day  by  day.  This
needs more money, not only for the protection of our country, but  also  for
peacekeeping, unity, stability and prosperity. We cannot have  unity,  peace
and prosperity in Africa if we still have  civil  wars,  coups  and  certain
African states with coup leaders. We need growth  and  economic  development
in Africa in order for the  New  Partnership  for  Africa's  Development  to
succeed.

As we speak today, we are hosting a three-day African Summit  of  the  World
Economic Forum in  Durban  for  the  sole  purpose  of  African  growth  and
economic development.  African  unity  will  work  if  there  is  peace  and
stability on our continent. As we speak today, there are still  problems  or
conflicts in some parts of Africa, which reduce potentially  wealthy  states
to basket cases, such as the Democratic Republic  of  Congo,  Liberia,  Côte
d'Ivoire and the Central African Republic. These are the matters  that  need
unity among nations. As Africans, we need to deal with our own problems.  We
should not look for help from our colonisers. We should build  our  capacity
and reserves to be able to deal with most of  the  African  conflicts  as  a
continent.

I am also told that the level of support of  Africa's  growth  and  economic
development will depend on Africa's advances in  governance  and  democracy.
Therefore, if there is no peace and stability, there will be  no  governance
or democracy. Based on the above, it is therefore critical that we  have  an
African standby force for peacekeeping in the region and Africa as a  whole.


We have to present our force structure and design, which my colleagues  will
deal with. The other areas that we need to look at or be really  considering
of if we need our Defence Force to be ready  is  the  question  of  military
bases. Our buildings sometimes are not in really good condition at  all.  We
support the budget. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, hon  members,  in  this  year's
Budget the Minister of Finance linked together the twin concepts of  freedom
and development. He told us that  the  Budget  draws  inspiration  from  the
Freedom Charter. The freedom from fear of bodily  harm  and  hunger  is  the
freedom of all our people to participate in normal daily  activities.  There
shall be peace and  friendship,  says  the  Freedom  Charter.  This  is  the
framework on which our defence policy is based. This policy  marks  a  major
break  with  the  apartheid  defence   doctrine   of   destabilisation   and
domination.

The 2003 Budget gives priority to reducing poverty  and  unequal  access  to
resources that are key causes of conflict.  As  part  of  the  International
Relations, Peace and Stability Cluster the  Department  of  Defence  is  the
leading department in the efforts to bring peace in Africa. We believe  that
without peace and stability, economic development will not fully  take  off.
Conversely, without economic development and justice there cannot be  peace.
We believe that it  is  possible  to  end  wars  in  Africa.  Through  Nepad
Africans are determined to find lasting solutions.

The President in his address on  Africa  Day  made  it  clear  that  we  are
responsible for each other's welfare when he said:


  Indeed we cannot afford the slaughter of one African by another, anywhere
  on our continent. Tutsi and  Hutu  are  African.  Hausa  and  Yoruba  are
  African. Ndebele and Shona are African. Zulu and Sotho are African.

Let me highlight the dilemma we face. This is  the  problem  of  striking  a
balance between expenditure on defence and other  pressing  national  needs.
This dilemma is captured in the following quotation:


  In effect the most difficult military  problem  to  resolve  is  that  of
  establishing a security system as inexpensive  as  possible  in  time  of
  peace capable of transforming itself very rapidly into a  powerful  force
  in case of danger or aggression.

Achieving the correct mix to become a modern and balanced Defence  Force  on
the one hand, but affordable on the other is the  challenge  that  confronts
the Department of Defence. The business plan for the Department  of  Defence
for the 2003-04 financial year recognises the dilemma of balancing the  need
to acquire the optimal level of competencies, technology and  organisational
structure  needed  for  the  defence  of  our  country,  and  the  budgetary
constraints. The business plan is therefore guided by the considerations  to
achieve an excellent  strategic  direction,  resource  management,  maintain
effective combat forces and support forces, while ensuring a  high  standard
of professionalism through effective command and control  doctrine,  tactics
and appropriate technology.

The Department of Defence also recognises that successful transformation  is
essential to ensure alignment of its  policies  with  those  of  Government.
These  are   the   issues   of   civil/military   relations,   transparency,
representivity, state expenditure and security. Issues of  inequality  cause
conflict within the  DoD  and  will  continue  to  do  so  unless  they  are
addressed. To achieve  sound  civil/military  relations  the  Department  of
Defence submits its annual  reports  to  Parliament  and  appears  regularly
before  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Defence.  The  DoD   ensures   proper
accountability through its Inspectorate General which consists of about  200
inspectors and auditors, the largest among all the departments.

The inspectorate has obtained a high accreditation  from  the  International
Standards Organisation in December 2002 and  we  congratulate  the  division
and its leader. The DoD deems it extremely important  to  maintain  a  broad
national consensus of South Africa's  defence  needs  and  those  of  peace-
support operations, humanitarian  assistance  and  post-war  reconstruction.
The SANDF needs to be properly funded, as other members have said,  so  that
it is ready, organised, equipped and prepared to support a common  objective
of achieving peace and friendship as envisaged in the Freedom  Charter.  Two
years ago we sent troops to Burundi to safeguard the  returning  politicians
in that country and not a single one of those politicians  was  harmed.  The
SANDF is deployed in the DRC  under  MONUC.  President  Mbeki  has  recently
raised concerns about the killing of villagers in the  North  Eastern  Congo
and has called for an order enforcing a joint AU/UN force to be deployed  in
the region.

I had the opportunity recently to  visit  our  troops  in  Kinshasa  when  I
attended  the  DRC/South  African  Women's  Peace  Dialogue.   Despite   the
challenges our troops face daily, such as the effect of long  absences  from
home, language barriers and the reality of war, their morale remains high.

The UN Security Council's Resolution 1325 calls  on  all  member  states  to
ensure that women are represented in all peace processes  and  post-conflict
reconstruction. We are happy to  record  in  this  Budget  Vote  that  women
peacekeepers have been  deployed alongside their male  comrades  right  from
the beginning. They are coping equally  well  and  we  can  say  with  pride
``Malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi!'' [Praise the name of the women!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

The  DEPUTY  MINISTER  OF  DEFENCE:   The   Chief   Directorate   on   Equal
Opportunities intends to engage the Chief  of  Joint  Operations  to  ensure
gender mainstreaming in the training  and  deployment  of  peacekeepers  and
strict adherence to the Department's Code of Conduct  which  calls  for  the
protection of women and girls from rape  and  other  gender-based  forms  of
violence. We are happy to report that women soldiers are  making  a  special
contribution to the peace process in the DRC through their participation  in
the Inter-Congolese Dialogue. This process was initiated in  the  Presidency
under the leadership of  Mrs  Zanele  Mbeki.  The  DoD's  own  programme  of
involving women in the peace process in Africa continues to grow. This  year
the African Women's Peace Table, a forum created in the department  in  2000
to  initiate  dialogue  among  women  soldiers  and  civilian  women   peace
activists will focus on Nepad and the AU. We expect participation  by  women
soldiers from SADC.

 Another important development is the production by  the  Chief  Directorate
of a draft document that proposes a policy on shared  values  for  the  DoD.
This will strengthen the existing policies on  transforming  our  department
into a fully nonracial,  nonsexist  organisation.  Co-operation  with  other
defence forces in  the  region  on  issues  of  gender  equity  included  an
invitation of our Chief Directorate on Equal Opportunities  and  Affirmative
Action from Namibia to assist the Namibian  defence  force  to  develop  its
gender focal point.
Let me  turn  now  to  the  department's  contribution  to  national  skills
development. Skills development including life skills is crucial to  empower
our people to carry out their tasks  with  confidence  and  efficiency.  The
human resources division of the DoD has embarked  on  a  skills  development
programme to address the issue of the lack of representivity  especially  in
the highly technical masterings  of  the  SANDF.  The  failure  to  get  the
numbers correct could be attributed to the  education  dispensation  of  the
past  which  made  the  availability  of  properly  prepared  school-leavers
difficult.  The  Youth  Foundation  Training  and  the  Siyandiza   Aviation
Awareness  Programme  target  Grades  10-12  youths  from  a   disadvantaged
background to improve their maths and physical science symbols  and  produce
a critical mass of well-trained young people.

Siyandiza aims  to  increase  the  recruitment  pool  for  training  pilots,
navigators, air-traffic controllers  and  engineers  thus  helping  the  air
force to achieve its transformation goals. The new South African  Air  Force
Young  Falcons  Programme  targeting  Grades  6-12  will  be  undertaken  in
partnership with the Department of Education and  will  create  a  true  air
force identity for the participating learners.

Chairperson, the poet Ted Hughes writing  about  how  useless  war  veterans
feel about having served, said in a poem:


  The war ended, the explosions stopped.
  The men surrendered their weapons
  And hung around limply.
  Peace took them all prisoner.

This reminds us of the challenge of  ensuring  that  military  veterans  are
assisted to reintegrate smoothly into productive civilian  life.  Parliament
passed the Military  Veterans'  Affairs  Act  of  1999  which  proposes  the
establishment of a board to advise the Minister of Defence  on  issues  that
concern military veterans in order to improve  their  quality  of  life  and
that of their dependants.

The Service Corps was established  in  September  1995  to  reintegrate  ex-
combatants into society. A study  which  was  ordered  by  the  Ministry  of
Defence revealed that the Service Corps was not  functioning  optimally  and
had not succeeded in migrating out of the SANDF. We are  happy  to  announce
that efforts to migrate the Service  Corps  into  a  national  vehicle  that
would benefit the  nation  are  currently  under  way.  This  would  provide
general access to its immense resources such  as  the  Centre  for  Advanced
Training, the CAT, in Pretoria, thus assisting in  the  development  of  our
nation.

We recognise the need to ensure links with  the  existing      socioeconomic
clusters of Government in order to ensure viability of the Service Corps  in
such programmes as the Emerging Contractor Development Programme located  in
the Department of Public Works, the capital equipment clustering process  in
the  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry,  the  preferential  and  targeted
procurement initiative in Public Works  and  other  government  departments,
export initiatives undertaken by DTI and Nepad and  supporting  institutions
such as the CSIR.

Developmental peacekeeping provides the SANDF with a unique  opportunity  to
assist in the migration of the Service Corps, whilst linking  into  existing
infrastructure-related interventions that  would  support  Nepad.  Both  the
CSIR and the Ministry of Defence are currently exploring the viability of  a
developmental peacekeeping model. In April  this  year,  the  Department  of
Defence together with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  launched
Operation Vuselela  to  eradicate  foreign  vegetation  on  SANDF-controlled
land. This project employs only military  veterans  and  is  run  under  the
auspices of the Working for Water Programme with funding  from  the  Poverty
Relief Fund. The size and scope  of  the  problem  of  undemobilised  former
soldiers who generally are young and restless is  a  problem  not  only  for
individual defence forces, but also for the region and the  continent  as  a
whole. We cannot sleep peacefully while  tens  of  thousands  of  unemployed
hungry, former soldiers roam around. The welfare of veterans should  not  be
left to the sole attention of the DoD. It was in recognition  of  this  that
Minister Ronnie Kasrils and I jointly launched Operation Vuselela.
Previously, I have spoken about  the  importance  of  developing  a  common,
national  military  heritage  which  integrates  struggle   and   resistance
history. To this end we have engaged the Directorate  on  Military  Veterans
Affairs in discussion with  the  Freedom  Park  Board.  We  thank  Dr  Wally
Serote, the Freedom Park Board and the Department of Arts  and  Culture  for
their continued support. The  preparations  are  under  way  for  the  World
Congress of Military Veterans which  will  take  place  in  Johannesburg  in
December this year. This will be the first time  the  congress  is  held  in
Africa  and  will  provide  an  excellent  opportunity  for  former  African
soldiers to meet and put their issues on the agenda.

The Government is aware of the shortcomings  of  the  pensions  dispensation
for former  nonstatutory  force  members.  As  announced  by  Treasury,  the
Special Pensions Act  of  1996  will  be  amended  shortly  to  rectify  the
discrepancies. It is expected that this process  will  be  finalised  before
the end of this parliamentary session.

The SANDF continues to be involved in the fight against Cholera and  Malaria
in South Africa and in SADC. SAHMS  was  a  key  participant  in  the  Rally
Against Malaria organised under the leadership of the  Minister  of  Health.
The SANDF helped to construct the temporary bridge on the South Coast  after
it was bombed  allegedly  by  the  Boeremag.  The  SANDF  has  continued  to
contribute to internal peace and stability.

I come now to HIV/Aids. HIV poses a special challenge for the DoD  from  the
point of view that the bulk of its personnel fall  in  the  most  vulnerable
social group of the young, highly mobile and sexually active.  The  risk  of
defence personnel on external deployment  is  heightened  by  long  absences
from home. This necessitates more extensive training for our soldiers  about
the issues surrounding the virus before deployment. The DoD has  intensified
its efforts  to  fight  HIV/Aids  through  the  Masibambisane  Campaign.  An
advisor on HIV/Aids was appointed in the Ministry of  Defence.  A  total  of
R4,6 million was spent on the campaign and 71% of the staff of the  DoD  was
exposed to the Masibambisane Campaign. However, we are aware  that  we  have
to pay increasing attention to  this  and  the  Inspector  General  will  be
looking at auditing our programmes to see their effectiveness.

Let me end by saying that in marking the significance of the youth,  I  have
invited my niece who is in the gallery, Sanelisiwe Mtshali, a Grade 9  pupil
at my old school Inanda Seminary in Durban. Inanda  Seminary  produces  many
leaders including among others our  Deputy  Speaker  Ms  Baleka  Mbete.  The
school's motto is: ``Shine where you  are.''  The  Government  is  directing
policy and resources to enable our youth to excel. I call our youth  in  and
out of uniform to shine where you are.

Mayihlome  ihlasele.  Masilwe  nobuphofu   nendlala.   Masilwe   nengqulaza,
ukunukubekwa kwezingane kanye nokudlwengulwa kwabesifazane. Ikusasa  lentsha
lisezandleni zayo. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]  [Attack!  Let  us  fight  against
poverty and hunger. Let us fight HIV/Aids,  child  abuse  and  the  rape  of
women. The future of the youth is in their hands. Thank you. [Applause.]]
Mr J SCHIPPERS:  Chairperson,  the  Defence  Budget  framework  indicates  a
growth in all the programmes, except for landward defence that  registers  a
decline of 4,4%. Given the fact that South Africa does not have a  huge  air
or maritime defence capability, I do  not  think  we  must  scale  down  our
landward defence.

Our defence capability must be  our  best  deterrent  to  any  aggressor.  A
vibrant defence strategy can also be a vehicle to develop and transform  our
country and its people. That is why the Defence Budget supports  key  issues
such as health care,  land  restitution,  skills  development,  and  foreign
representation.

Die algemene verkiesing van 2004 is om die draai  en  dit  is  nie  om  dowe
neute dat die wapenverslag weer soveel prominensie kry  nie.  Die  ondersoek
na die wapenverslag word deurlopend deur die DA  bevraagteken.  Ek  wil  met
die agb heer Beukman saamstem as hy sê dat  die  groot  dilemma  in  hierdie
saga is dat LP's met 'n politieke opdrag  na  Skoor  kom  en  dit  bemoeilik
vordering. Vir die agb heer gaan dit in die eerste plek oor die belange  van
Suid-Afrika.

Die Portefeuljekomitee oor Verdediging moet 'n toesighoudende rol  speel  om
toe te sien dat  die  veelbesproke  wapens  gelewer  word.  (Translation  of
Afrikaans paragraph follows).

[Chairperson, the general election of 2004 is around the corner  and  it  is
not  for  no  reason  that  the  weapons  report  once  again  features   so
prominently.  The  DA  continually  questions  the  investigation  into  the
weapons report. I want to agree with the hon Mr Beukman when  he  says  that
the big dilemma in this saga is that MPs approach  Scopa  with  a  political
brief and that impedes progress. The hon member is primarily concerned  with
the interests of South Africa. The Portfolio Committee on Defence must  play
a supervisory role to ensure the delivery of the much-talked-of weapons.]

Chairperson, for any country participation in  peace  missions  comes  at  a
price. There is the direct cost.  This  includes  the  potentially  lifelong
psychological scarring that goes with exposure  to  situations  of  genocide
and massacre. The constitutional purpose of the Defence Force is  to  defend
and protect the Republic of South Africa. The question, however  is  whether
participation in peace missions serve our nation's interests. The link  with
national interests is the  effect  on  the  economy  of  the  subregion  and
therefore on South Africa's peace, stability, development and growth.

The SA National Defence Force formulated the one-force policy in  which  the
regular force and the reserve force comprise one force for  the  defence  of
South Africa. The two components are therefore complementary  and  essential
partners in our defence capability.

There are thousands of disillusioned and dissatisfied  members  of  the  old
Cape Corps in South  Africa  who  did  not  benefit  from  the  transitional
agreement at Kempton Park. Some of them have started  their  own  fraudulent
schemes in which they promise unsuspecting old  members  large  payments  if
they join their particular venture. There were statements by the New  NP  in
this regard. These schemes impoverish our people even  further  because  the
members must contribute on a monthly basis  in  order  to  qualify  for  the
payouts. I encountered this in my constituency and  discussed  it  with  the
responsible military people. I  am  glad  that  the  Reserve  Force  Council
embarked on a process to get all dissatisfied ex-members of the  Cape  Corps
on board and to engage them in a peaceful settlement.

Mediaberigte van gister wil hê dat 1 Militêre Hospitaal buite Pretoria  dalk
moet sluit. Dis is  as  gevolg  van  'n  brandinspeksie  deur  die  Tshwane-
munisipaliteit. Die feit dat só 'n toestand kon ontstaan, moet  bevraagteken
word. Daar is standaardprosedures wat dit kon verhoed.

Die betrokke hospitaal het in die verlede wondere verrig en met die  jongste
mediese tegnologie tot sy beskikking, kan  hy  in  die  toekoms  nog  groter
mylpale bereik. Ons doen 'n beroep op die Minister van  Verdediging  en  die
Geneesheer-generaal, om alles moontlik te  doen  om  die  hospitaal  tot  sy
volle glorie te herstel tot voordeel van alle Suid-Afrikaners.  (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[According to yesterday's newspaper  reports  1  Military  Hospital  outside
Pretoria will probably have to close. This  stems  from  a  fire  inspection
made by the Tshwane Municipality. The  fact  that  such  a  situation  could
arise must be questioned. Existing standard procedures could have  prevented
it.

The hospital concerned worked wonders  in  the  past  and  with  the  latest
medical technology at its disposal, can reach  even  greater  milestones  in
future. We call on the Minister of Defence and the Physician-General  to  do
everything in their power to restore the hospital to  its  former  glory  to
the advantage of all South Africans.]

Following the announcement by President Mbeki in his  state  of  the  nation
address that attention would be given this year to phasing out the  commando
system and the creation of a new system, there was  much  concern  expressed
about the need to avoid a security vacuum in the rural areas.

After extensive research and  consultation  the  New  NP  launched  its  own
policy proposal  document  on  the  transformation  of  the  commandos.  The
existing commando system has been a semipermanent use of a  purely  military
organisation mainly for nonmilitary tasks.  For  almost  two  decades,  this
unusual  situation  has  continued  because  it  was  both  inexpensive  and
convenient. The commandos achieved many notable successes, because  in  2001
alone more than 80 000 area actions were carried out including, inter  alia,
air and vehicle patrols, road blocks, manning  of  vehicle  control  points,
farm visits and border listening posts.

In sommige dele van Suid-Afrika bestaan daar  nou  egter  'n  opvatting  dat
kommando's 'n oorblyfsel uit ons verdeelde verlede is en  dat  hulle  optree
as agente van verdeling. Hierdie negatiewe  persepsie  moet  aangepak  word,
derhalwe wil die Nuwe NP 'n nuwe entiteit voorstel.

Die Nuwe NP glo dat  'n  koste-effektiewe  en  onmiddellik  implementeerbare
alternatief  stelselmatig  oor  ses  jaar  ingefaseer  kan   word   om   die
kommandostelsel  te  vervang.  Dit  moet   'n   dubbeldoelige   paramilitêre
patrolliemag wees wat 'n geskikte naam moet kry. Ons dink aan  Konstabelary,
ons dink aan Inkonkoni, ons dink aan Khusela Isizwe en nog  ander  name.  Só
'n naam moet die patrolliemag simboliseer.

Een van die sterkste argumente vir so 'n mag is dat  dit  nie  die  werklike
legitieme  kommer  opper  van  'n  langtermyn-  militêre   ontplooiing   ter
ondersteuning  van  die  burgerlike  regering  nie.  Voorbeelde  van  só  'n
patrolliemag  word  gevind  in  lande  soos  Nederland,  Italië,  België  en
Frankryk.

So 'n mag moet 'n vredesrol en 'n oorlogsrol vervul.  Sy  vredesfunksie  sal
tipies fokus op  die  beskerming  en  ondersteuning  van  gemeenskappe  deur
misdaadvoorkomingspatrollies, padblokkades, teen-dwelmoperasies,  skare-  of
optogbeheer, grensbeheer en eerstefase-rampbestuur.

Ten tyde van  oorlog  of  ernstige  noodgevalle  kan  die  mag  met  die  SA
Nasionale Weermag integreer om bystand te verleen  aan  interne  sekuriteit,
sleutelarea-beskerming,   grensbeheer   en   die   beveiliging    van    die
agtergevegsterrein, die  sogenaamde "rear-area patrol".  Ander  kenmerke  is
dat dit 'n mobiele, lig gewapende  patrolliemag  moet  wees,  bestaande  uit
beide voltydse  en  deeltydse  elemente  van  die  territoriale  reserwemag.
Getalsgewys kan dit bestaan uit 20 000 voltydse en 100 000 deeltydse lede.

Die bevelsorde op die nasionale vlak sal begin by  'n  aparte  agentskap  in
die Departement van Verdediging, wat  onder  'n  toegewyde  adjunkdirekteur-
generaal staan met twee hoofdirekteure. Die bevelsorde  moet  direk  verslag
doen aan die Minister van Verdediging.

Die Nuwe NP stel voor  dat  die  finansiering  op  twee  primêre  wyses  kan
geskied:  'n  Spesiale  toedeling  uit  staatsfinansiering;  'n  aansienlike
toedeling uit die winste van die staatslotery. Dit is  maklik  regverdigbaar
omdat die toepassing van wet en orde  fundamenteel  is  vir  die  behoud  en
beskerming van die sosiale welsyn wat bereik is deur ander uitbetalings.

Ten slotte, Voorsitter, die idee van die kommando het sy oorsprong in  Suid-
Afrika. Dit het 'n lang geskiedenis van militêre  en  kulturele  innovering,
primêr gebaseer op die integrasie van  Khoi  militêre  taktiek  en  van  die
Nederlandse Oos-Indiese Kompanjie. Dit is 'n konsep wat aanvaarbaar  is  vir
die Griekwa, die Namakwa, die Afrikaner, die Basoeto, en die  Xhosa.  Só  'n
mag kan ook sy eie identifiseerbare uniform hê.  (Translation  of  Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[However, in some parts  of  South  Africa  a  perception  now  exists  that
commandos are a remnant of our divided past acting as  agents  of  division.
This negative perception must be addressed  and  that  is  why  the  New  NP
wishes to propose a new entity.

The New NP believes that  a  cost-effective  and  immediately  implementable
alternative can be gradually phased in over a period of six years  in  order
to replace the commando system.  It  must  be  a  dual-purpose  paramilitary
patrol force which must be given a suitable name. We are thinking  of  names
such as ``constabulary'',  ``Inkonkoni'',  ``Khusela  Isizwe''  and  others.
Such a name must symbolise the patrol force.

One of the strongest arguments for such a force is that it  does  not  raise
the very legitimate concern of a long-term military  deployment  in  support
of a civilian government. Examples of this  type  of  patrol  force  can  be
found in countries such as the Netherlands, Italy, Belgium and France.

Such a force must fulfil a role in times of peace and of war. Its  peacetime
function will typically focus on protecting and  supporting  communities  by
way of crime prevention patrols, roadblocks, antidrug operations,  crowd  or
riot control, border control and first-phase disaster management.

In times of war or grave emergency the force  can  be  integrated  with  the
South African National Defence Force to assist with internal security,  key-
point protection, border control and securing the rear-battle area, the  so-
called "rear-area patrol". Other features are that  it  must  be  a  mobile,
lightly-armed  patrol  force,  comprising  both  full-time   and   part-time
elements of the territorial reserves. As far as numbers  are  concerned,  it
could comprise 20 000 full-time members and 100 000 part-time members.

The national-level chain of command would start at a separate agency in  the
Department  of  Defence,  headed  by  a  dedicated  deputy  director-general
assisted by two chief directors,  reporting  directly  to  the  Minister  of
Defence.

The New NP proposes that funding take place in two primary ways:  a  special
allocation of state funding and a substantial allocation  from  the  profits
of the National Lottery. This is easily justifiable because the  enforcement
of law and order is fundamental to upholding and protecting the social  good
achieved by the other pay-outs made.

Finally, the idea of a commando originated in South Africa. It  has  a  long
history  of  military  and  cultural  innovation,  based  primarily  on   an
integration of Khoi military tactics and  those  of  the  Dutch  East  India
Company. It is a concept which was embraced by the Griqua, the Namaqua,  the
Afrikaner, the BaSotho and the Xhosa. Such a force can  also  have  its  own
identifiable uniform.]

Chairperson,  we  will  discuss  this  proposal  with   all   the   relevant
stakeholders and come forward with a final document.  The  New  NP  supports
this Budget Vote. I thank you.

Mr S B NTULI: Viva June 16, Viva!

Hon MEMBERS: Viva!

Mr S B NTULI: Chairperson, Minister of  Defence  Mosiuoa  Lekota  and  other
Ministers, members of the gallery and hon members, as we are  in  the  month
of June allow me also to pay tribute to the youth of South Africa  who  fell
in the hands of the apartheid regime and the remnants of  colonialism.  They
fell in pursuance  of  the  liberation  of  South  Africa,  challenging  the
effects of separate development policies; fighting  for  liberation  against
the imposition of Afrikaans as a medium of  instruction;  fighting  for  the
establishment  of  the  democratic  student  representative  councils,   and
fighting  against  playing  apartheid  sports  so  that  apartheid  and  its
structures of joint management councils, notoriously known  as  JMCs  became
isolated.

To mention a few of these students: Paul Shabangu of  Emngwenya  College  of
Education who was a student teacher killed by the enemy along the  Swaziland
border in 1988 together with three  other  colleagues;  Hendrick  Nkuna  was
brutally killed by the apartheid regime in 1984 at the  then  Mabopane  East
Technikon, now the Northern Gauteng Technikon; Thabo Makoela was one of  the
high school students of Soshanguvhe killed by the police in 1985 - he was  a
Cosas member; Emma Sathekge, a child killed by the police while  playing  at
her home in Atteridgeville in 1983; Bheki Mlangeni was a  Wits  law  student
blown up by the enemy with a hearing device bomb -  he  was  also  an  Azaso
member; Onkgopotse Abram Tiro, a former Turfloop student was also killed  in
1974; The Ongoye  Massacre  of  1983;  the  Modjadji  College  of  Education
Massacre which also left some students dead. The list is endless.

As we celebrate youth month, all  the  youths  who  laid  down  their  lives
should remind us of where we come from and inspire us  as  comrade  students
of today and leaders of this country; and also remind us about the  struggle
for the total liberation of our country politically, economically,  socially
and otherwise which  has  still  to  be  achieved  fully.  Again  to  remind
ourselves, Azaso adopted the Freedom Charter in  1981  at  the  congress  at
Hammanskraal and subsequently changed its  name  from  Azaso  to  the  South
African National Students Congress, my alma mater.

Coming to the defence budget, we as the ANC once more  wish  to  acknowledge
our leaders for the political role they played in leading the  country  into
Codesa 1 and 2 and ushering in a new democracy we all enjoy  today.  It  was
not an easy path yet South Africa chose it. Following  the  1994  democratic
breakthrough, the apartheid political system  and  its  effects  were  being
gradually demolished and the work begun to establish a new democratic  order
as we  embodied  in  our  Constitution,  Act  108  of  1996.  Militarily  we
undertook to set up a military/civic education programme,  in  view  of  the
different armed forces: the liberation movements characterised  by  Umkhonto
weSizwe and the Azanian Peoples Liberation Army;  the  statutory  forces  of
the old apartheid regime and its Bantustan armies  of  the  SADF;  the  TBVC
states and the Inkatha military wing.

A military/civic education programme was developed  with  the  objective  of
instilling respect among members and employees of the defence regarding  the
values  of  the  new  democratic  South  Africa  we  wanted.  Military/civic
education is meant to provide appropriate education and training  on  values
such as respect for human rights, the rights and  duties  of  soldiers,  the
rule of law, political  nonpartisanship,  nondiscrimination,  nonsexism  and
most importantly the civil supremacy over the armed forces.

Chairperson, hon members, I wish to inform  this  august  House  about  what
constitutes the curriculum of the  military/civic  education  programme.  It
outlines the  features  of  the  democratic  and  political  processes;  the
historical background process that resulted in the political liberation  and
the beginning of the layout of the foundation  for  the  democratisation  of
our single SA National Defence Force; orientation about the SA  Constitution
and  the  Bill  of  Rights;  the  civil/military   relations   issues;   the
international humanitarian law dealing with  matters  such  as  the  law  of
conflict, the respect for cultural diversity  and  military  professionalism
in a democracy.

Hon Minister, we commend your department for coming up with this  curriculum
for it lives up to  the  aspirations  of  the  people  of  South  Africa  as
enshrined in the Freedom Charter. There are also other issues  that  today's
budget should cater for. The military  ombudsperson  is  one  of  them.  The
White Paper on Defence states:


  The military ombudsperson's duty among others  would  be  to  investigate
  complaints against the SANDF by military personnel. It is envisaged  that
  the ombudsperson will address any military personnel matters which cannot
  be resolved through other existing mechanisms.

This office needs to provide  an  oversight  role  over  the  Department  of
Defence and the SANDF as a whole. Therefore hon Minister, the  staffing  and
profiling of this office needs to be looked into. This office  needs  to  be
accessible to the ordinary men and women of the service. Violation of  human
rights, acts of power abuse by those in authority and  the  neglect  of  law
and labour law within the military establishment constitute  a  plethora  of
issues within the scope of the  military  ombudsperson's  office.  Yet  this
office is not popularly known among ordinary members of the SANDF.

Civic education programmes should  be  accessible  to  all  members  of  the
defence right from the chief of staff  through  to  the  senior  and  middle
management  of  command  down  to  the  lance  corporal;  from  generals  to
noncommissioned officers. Military/civic education plays a pivotal  role  in
the transformation of the SA National Defence Force  because  an  uninformed
soldier is as dangerous as the enemy itself.  Therefore  a  civic  education
programme  within  the  Defence  Force  constitutes  a   fundamental   basic
foundation for the military establishment. It was not an error that the  ANC
during the crafting of the Freedom Charter in 1955, among other  things,  in
clause 8 stated that the doors of learning and  culture  shall  be  open  to
all. This clause signifies the seriousness with  which  the  ANC  views  the
importance of education in a society. Since then it has strived  to  educate
our society, hence the relevance and the importance  of  the  military/civic
education programme for men and women in the SANDF in  particular,  and  the
members of the Department of Defence in general.

I therefore repeat: An uninformed soldier  is  as  dangerous  as  the  enemy
itself. Every soldier must know and understand why he or she is trained  and
when required he or she is sent to operations. He  must  be  convinced  that
his  mission  is  politically  necessary,  politically  correct,  militarily
sensible and morally sound. Hon Minister we agree with your department  that
whereas the programme appears  to  have  at  first  been  designed  for  the
integration of different forces into one, in actual fact it requires  to  be
continued for the new recruits and  aspirant  members  of  the  SA  National
Defence Force.

As South Africa is part of the African continent we are also called upon  by
the African Union to throw our weight behind Nepad. The New Partnership  for
Africa's Development poses various challenges. For  instance,  according  to
article 4 on the Principles and Functions of the  Constitutive  Act  of  the
African Union among other things, the union calls upon the member states  to
establish a common defence policy  for  the  African  continent  for  member
states to function with respect for  democratic  principles,  human  rights,
the rule of law and good governance. Therefore  it  behoves  our  forces  to
understand and internalise this.

Last but not least, I wish to show appreciation of the DoD's preparation  of
the members of the Service Corps for the life beyond the  full-time  service
period on the SANDF - the strategy of the Service Corps follows  a  two-path
parallel approach. Lastly, we also wish to thank the reserve forces  in  all
the arms of service for the unrelenting efforts when they are  being  called
and that they respond to the call. And lastly  I  wish  to  thank  you  all.
[Applause.]

Mnr A BLAAS: Blommetjie, jy raas. Stilte! Agb Minister, die  ACDP  gaan  jou
begroting ondersteun. Ek onderskryf heelhartig die kommer  wat  uitgelig  is
deur die agb Thandi Modise en meer. Ek dink daar is sekere sake  wat  aandag
moet  kry  en  sy  het  dit  baie  goed   beskryf.   Die   tekort   op   die
bedryfsbegroting is volledig gedokumenteer en gemotiveer.

Agb Minister, jy sal baie fermer standpunt moet  inneem  om  meer  geld  vir
hierdie doel te bekom,  óf  ons  sal  moet  kyk  na  die  tydskale  vir  die
implementering van van die ander beleidsdoelwitte, anders gaan ons nie  baie
strategiese doelwitte bereik nie.

Ek fokus vinnig op 'n paar aspekte van die reserwemag  -  wat  'n  integrale
deel van die weermag is. Erkenning word gegee aan  die  uitstaande  werk  in
die afgelope 12 maande deur  leiersgroepe  van  die  reserwemagte.  Ons  sal
egter vir hulle geld moet gee om hierdie planne uit  te  voer,  anders  gaan
ons hulle en die weermag  in  die  steek  laat.  (Translation  of  Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A BLAAS: Blommetjie [little flower], you are making a noise. Quiet!  Hon
Minister, the ACDP will support your Budget. I  wholeheartedly  support  the
concern that was raised by the hon Thandi Modise and others.  I  think  that
there are certain issues that should receive attention,  and  she  described
them very well. The deficit of the operational budget  is  fully  documented
and motivated.

Hon Minister, you will have to take a  much  firmer  position  in  order  to
obtain more money for  this  purpose,  or  we  will  have  to  look  at  the
timeframes for the  implementation  of  some  of  the  other  policy  goals,
otherwise we will not achieve very strategic goals.

I shall quickly focus on a few aspects of the reserve forces, which  are  an
integral part of the defence force. Acknowledgement should be given  to  the
outstanding work performed during the past 12 months  by  leader  groups  of
the reserve forces. However, we will have to  give  them  money  to  execute
these plans, otherwise we will be letting them and the Defence Force down.]

Sir,  chaos  is  developing  around  the  phasing  out  of  the   commandos,
notwithstanding the undertakings given by the President  and  the  Minister.
Various people  are  creating  uncertainty  and  disillusionment  by  making
conflicting  statements.  The  latest  is  the  wisdom   of   the   National
Commissioner of Police.

I would appreciate the Minister's views on  this.  He  says,  amongst  other
things that commandos had their own structures and that they were  under  no
one's command, and that this is not acceptable to the police. The units  are
no longer part of the doctrine of the South African National  Defence  Force
and are not in the army's force design. He also says some other things.

What a distorted perception and an irresponsible public statement  to  make.
He should rather focus  on  staffing  and  empowering  his  own  structures,
including  the  establishment  of  a  reliable  and   deployable   reservist
component. Instead, he flutters around like a cat on a  hot  tin  roof,  not
sure where  this  responsibility  should  vest  -  with  either  the  sector
policing, special units or with reservists. He should pay  for  the  defence
support, then he may appreciate what it is worth to him.

Phasing out the commandos, not debating its merits,  is  a  sensitive  issue
that must be thoroughly managed to prevent it from exploding in  our  faces,
leaving us with a security vacuum in the rural areas.  And  it  is  not  for
white farmers alone. These men, 60% of whom are black members, render  their
services to the deep rural areas with their own specific problems.

Referring to the conventional reserves, we have a  five-year  window  period
to save these units. Only leader groups were maintained and limited  intakes
were trained. The age profile will make them redundant within five to  eight
years. It takes us seven years to put down an infantry company commander  on
the ground. We must address this, otherwise the conventional  reserves  will
fall away.

Minister, together we must face realities and ensure that what  is  required
to defend our country stays intact and is sustainable. We should  not  allow
the outstanding work done by dedicated members of the  SA  National  Defence
Force to be in vain. [Time expired.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, as 'n mens deesdae  iets  lees  van  die
weermaglees, is dit  negatief  en  sleg.  As  dit  nie  die  spook  van  die
wapenskandaal is nie, dan is dit die swak gedrag en/of optrede van manne  en
vroue in uniform. Die ruggraat van  die  weermag  was  nog  altyd  die  leër
gewees. Die werklikheid is dat die leër op die oomblik die afdeling  in  die
weermag is wat die swakste is.

In die media moet ons lees van 'n infanteriesoldaat wat 'n  teiken  op  drie
meter net eenkeer uit 200 skote tref. Op 'n amptelike vraag van my  aan  die
agb Minister bevestig die Minister die geval.  Sy  verduideliking  is  egter
dat dit 'n eksperiment was wat 24 uur opleiding ingesluit het.

Ek wil vir die agb Minister sê: As 'n infanteris  na  24  uur  opleiding  'n
teiken op drie meter net eenkeer tref uit 200 skote, getuig dit  van  totale
onbeholpenheid en swak opleiding en -vermoë. Ek stel voor die  agb  Minister
begin die troepe eerder oplei in klipgooi en  slingervel.  Dalk  tref  hulle
die teiken beter. [Gelag.] 'n Verdere onsteltenis in die  leër  is  dat  72%
van sy begroting aan personeel spandeer word. Dit is  geen  wonder  daar  is
nie geld vir behoorlike opleiding nie.
Nog 'n probleem  is  dat  die  gemiddelde  ouderdom  van  jou  gevegstroepe,
volgens wêreldstandaarde, ongeveer 21 jaar moet wees. In Suid-Afrika is  die
gemiddelde ouderdom bo 35. En die rede? Dit is weens  die  integrasieproses.
Dit is die verduideliking wat gegee is en dan  moet  ons  egter  eerlik  met
mekaar wees en erken dat die integrasieproses nie so suksesvol  was  as  wat
algemeen verkondig en gesê word nie.

'n Verdere groot bron van kommer in die leër is dat  ongeveer  25%  van  ons
infanterie-eenhede se gevegsgereedheid minder  as  50%  is.  Daar  is  selfs
eenhede wat maar om en by 20% gevegsgereed is. Ek moet vir die agb  Minister
sê, dit getuig net van een ding - swak dissipline en swak bevel en beheer.

Ek wil onomwonde vir die agb Minister sê: Die Suid-Afrikaanse leër maak  ons
hele weermag 'n flentergat weermag, en die  agb  Minister  sal  vinnig  moet
optree. Die agb Minister het meer as 80% van  sy  toespraak  vanoggend  hier
gewy aan die weermag se betrokkendheid in Afrika en  selfs  aangekondig  dat
die Regering besluit het om progressief die weermag se betrokkenheid in  ons
land af te skaal oor die volgende  vyf  jaar  sodat  die  bronne  beskikbaar
gestel kan word vir vredesendings in Afrika.

Die agb Minister sê eintlik vir ons dat Afrika nou belangriker  is  vir  die
weermag as Suid-Afrika.  Ek  wil  vir  die  agb  Minister  en  die  regering
waarsku: Pasop dat die Kongo en ander dele van  Afrika  nie  Suid-Afrika  se
Viëtnam word nie.

Dit bring my by die kommando's. Die binnelandse afskaling  van  die  weermag
verskaf 'n goeie rede hoekom die kommado's eintlik nou uitgebrei behoort  te
word. Die uitfasering van die kommando's is verkeerd en  is  'n  strategiese
fout. Die koste verbonde aan die  kommando's  is  omtrent  R110 miljoen  per
jaar. [Tussenwerpsels] 'n Goedkoop prys vir landelike beveiliging,  maar  bo
alles 'n goedkoop prys vir 'n mag om op terug te val.

Dit is die kommando's wat ingeroep word as daar  gehelp  moet  word  by  die
Wêreldbekerkrieket, dit is die kommando's wat ingeroep word as  daar  gehelp
moet  word  by  internasionale  konferensies.  (Translation   of   Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, whenever one reads something about  the
Defence Force these days it is negative and bad. If it's not  the  ghost  of
the arms scandal, then it is the bad behaviour and/or  actions  of  men  and
women in uniform. The backbone of the Defence  Force  has  always  been  the
army. The reality is that at this moment the army is  the  weakest  division
in the Defence Force.

We had to read in the media of an infantry soldier who only  hits  a  target
at three metres once out of every 200 shots. After an official question  put
by me the Minister confirmed the case. His explanation is, however, that  it
was an experiment which included only 24 hours of training.

 I want to say to the hon Minister that when an infantry man  cannot  hit  a
target at three metres after 24 hours of training, it is evidence  of  total
incapability and poor training and ability. I suggest that the hon  Minister
instead trains the troops in  stone-throwing  and  catapult-slinging.  Maybe
then they will hit the target better. [Laughter.] A further concern  in  the
army is that 72% of its budget is spent on personnel. It is no wonder  there
is no money for proper training.

Yet another problem is that according to world standards the average age  of
your fighting troops should be approximately 21 years. The  average  age  in
South Africa is above 35.  And  the  reason?  It  is  as  a  result  of  the
integration process. This is the explanation that was given and however,  we
must, be honest with one another and admit that the integration process  was
not as successful as it was generally proclaimed and said to be.

Another major source of concern in the army is that the battle readiness  of
25% of our infantry units is less than 50%. There are even  units  that  are
only about 20% prepared for battle. I must say to the hon Minister, this  is
evident of only one thing - poor discipline and  poor  command  and  command
control.

I unequivocally want to say to the hon Minister that the South African  army
makes the whole Defence Force appear shabby, and the hon Minister will  have
to act quickly. The hon Minister has dedicated more than 80% of  his  speech
here to the involvement of the Defence Force in Africa  and  even  announced
that the Government has decided progressively to scale down the  involvement
of the Defence Force in our country over the next five  years  in  order  to
make our resources available for peace missions in Africa.

The hon Minister is really saying that Africa is more important  than  South
Africa to the Defence Force. I  want  to  warn  the  hon  Minister  and  the
Government: Be careful that the Congo and  other  parts  of  Africa  do  not
become the Vietnam of South Africa.

This brings me to the commandos. The scaling down of  the  domestic  Defence
Force provides a good reason for why the commandos should  actually  now  be
expanded. The phasing out of the commandos is wrong and a  strategic  error.
The costs attached to  the  commandos  are  about  R110  million  per  year.
[Interjections.] It is a cheap price to pay for  safeguarding  rural  areas,
but above all a cheap price to pay for having a force to fall back on.

It is the commandos that are called up when assistance is  required  at  the
Cricket World Cup. It is the commandos that are called  up  when  assistance
is required at international conferences.]

What are the reasons, according to  the  Minister,  for  abolishing  of  the
commandos: ``Commandos  are  white  structures  who  operate  against  black
people, therefore they are to be abolished''.

I want to say to the hon  Minister:  Since  1996,  the  commandos  conducted
about 260 000 actions.  These  were  actions  like  road-blocks  and  search
operations. In the seven years  since  1996  only  30  criminal  cases  were
opened against members of the  commandos  after  such  operations.  In  only
three of these cases were the culprits found guilty.

These figures must be compared to the cases of racism in the  Defence  Force
as a whole, like the murders at the Tempe base and similar incidents in  the
police. The Defence Force and the police  were  not  abolished  after  those
incidents.

Ek wil vir die agb Minister sê die kritiek teen die kommando's is  onbillik,
onregverdig en ongevraagd. Dit is lede wat 'n diens  aan  Suid-Afrika  lewer
en wat gesteun behoort te word. Dit is lede wat ook misdaad  in  Suid-Afrika
bekamp. Dankie,  Voorsitter.  [Tyd  verstreke.]  (Translation  of  Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[I would like to say to the hon Minister  that  the  criticism  against  the
commandos is unfair and uncalled  for.  These  are  members  who  deliver  a
service to South Africa and should be supported. These are members who  also
combat crime in South Africa. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]]

Mr L N DIALE: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson and  hon  Minister  of  Defence,
Comrade Mosiuoa Lekota. I want to acknowledge the presence of  our  glorious
army, the SA National Defence Force. [Applause.]

 Ke leboga go tšeya karolo mo ngangišanong ye  ya  Sekhwama  sa  Masole.  [I
have pleasure in participating in this Defence Vote.]

Deputy Chairperson, in many countries across the globe  the  social  welfare
and care of those who served their countries  during  times  of  strife  and
conflict  have  been  the  responsibility  of  the  state.  The  nature   of
assistance given to  war  veterans  has  taken  on  various  forms  such  as
pensions, education, medical care and employment opportunities.

Let me emphasise the challenges facing our own SA  National  Defence  Force.
Over the past eight years, the SA  National  Defence  Force  has  set  about
trying to build an integrated Defence Force,  a  new  military  culture  and
policies appropriate to democratic society.

One of the crucial challenges of our democracy was the integration of  seven
different military formations into  a  single  SA  National  Defence  Force,
representative of the demographics  of  the  country.  It  also  meant  that
training had to be uniform,  with  a  code  of  conduct  and  uniformity  of
purpose. The process of demobilisation was, to some extent,  dependent  upon
whether force members were able to reintegrate  successfully  into  society.
It has to be noted though that former combatants have enormous  difficulties
in finding employment because of lack of  skills  and  education,  or  as  a
result of ill-health and psychological problems.

I would like to remind this august House that whilst we all, both black  and
white, fought for bringing about the political liberation  of  this  country
there is a component of combatants within our society which  played  a  more
significant role - the soldiers. These soldiers, many of whom  were  serving
in the SANDF as well as those who have been integrated from  the  liberation
movements, namely Umkhonto weSizwe and  the  Azanian  Peoples  Organisation,
have since resigned or have been demobilised. However, I would like to  make
a special plea  to  all  who  sit  here  today,  and  those  South  Africans
listening, that we should consider these  men  and  women,  lest  we  forget
their contributions.  Can  we  acknowledge  via  the  Defence  Budget  their
sacrifices and their commitment to the people of this country?

The ANC's 51st National Conference held last December resolved as follows:


  That  urgent  attention  be  paid  to  the  reskilling,  development  and
  integration into society of ex-combatants of the liberation struggle, ex-
  SADF and ex-SANDF personnel, veterans and the  youth  on  a  multipronged
  basis involving relevant departments and stakeholders in civil society.


  That there is a need to explore the extension of medical services through
  South African Military Health Services to members  of  former  liberation
  forces and to expedite the implementation of laws enacted  to  facilitate
  access to pensions for the nonstatutory forces' members.

I need to  remind  this  House  that,  as  liberation  forces  fighting  and
engaging the oppressor, many combatants were denied  the  basic  necessities
such as medical aid. Many of these selfless soldiers were  spread  all  over
the country and the continent, and some were even  abroad  fighting  in  the
trenches; fighting for freedom and for the total liberation of  our  country
from the injustices of apartheid.

Today we rejoice in our liberation  and  freedom.  However,  this  rejoicing
comes at a price. Many of these selfless combatants are  currently  homeless
people without the necessary shelter of  a  home  or  the  necessary  health
services such  as  medical  aid.  Presently,  no  organised  social  welfare
services are rendered to the former members of nonstatutory forces. This  is
because they have no fixed place of abode  and  do  not  have  a  source  of
income since the Special Pensions Act only caters for those who are over  60
years of age.

Hon Minister and hon members,  surely,  such  a  situation  demands  that  a
comprehensive and needs-driven service is rendered  to  former  nonstatutory
forces  veterans.  We  appear  to  be  lagging  behind  in  fulfilling   the
resolutions adopted at the ANC National Conference in Stellenbosch.

Another crucial issue I wish to highlight is that  of  the  special  pension
for nonstatutory forces. Once more, we commend this Parliament  for  passing
the Special Pensions Act of 1996, which provides for pensions to be paid  to
ex-combatants, activists of the anti-apartheid liberation struggle. The  aim
was to provide some compensation to those who fought against  apartheid  and
who were unable to make adequate pension provision.  It  is  essential  that
these pension payouts take into account not only  the  service  period  when
these combatants joined the SA National Defence Force in 1994, but also  for
the  period  when  these  combatants  joined  their  respective   liberation
movements.

 Hon Minister, a question that needs  to  be  asked  in  the  light  of  the
serious circumstances facing many former combatants is this: Why should  the
members who need the money now wait until  they  are  60  years  of  age  to
access it? Why can't they receive the money now to invest it  as  they  deem
fit? There needs to be a better understanding of the  plight  and  needs  of
veterans. The argument goes that many  MK  military  veterans  are  men  and
women who were prepared to fight to their death for the liberation of  their
country. The Government and communities have therefore to ensure that  these
heroes and heroines receive the care, support and  appreciation  which  they
have earned in their service to this country.

In keeping with this need to redress past injustices,  may  we  in  the  ANC
commend the Cabinet's decision on the approval of South Africa as  the  next
host of the General Assembly of the World Veteran Federation to be  held  in
December 2003. It is hoped that this forum  will  enable  all  to  formulate
appropriate policies, benefits and programmes that  would  seek  to  enhance
the lives of veterans. I thank you.

Ke le leboga ka kudu. [I thank you very much.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi! [Praise  the  name  of  the
women!] Deputy Chair, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,  it  is  comforting
to note that we have a strong body of defence securing the security  of  the
South African people.

The objectives of the SANDF display this security in  marking  the  sector's
duties as being to defend against aggression, promote security  and  support
the people in South Africa in the many ways it has undertaken to do so.

The MF applauds the department for its many rescue missions, such as the 24-
day rescue mission  in  the  Antarctica  mid-last  year.  It  was,  however,
reported mid-last year that only 3 000 out of 76 000 soldiers of  the  South
African army could be deployed as many were unfit or too old and  only  four
tanks of our 168 tanks could be used  in  action.  HIV/Aids  has  also  been
reported to have infected 60% of soldiers, with seven out of ten  deaths  in
the army being Aids-related.

This is extremely distressing, noting the importance these soldiers play  in
the defence of the South  African  people.  It  is  hoped  that  the  budget
allocated to this department  for  this  financial  year  will  be  utilised
effectively to better the mentioned statistics.

Training should be intensified to ensure the fitness of our  soldiers,  with
regular medical checks. We should perhaps borrow  training  strategies  from
countries displaying a stronger defence force to do so.

It appears as if HIV/Aids has not spared any faculty. The MF feels that  the
department should embark on an initiative with the Department of  Health  to
reduce statistics of HIV/Aids  infected  soldiers.  Aids  is  weakening  our
economy, and now our Defence Force. Members of the Defence Force  should  be
motivated to manage their health and fitness effectively as their  duty  and
responsibility to the Defence Force.

Further, the air force is also reported  to  have  fuel  shortages.  The  MF
hopes that hese loopholes will be filled by the  budget  allocated  and  has
confidence in the department's commitment to  delivery.  Hon  Minister,  may
you and you department and our  Defence  Force  be  blessed  with  the  good
health and strength so that our country can be well protected. [Applause.]

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Deputy Chairperson, perhaps  one  should  start  first  and
foremost by responding to the hon Schmidt and say to him  that  with  regard
to what he has raised about the Minister, I just want to remind him for  the
record that the Minister has  appeared  before  the  ethics  committee,  has
apologised, was fined, and the matter has been concluded. It actually  shows
that he took the podium without any issue.

The ANC supports the Defence Budget Vote. At its  51st  national  conference
in Stellenbosch, the ANC reiterated its resolve for a speedy  transformation
of the state machinery, and the SANDF is key to this  project.  The  aim  of
the Department of Defence Human Resource Strategy 2010, is  to  ensure  that
the right quantities and quality of human resources  are  available  in  the
right places at the right time and that they  are  effectively,  efficiently
and economically managed and administered.

The strategic goals of the Human Resources Strategy  2010  strategy  are  to
rejuvenate the SANDF's human  resources  composition  with  young,  fit  and
healthy members who will fulfil operational utilisation  needs;  achieve  an
affordable HR composition;  adequately  resource  and  utilise  the  regular
force and the reserve force; replace the current SANDF service  system  with
a new service that will reduce  personnel  expenditure  and  optimise  force
level flexibility; improve  HR  service  delivery  and  finally  retain  the
required operational and functional expertise.

The integration of the former statutory and  nonstatutory  forces,  many  of
which were once enemies, is a  powerful  illustration  of  the  Government's
commitment to national reconciliation, unity and transformation. To be  able
to achieve this, the DoD needs funding to retrain, reorientate  and  provide
intensive bridging  and  supplementary  programmes  for  these  forces.  The
overarching goal is to establish a new institution which  is  professionally
efficient, effective and broadly representative.  Representivity  refers  to
the racial and gender composition of the army and to  the  fair  integration
and equitable representation of the constituent integration  forces  at  all
ranks.

Failure to meet this goal will critically undermine the  legitimacy  of  the
army in particular and  the  DoD  in  general.  Thus  far,  the  process  of
integration has not been easy or  without  hiccups.  Numerous  problems  and
grievances have emerged and at times have given  rise  to  serious  tension.
Many  of  these  difficulties  were  inevitable,  given  the  political  and
logistical  complexities  of  merging  forces.  Nevertheless,  the  DOD   is
committed through constructive  interventions  to  properly  manage  and  in
future prevent such tensions.

The DOD acknowledges the responsibility to  secure  the  legitimacy  of  the
armed forces and as such is committed to the goal of overcoming  the  legacy
of racial and gender discrimination. It will ensure that the army,  and  its
leadership in particular, is broadly representative  of  the  South  African
population  to  avoid  or  minimise  the  situation  where   largely   white
personnel, especially in the middle and higher ranks, are  predominantly  in
the leadership of a predominantly black and African force.

The DOD  acknowledges  the  right  of  women  to  serve  in  all  ranks  and
positions,  including  combat  roles.  To  be  able  to  achieve  the  above
responsibility, the DOD under  the  close  leadership  of  the  Minister  of
Defence has put in place programmes on education, training,  development  of
black  officers,  service,  women   and   other   previously   disadvantaged
personnel. Appropriate strategies in this regard include  special  education
and  training  courses,  career  development  plans  and  re-orientation  of
recruitment and promotion  systems.  This  is  one  area  which  needs  fast
tracking with specific reference to specialised mastering.

The  DOD  wants  its  HR  composition  to  be   competently   managed.   The
organisation and the  individual  must  have  an  HR  composition  which  is
effective,  efficient,  economical,  equitable,  motivated,  productive  and
professional. It is, therefore, developing an institutional culture  and  an
occupational ethos  based  on  professional  conduct  as  well  as  military
professionalism in  the  case  of  uniformed  personnel,  service  delivery,
individual empowerment and pride in the organisation and its common  values.
These transcend all potential historically derived from devisive factors.

The DOD recognises that its output  depends  on  the  contribution  of  each
individual as well as the collective efforts of the organisation,  therefore
individual empowerment. The  determining  factors  of  the  Defence  Force's
operational effectiveness, is that the  bulk  of  its  deployable  personnel
should be young, fit and healthy. The DOD and SANDF cannot afford  to  reach
a situation where its deployment potential is impaired as a  result  of  the
continuously increasing age of the bulk of its deployable personnel.
To address that, it  is  important  for  the  SANDF  to  continue  with  its
recruitment of young people, particularly in the range of ages 18 to  22  in
order for them to be trained and become part of the new army.  The  existing
scenario is that the army has members who - predominately are in  the  range
of 30 to 60  years  of  age.  This  implies  that  the  bulk  of  deployable
personnel are ageing.  These  age  parameters  by  far  exceed  the  optimal
international ranks age norm for lower ranks in particular.  The  effect  of
the age imbalance is that services, particularly in the South African  army,
carry  significant  numbers  whose   effective   deployment   potential   is
restricted as a result of their age.

 In 1999, the health status of the  SANDF  personnel  was  registered  as  a
strategic issue. There is a particular concern regarding the effect  of  the
HIV/Aids pandemic, most prominently, on the external  deployment  capability
of the army as well as the effect on  the  cost  escalation  of  maintaining
personnel  who  cannot  be  utilised.  The  most  immediate  health   status
challenges from the HR perspective includes the  continuous,  comprehensive,
quantification of the pandemic.

In conclusion, accordingly, the South  African  army  has  been  transformed
from the former  Big  Brother  in  the  region  and  continent  to  being  a
beachhead in  the  project  of  Africa's  regeneration.  Therefore,  its  HR
strategy has to take into cognisance this role. It is important  to  embrace
this obligation and task which goes with our positive  contribution  on  the
continent, particularly peacekeeping  efforts,  because  if  any  region  is
unstable in Africa, there will be no stability in  South  Africa.  In  fact,
our country will be forced to contend with the heavy influx of  people  from
their countries  to  ours.  Inevitably,  this  will  lead  to  unpredictable
population density in the country,  which  will  impact  negatively  on  the
reconstruction and development programme.

Mr P J  NEFOLOVHODWE:  Deputy  Chairperson,  I  remember  on  Robben  Island
sitting and talking to comrades,  who  included  the  Minister  of  Defence,
about  how,  after  liberation,  we  would  involve  ourselves  in   matters
concerning  the  African  continent   -   how   we   should   shoulder   the
responsibility of  influencing  thought  processes  to  actualise  Nkrumah's
dream of the United States of Africa.

I remember discussing sacrifices that were being  made  by  the  front  line
states, as well as the OAU, to get us free.  We  then  committed  ourselves,
body and soul, to assist with the process leading  to  the  emancipation  of
Africa. This would involve the formation of an  African  peacekeeping  force
to protect the hard-won freedom of African people.

Our Defence Force is on the road to actualising this dream. This is a  dream
of shaping a peaceful, developing  Africa  free  from  poverty,  hunger  and
conflicts. Our  Defence  Force's  involvement  in  peacekeeping  activities,
whether in Burundi or the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  has  the  utmost
blessing from AZAPO. To AZAPO, this is our duty, firstly,  to  ourselves  as
Africans, and, secondly, as human beings who  cannot  sit  back  when  other
human beings are  suffering.  [Applause.]  Needless  to  state  that  Africa
shouldered the responsibility to free us through the  OAU  Liberation  Fund.
It is indeed our turn to do those things  we  can  to  advance  the  African
agenda.

Our country has proved that it is more than ready to serve  Africa.  Despite
the legacy of apartheid and colonialism, in the short space of time -  since
the majority of our people assumed the responsibility of  democratising  the
country - we have addressed  ourselves  boldly  to  the  task  of  laying  a
foundation particularly for the African peacekeeping force. To  the  members
of our armed forces, AZAPO supports you. We are proud of you.  The  way  you
serve your country and Africa makes us proud.  AZAPO  supports  this  Budget
Vote. [Applause.]

Brig Gen P J SCHALKWYK:  Deputy  Chairperson,  hon  Minister,  hon  members,
Chief of the SANDF, chiefs of staff and other senior officers  present,  due
to the time constraint I would like only  to  address  two  specific  grass-
roots aspects.

In the first instance we have a Defence Force that is struggling  to  manage
itself with its inherent problems and the financial constraints  imposed  on
it. We  must  realise  that  during  demobilisation  there  are  three  very
relevant factors which must be borne in mind. Firstly, what  are  you  going
to do with your defence industries when there is  no  longer  a  requirement
for their products? Secondly, what is the impact going to be on  communities
when military bases are closed down? Thirdly, and this is the one as far  as
I am concerned that is very relevant, how are  we  going  to  integrate  our
redundant soldiers into civil society?

The army specifically is sitting with a  major  problem.  It  is  forced  to
spend a large chunk of its budget on unproductive soldiers. It is  generally
accepted that to keep 1 000 sick, lame and aged soldiers  on  full  strength
costs us in the region of R60 million annually. If we have 10 000  of  these
soldiers it would cost us R600 million. And this all comes from the  defence
budget.

This is not solely the problem of the army or the  Defence  Force.  This  is
the state's problem - it is a  national  problem.  And  the  executive  must
attend to this. The Deputy Minister did address this in her speech,  but  it
is important that we give impetus to it and monitor the progress made.

The second subject I wish to address is the case of military  veterans.  The
assistance to veterans of MK and APLA has now been finalised.  What  remains
to be attended to, is the plight of what I have  defined  as  the  neglected
veterans who served in the old Union Defence Force - the  hon  Middleton  is
one of them - and the SADF, and  in  the  TBVC  forces.  Most  of  them  are
destitute and without jobs. They spent years and years  in  the  service  of
the government at the time with no opportunity to contribute  to  a  pension
fund, nor did they have the money to subscribe to a private annuity fund.

Minister, you and the chairperson of the defence  portfolio  committee  have
in this House acknowledged the existence of this  problem.  Minister,  thank
you for granting me an audience, and arranging for me to brief the  Military
Veterans Advisory Board on this matter.  They  have  subsequently  met  with
veterans in Kimberley and in Cape Town, and intend visiting  groups  in  the
Vaal Triangle, Port Elizabeth, Durban and Karoo.

Once they have gathered all the information the question that arises is,  so
what? They have done some very constructive work and  must  be  complimented
on it. Since these meetings - and this is very important, Minister  -  there
has been no protest marches against the President, or against  the  Minister
of Defence. But we have to do something with the information  gathered.  The
advisory board can only advise, but it cannot resolve problems.

Minister, I would like to make a proposal to you to  establish  a  dedicated
office for these veterans. This office is to be similar to the  office  that
served the MK veterans with similar functions. I know that you will tell  me
that there is a Veterans Administration Directorate, but I  can  assure  you
that with their present structures they will not be able to cope  with  this
huge problem. Once this office is functioning  I  will  feel  that  we  have
really achieved something important as far as these veterans are concerned.

Just finally, I would like also to mention that the conference of  the  24th
congress of the World Veterans Federation in  December  of  this  year  will
hopefully make more people aware of the plight  of  the  veterans  in  South
Africa and the world in general. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G C  OOSTHUIZEN:  Thank  you,  Chairperson.  In  the  beginning  the  hon
Schalkwyk was also in the election mode, as I listened to him, but later  on
he made a  valuable  contribution  and  I'm  pretty  sure  that  he  may  be
entertained in the proposals he made.

Voorsitter, ek het nou vanoggend die voorreg gehad om na die agbare  Schmidt
te luister. En ek wil dit nou hier sê dat hy 'n baie verstandige man  is  as
hy in 'n komitee sit, maar die  moment  wanneer  hy  opstaan  om  te  praat,
gebeur daar iets met hom. Ek wil voorstel ons moet hom laat sit en praat  in
hierdie Raadsaal. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dis reg, dis reg, my  vriend,  want  dan
lewer hy goeie bydrae.  Hoe  meer  ek  na  hom  geluister  het  vandag,  agb
Voorsitter, hoe blyer was ek dat die DA nie  die  mag  het  om  besluite  in
hierdie land te kan neem nie. Hoekom? Wel,  ons  sou  totaal  'n  flentergat
weermag hê. Dit sal niks beteken nie, want hulle wil nie  'n  sent  spandeer
om toerusting aan te koop nie. Nee, hulle wil nie toerusting aankoop nie  en
hulle ondersteun ook nie diplomatieke inisiatiewe om vrede in Afrika te  kry
nie. So, hulle bly maar getrou aan hulle "fight back  campaign"  en  sê  die
konflik in Afrika kan aangaan, maar hy moet net nie na ons toe kom in  Suid-
Afrika nie. Ek wil vir hom sê,  "Slaap  lekker,  Rip  van  Winkel.  Jy  gaan
wakker word." Want trouens, meneer die Voorsitter, hulle ondersteun aan  die
einde van die dag nie eens die  begroting  nie,  want  hulle  is  ``soft  on
security''. Hulle was dit hulle lewe lank gewees. Hulle sal dit  hulle  lewe
lank bly. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Baie dankie, my vriend. Ek gaan vir jou  'n  toespraak  hou  en  as  jy  die
verstand het om te luister na wat ons vir jou sê, mag jy dalk  'n  positiewe
stap in jou lewe neem en mag jy dalk positief in hierdie  land  raak  om  'n
beter horison te skep vir geslagte wat nog  moet  kom,  Dominee.  [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, now this morning I have had the privilege  to  listen  to  hon
Schmidt. And I want to say here and now that he is a very sensible man  when
he sits in a committee, but  the  moment  he  gets  up  to  speak  something
happens to him. I want to suggest that we allow him to sit and talk in  this
Chamber. [Interjections.] That is right, that is right, my  friend,  because
then he makes valuable contributions. The more I listened to him today,  hon
Chairperson, the more pleased I was that the DA did not have  the  power  to
make decisions in this country. Why? Well, we would have an  army  which  is
in tatters altogether. It would be no good, because  they  do  not  want  to
spend a cent on buying equipment. No, they do not  want  to  buy  equipment,
and they do not support the diplomatic  initiatives  for  peace  in  Africa.
Thus, they only remain true to their fight back campaign, and say  that  the
conflict in Africa can continue, as long as it does not come to us in  South
Africa. I want to say to him: "Dream on, Rip van Winkle. You  will  have  to
wake up''. Besides, Mr Chairman, at the end of the  day  they  do  not  even
support the budget, because they are soft on security. They have  been  like
that all along. They will remain like that for  the  rest  of  their  lives.
[Interjections.]

Thank you very much, my friend. I will make a speech for  you,  and  if  you
have the sense to listen to what we are saying to you, you might  just  take
a positive step in your life and  become  positive  about  this  country  in
order to create  a  better  horizon  for  the  generations  still  to  come,
Reverend. [Applause.]]

Reference was also made to the special defence packages  by  the  Democratic
Alliance. It was predictable. It's an election thing.  Cook  it  up,  attack
the Minister, link a lot of things together and here we are with a  diabolic
ANC. But what I did not hear them say is how the  expenditure  decreased  on
the SDP because of the strengthening of the rand.
Nee, nou's julle stil. Dit pas julle om  stil  te  bly.  Maar  as  die  rand
verswak, wat julle wil hê moet gebeur,  want  julle  is  nie  patrioties  in
hierdie land nie, dan roep julle perskonferensies, dan vertel julle  hoeveel
miljoene verkwis en verkwansel hierdie Regering. (Translation  of  Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[No, now you are quiet. It  suits  you  to  keep  quiet.  But  if  the  rand
weakens, which is what you want to happen, because you are not patriotic  in
this country, then you call press conferences, and then you  report  on  how
many millions are squandered and thrown away by this Government.]

Let's put the SDP into perspective. The South  African  limited  acquisition
of defence equipment has attracted much attention - more  than  often,  very
ill-informed, especially from the DA. The SDP only  benefits  the  navy  and
the air force - and this, while one of the major components of  the  Defence
Force, the SA  Army,  has  an  urgent  need  for  a  wide  range  of  modern
equipment. It is important to understand the reasoning behind  this  ANC-led
Government's decision to recapitalise the Defence  Force,  as  well  as  the
intended use of that capital equipment.

The fact is that in the final  years  of  apartheid  we  saw  and  witnessed
increasingly intense civil disobedience and low levels of guerilla  activity
in South African townships. The consequence was that the budgets  were  then
shifted to favour the army, but more especially the police,  and  then  more
especially the counter-revolutionary social  expenditure  that  we  arranged
for them.

The net result was that the main equipment of the navy  and  the  air  force
was willingly allowed to be  run  down.  I  say  this,  because  the  DA  is
continuing in their destructive fight back campaign whenever they  refer  to
the SDP. Not only must we question their logic and their patriotism, but  we
must challenge that. They  should  in  this  election  campaign  answer,  to
themselves and to this country, whether the armed  forces  are  sufficiently
equipped to play the role they have to play. We all know that the answer  to
that is no. But we also know that the DA  is  also  not  equipped  to  be  a
government - not by far. [Applause.]

The DA projects itself as the safe haven  of  classic  liberal  values.  The
truth, however, in this debate is that the DA reinforced itself as a  small,
minor  opposition  party,  stripped  of  its  moral  rectitude,  complaining
forever from the sidelines. [Applause.]

 In the final analysis of the SDP, it must be said that  the  South  African
Government has driven a hard  bargain  with  the  defence  manufacturers  to
obtain weapons at a reasonable price  with  exceptional  offsets  for  South
Africa. The value of counter-investments can never be questioned.  Not  even
the DA, if they have 1% of the economic brains will question that. But  they
are so immersed their fight-back campaign that I'm  afraid  that  gang  will
never be able to understand this.  [Interjections.]  I've  now  paid  enough
attention to you.

For a country just nine years into the open season of democracy we  are  not
only doing well, we are also setting  examples  of  international  standard.
The world and current situations are dynamic. They're not cast in stone.  No
prediction or analysis of  danger  is  static.  Let  me  say,  danger  lurks
everywhere and can strike at anytime. No nation can  afford  the  luxury  of
being unprepared. We have a duty to plan and budget for  the  rising  levels
of insecurity in the world and specifically in our region. And this  reality
the DA will never be able to escape.

At the centre of this debate is whether this country should have  a  defence
force. Undoubtedly the answer is yes, because we  carry  the  responsibility
of maintaining law  and  order  in  our  country,  the  region  and  on  our
continent. This reality compels us to look at how the Defence  Force  should
be equipped and funded to fulfil that responsibility. If we are  to  protect
our shores from human sharks intent on  bleeding  our  sea  harvest  and  we
intend to fulfil the role we are playing in Burundi, the DRC and  elsewhere,
we must accept the reality of our time. And this reality is that the  levels
of insecurity have risen throughout the world.
The macro picture of defence force planning and resource  allocation  starts
with a percentage of the GDP which is devoted to the  Defence  Force.  We've
heard speaker  after  speaker  today  saying  that  it's  insufficient.  The
reality is that in real terms we are at the level of  1975.  The  adjustment
in the Defence allocation started in 1990 and that was long before the  dawn
of our new democracy. And then in 1990  we  anticipated  the  resolution  of
South Africa's internal political problems by shifting the budget.  What  an
error of judgement!

The dawn of our democracy, almost a decade ago, bears witness  to  the  fact
that the global balance of forces have  changed  remarkably  over  the  last
decade. In fact, the recent emergence of the African  Union  and  Nepad  are
placing further opportunities and challenges before us. South Africa  has  a
role to play in the overall development in Africa  and  of  our  region.  In
fact, the dawning of our democracy makes South Africa vastly  more  powerful
in the region and in the world.

The successes of this ANC-led Government's  domestic  and  foreign  policies
have resulted in wide involvement in peace missions in Africa.  The  Defence
Force is and will remain an invaluable instrument of the state,  helping  to
ensure  peacekeeping,  peace  supporting  and  peacemaking  on  the  African
continent. We, as the ANC, are proud  that  the  Defence  Force  is  on  the
march. It's on the march for peace. It's on the march  for  development  and
it's on the march for prosperity. [Applause.]

Participation in peace missions comes at a price, because not  all  expenses
are covered by the United Nations  and  other  sources.  But  despite  these
expenses, peace missions and peace building are much cheaper  than  outright
war. This, these people will never understand.  This  is  why  we  say  that
these peace missions as well as the Defence  Force  as  a  whole  should  be
measured by the results achieved rather than  by  the  amount  of  money  we
budget. And I'm calling for an increase in that budget that we have.  It  is
in this context that we have to address one  of  the  common  misconceptions
and misperceptions regarding peace missions.
Peace missions are relatively free of risk - this is a perception -  are  in
fact just a sort of stepping up of  policing  activity  in  another  foreign
country. We should know that this is not the case. There are many  risks  in
peace missions. They usually take place in highly charged  situations  where
the peacekeepers are often hugely outnumbered and far from normal  resources
of combat, logistics and support. Peacekeepers are liable to  be  confronted
by many ambiguous and potentially explosive situations and we as  a  country
expect of them to act and react  in  such  a  manner  that  we  continue  to
contribute towards diplomatic conflict resolution initiatives.

 In fact, our expectations are great because  the  success  of  the  Defence
Force operations could provide disproportionately huge positive  results  in
our country. In short, the defence  system  must  always  be  attempting  to
sense the right direction for the future in order  to  achieve  the  purpose
for which it exists. What we as politicians ought to do  is  to  ensure  the
correct balance between defence policy, the situation on the ground and  the
situation internationally. We have to budget sufficiently to ensure that  we
have sufficient resources and equipment.

The African Union and Nepad signal Africa's true emancipation  from  outside
interests. It would therefore be ironic to  leave  the  peace  and  security
agenda in the hands of non-Africans. The growing  consensus  is  that  Nepad
needs a bodyguard to protect and support it. And this urges us to deal  with
the levels of insecurity and insufficient budgets. If  this  means  that  we
have to make bold decisions - let's do so.

I'm proposing that we relook at the percentage of the  GDP  we  allocate  to
Defence, peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations  in  Africa.  This  would
... [Interjections.] ... Mr Chairperson, if  people  don't  understand  what
you say you will never convince them. Sir, we have to turn the tide. And  by
turning the tide the whole of Africa will eventually inherit the virtues  of
democracy, justice, peace and of harmony. This will  make  us  first  -  not
last. Thank you. [Applause.]
The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, in responding I would  like  to
recall the presence of the hon Norman  Middleton  here,  and  the  point  he
made, which I think is vital for our country to keep in mind,  and  that  is
that the country must always be ready to defend  itself.  There  can  be  no
compromise on the question that the country must, day and night,  be  ready,
be prepared. We cannot dabble with and risk defence.

The hon speaker who followed me here made the point that a  fair  amount  of
defence expenditure has gone to the Strategic Defence Package. That has  not
been an accident of history. This House has  determined  the  needs  of  the
country with regard to defence, social expenditure, etc, and it  has  placed
an obligation on  the  executive  to  deal  with  the  distribution  of  the
available resources, to address those needs of the country.  The  amount  of
resources available for defence  purposes  could  only  enable  the  Defence
Force to address the needs of the navy and the air force.

There is a calculated risk built into this, because the  command  structures
of the Defence Force realised that, given what  was  available,  they  could
only partially address the needs of the  Defence  Force.  It  was  therefore
tactfully and consciously decided to allow our  landward  defences  to  hold
out and prioritise these other areas. This explains why over  the  past  few
years whatever allocations have come to defence have addressed  these  areas
of the Strategic Defence Package, the Air Force and the Navy.

This does not mean that the  command  structures  of  the  National  Defence
Force are not alert to the landward needs that exist. Had this country  been
in a better position, had it had more resources to  devote  to  defence,  we
would have simultaneously  addressed  the  landward  defences.  The  command
structures of the SA National Defence  Force  are  anxious  to  address  the
issue of landward  defences,  but  Cabinet  and  the  Government,  can  only
allocate at the present time as it has done.

I raised the issue in the main address here this morning.  This  country  is
spending 1,6% of its GDP on defence. I want to give  members  of  the  House
some idea of what the situation is, even in the post-1989, post Berlin  Wall
collapse period. A country such  as  the  United  States,  which  is  really
threatened by nobody, as things now stand, spends 3% of its GDP on  defence.
The United Kingdom spends 2,4% of its GDP on defence. Egypt spends  3,2%  of
its GDP on defence. Nigeria spends 4,5% on defence. It is  one  of  the  key
peace support and peace enforcement  agencies  of  our  continent  in  West-
Africa.  Nigerians  are  devoting  4,5%  of  their  GDP  to  peace   support
operations in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Ivory Coast. Algeria spends 6,8%  on
defence.  Botswana,  nextdoor  to  us,  spends  5,5%  on  defence  purposes.
Namibia, our sister country, spends 3,6% on  defence.  South  Africa  spends
1,6% on defence.

If you look at the obligations we are  asking  the  men  and  women  of  the
command structures of the National Defence Force to improvise on,  in  order
to meet the missions that this country has to meet across the continent,  it
is difficult to understand how they are able, so tactfully and  efficiently,
to strategise, to keep that critical balance that enables the Defence  Force
to continue to meet its obligations. But it is because they also  understand
the logic that guides this nation, that there are critical social  needs  to
be met, needs in other areas, because of our country's history. A point  has
been made by one of the speakers here, hon Groenewald.

Hy het dit reggekry om hier te kom, lekker te preek en grappies te maak  oor
die weermag, en dan uit te stap. Hy het my geheimsinnig 'n  briefie  gestuur
en gesê hy vra om verskoning maar hy kan  nie  wag  om  na  my  antwoord  te
luister nie. [He succeeded in coming here, sermonising  and  cracking  jokes
about the Defence Force, and then walk out of here. He mysteriously sent  me
a note and said he apologised but he could not wait in order  to  listen  to
my reply.]

What was his argument? His issue is that in my speech this  morning  I  said
that we should prioritise work in the subregion  at  the  expense  of  South
Africa. This was his point. He said: ``I warn you: You must be careful  that
the DRC does not become the Vietnam  of  South  Africa.''  Well,  he  speaks
Afrikaans most of the time.

I wondered to myself whether he just  read  that  phrase  and  never  really
worried about what it meant. Vietnam was an imperialist  war,  by  a  nation
occupying another country, not invited by that country. They were there  for
purposes completely in conflict with the purposes for which we  are  in  the
DRC. We have been invited by the people of the DRC. We did  n't  decided  to
invade that country; we have been invited by them  to  come  and  help  them
calm the situation and create an atmosphere  in  which  they  can  therefore
negotiate a settlement and implement decisions  they,  the  Congolese,  have
taken. Indeed, the Congolese  have  come  to  this  country,  to  Sun  City,
Johannesburg, Pretoria, to sit here and say: ``Give us an opportunity,  give
us a room, to sit and negotiate.'' We are there in  a  completely  different
manner.

This empty warning, that we must be careful that  it  must  not  become  the
Vietnam of South Africa, has no place. It is rhetoric which  means  nothing.
I want to take the point a little further. When we  consider  the  issue  of
stabilising our region, we must consider the implications of not  doing  so.
Not long ago, South Africa was playing against one of the countries  of  our
region. When we went into the stadium, one of the South Africans who was  in
our company said: ``There are more people from this other country here  than
South Africans, and yet it is  our  national  squad  versus  their  national
squad.''

The reason was that large numbers of the people who  were  in  that  stadium
were here as genuine refugees from the conflict in  their  country,  anxious
that peace must return to their country, so that they, like we ourselves  in
the years of exile, may find their way back  to  their  homeland.  And  they
were there supporting their country, even though they were in South  Africa.
They were there supporting their country to show  their  ongoing  patriotism
and loyalty to that country.
We have an obligation to assist with creating a situation in  their  country
that will enable them to  go  back,  not  only  for  their  sake,  but  most
importantly, for the sake of  South  Africans.  When  you  budget  here  for
health, for prisons, for hospitals, you don't  budget  for  refugees  -  you
budget on the basis of your own populace. Yet once these  people  are  here,
if they get arrested and go to prison, the prison  population  increases  in
numbers. Once they are in prison, the food supplies in  those  prisons  must
cover them. The  medical  supplies  in  those  hospitals  must  cover  them.
Indeed, you must also have free transport for them if you are going to  take
them back.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Minister, wind up. Your  time  has
expired, but I will give you a few moments to wind up.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: A few more minutes. I  think  the  point  has  been
made. In closing,  I  do  want  to  pay  tribute,  though,  to  the  Defence
Secretary, to the Chief of the South African National Defence Force, to  the
command structure of the Defence Force, and to the  men  and  women  of  the
Defence Force. I think that we must pay tribute to those South Africans  who
have been deployed in those missions and have come back, and  to  those  who
are deployed there today, and to those who will be deployed in future.

As the hon Pandelani Nefolovhodwe has said, it has always been an idea  that
seized many of our generation, that when  the  right  time  comes,  we  will
contribute to the unification of  the  people  of  our  continent.  We  will
create an atmosphere of peace and stability, that, led  as  we  are  at  the
present time by President Thabo Mbeki, Africa may be able to  chart  a  path
on the Nepad basis towards peace and prosperity. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE - STUDY TOUR TO
                                    JAPAN

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:
  That the Report be noted.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 12:17.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (a)     Annual  Report  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  -  Bank
         Supervision Department for 2002.


     (a)    Government Notice No 743  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         25050 dated 31 May 2003: Appointment  of  members  of  the  Amnesty
         Unit, in terms of section 23 of the Exchange  Control  Amnesty  and
         Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2003 (Act No 12 of 2003).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Strategic Framework for the Department of  Justice  and  Constitutional
     Development for 2003-2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.     Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Safety  and  Security   on
     International Convention on Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
     Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic  Agents,  dated
     11 June 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security,  having  considered
         the  request  for  approval  by  Parliament  of  the  International
         Convention  on  Prevention  and  Punishment   of   Crimes   against
         Internationally Protected  Persons,  including  Diplomatic  Agents,
         referred to it, and having conferred with the  Portfolio  Committee
         on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  recommends  that  the
         House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve  the
         said Convention.

Request to be considered.

2.     Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Safety  and  Security   on
     International Convention Against the Taking of Hostages, dated 11  June
     2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security,  having  considered
         the  request  for  approval  by  Parliament  of  the  International
         Convention Against the Taking of  Hostages,  referred  to  it,  and
         having conferred  with  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and
         Constitutional Development, recommends that the House, in terms  of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

Request to be considered.

3.    Seventeenth Report of  the  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts,
     dated 18 February 2003:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having sent a delegation  of
     nine members to the Cape Town International Airport,  the  Customs  and
     Excise Unit and the Cape Town Harbour on an Oversight Exercise, reports
     as follows:


     Delegation:


     Mr F Beukman -    New NP (Committee Chairperson)
     Mr L Chiba   -    ANC
     Mr B Nair    -    ANC
     Mr P Gerber  -    ANC
     Mr T E Vezi  -    IFP
     Ms N Hlangwana    -     ANC
     Mr B Kannemeyer   -     ANC
     Ms K Mothoagae    -     ANC
     Mr R Mofokeng     -     ANC


     Secretariat - Mr L Pakati and Ms N Madide.
     Researcher - B Letompa.
     Auditor-General's Office - Mr A van Dyk and Mr D Titus.


     A.     Introduction


         A resolution on Sars was adopted by the  Committee  on  17  October
         2001.  The   resolution   identified   various   internal   control
         weaknesses,  which  were  addressed  by  recommendations  for   the
         improvement of processes and systems. As a  result,  the  Committee
         decided to visit the two border posts.


     B.     Purpose of visits


         Visit to Cape Town International Airport and Cape Town Harbour:


         *  As part of its  oversight  function,  the  Committee  wanted  to
              proactively  determine  corrective  measures  to  address  the
              shortcomings reported by the Auditor-General surrounding  cash
              controls, duties and fuel levies,  warehouse  control  systems
              and management in general.


         *  To provide the Committee with insight  into  the  processes  and
              work  methods  with  regard  to  the  internal  controls   and
              functions at border posts.


         *  To identify risk areas within Customs  and  Excise  which  would
              result in noncompliance with the Act.


         The Office of the Auditor-General  briefed  the  Committee  members
         prior to the visit, with background information and information  on
         risk areas.


     C.     Cape Town International Airport


         The Committee's  first  destination  was  Cape  Town  International
         Airport (CTIA). The group was well received by the  following  Sars
         management team:


         General Manager     -    Mr V Shabalala
         Branch Manager      -    Mr J Malgas
         National Customs Expert from Head Office  -     Mr F Versfeld


         The branch manager briefed the delegation  on  the  activities  and
         processes that are followed at CTIA  with  regard  to  the  Customs
         Unit. Members were allowed to visit and inspect the  warehouse  and
         the cashier's office.


     D.     Concerns raised by members


         The  following  concerns,  relating  to  the  bill  of  entry,  the
         clearance  period,  clearing  agencies  and   customs   and   state
         warehouses, were raised by members:


         1. The first concern was around the reason why technology  was  not
              utilised more to facilitate and improve the processes that had
              to be followed, with specific reference being  made  to  donor
              goods. The delegation was told by the branch manager that  his
              unit was in the process of rolling out an electronic system to
              improve service delivery.


         2. A concern was  raised  regarding  the  extent  to  which  actual
              inspections were performed  to  verify  the  contents  of  the
              containers against their documentation. The delegation learned
              from Mr Shabalala that approximately 400 to  500  transactions
              are performed on a daily basis, in respect  of  which  between
              two and five per cent inspections coverage are achieved.  This
              unit was in the process  of  appointing  24  additional  staff
              members at the location, as at the time there were not  enough
              staff members available to perform such inspections.


         3. The view was expressed  that  if  inspections  performed  ranged
              between  two  and  five  per  cent  on  400   to   500   daily
              transactions, it was clearly not enough. Furthermore, if  Sars
              has promised to collect R10 for every R1 spent, why were  more
              people not employed to improve the inspection  rate?  On  this
              issue, the Committee was told that human  resources  shortages
              were being managed actively.


         4.  Another  concern  related  to  instances  where  vehicles  were
              hijacked in South Africa and exported  to  Australia,  because
              Sars (Customs) did not check  exports.  In  this  regard,  the
              Committee suggested that Sars should become more  involved  in
              the inspection of  exported  goods  by  investing  in  hi-tech
              equipment to improve the number of inspections executed and to
              detect stolen goods before they leave our shores.


     E.     Recommendations


         1. The Committee noted that controls  over  reports  for  ships  or
              aircraft inwards or outwards  were  inadequate.  Documentation
              such as inward reports  were  not  submitted  to  Customs  and
              Excise before the arrival of a vessel,  resulting  in  Customs
              and Excise not being aware of the vessel's arrival.


              The Committee recommends that stricter controls be implemented
              in respect of inward/outward reports.


         2. The Committee noted that unresolved differences existed  between
              the bills of entry and  manifests.  The  Committee  recommends
              that Customs and Excise attend to this as a matter of  urgency
              and report back to it, within two months of  the  adoption  of
              this report by the National Assembly, on progress made in this
              regard.


         3. The Committee noted that controls over removal  in  bond/removal
              in transit were inadequate. The Committee recommends that when
              goods are removed to Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland,
              a removal-in-bond certificate be passed at Customs and Excise,
              indicating the final country of destination.  These  RIBs/RITs
              should be verified to ensure that the  goods  have  in  actual
              fact left the country and  have  not  been  entered  for  home
              consumption without paying duties.


              Furthermore,  the  Committee  noted  that  controls  over  the
              receipt of terminal vessel out-turn (TVORs)  were  inadequate.
              The Committee recommends that this be addressed as a matter of
              urgency, as TVORs could be  used  by  Customs  and  Excise  as
              additional control measures to ensure that all  inward/outward
              reports have been received, thus  ensuring  that  Customs  and
              Excise are aware of all vessels entering  the  control/harbour
              area.


         4. The Committee noted that Break Bulk Goods were not acquitted  at
              all. The Committee recommends that Customs and  Excise  verify
              the bills of entry and acquit them with the manifest to ensure
              that they are correct and correspond with what the  shipmaster
              declared as having been discharged.


              However, the Committee noted that insufficient control existed
              over redirections or transhipments. It is therefore  important
              that, after the arrival of the  goods,  the  importer/clearing
              agent  should  either  decide  to  off-load  at  the   initial
              destination (ie Cape Town Harbour, where the duties are to  be
              paid) or to redirect the goods to  another  harbour  (ie  from
              Cape Town to Durban, where the duties will be paid).


         5. The Committee noted that control over the receipt  of  manifests
              was inadequate. Where control is not adequate,  penalties  are
              not levied, resulting in revenue being lost.


              The Committee recommends that the manifests be  entered  in  a
              manifest register to ensure that the  acquittal  documentation
              is received within  40  days.  If  not,  penalties  should  be
              levied.


         6. The Committee noted that the bills of entry  were  not  checked.
              The  Committee   recommends   that   tariff   codes,   weight,
              description of the goods and the calculation of VAT and duties
              be checked and verified to ensure correctness.  The  Committee
              also recommends that detected differences be addressed with  a
              Voucher of Correction and that duties be collected.


         7. The Committee noted  that  Sars  was  relying  on  the  clearing
              agent's documentation. This was largely due to the  fact  that
              Sars did  not  have  enough  personnel  available  to  perform
              physical inspections. If inspections performed ranges  between
              two and five per  cent  on  400  to  500  daily  transactions,
              clearly  not  enough  coverage  was  achieved.  The  Committee
              recommends that Sars consider at least  using  Portnet  as  an
              agent in addressing its own personnel shortages.  Furthermore,
              the Committee recommends that Sars become more involved in the
              inspection of exported goods by investing in hi-tech equipment
              to improve the number of inspections executed  and  to  detect
              stolen goods before they leave South Africa's shores.


         8. The Committee also noted that inland border posts were big  risk
              areas and that  the  conditions  under  which  border  control
              personnel worked were unacceptable. The  Committee  recommends
              that more resources be made available to inland  border  posts
              and that the conditions for the personnel be upgraded,  within
              the financial capacity of Sars.


         9. The Committee, with regard to stop notes, noted that:


              (a) Outstanding stop notes were not followed up.


              (b) Controls over stop notes and registers were inadequate, as
                  stop notes were removed from the registry.  As  a  result,
                  the register was  incomplete  and  no  reliance  could  be
                  placed on the completeness of the stop notes.


              (c) Insufficient documentation was attached to the stop notes.


              (d)  Insufficient  segregation  of  duties  over  stop   notes
                  existed.


              The Committee recommends that:


              *    This  risk  be  adequately  evaluated  and  addressed  by
                  obtaining additional manpower.


              *    Access  to  the  register  be  restricted  to  authorised
                  personnel only and that each entry be  made  under  strict
                  supervision.
              *   After stop notes have  been  finalised  and  inspected,  a
                  brief report be compiled, indicating the results  of  such
                  inspection, and be attached to the stop notes.


         10. The Committee noted that the seven-day grace period,  in  which
              the agent/importer should settle his or  her  account  of  the
              first deferment,  overlaps  with  the  starting  of  the  next
              deferment. Furthermore, the Committee noted that no bonds were
              obtained to cover the deferment of VAT, although this makes up
              the greater amount of  the  deferment  scheme.  The  Committee
              recommends that this matter be addressed urgently, as the bond
              held  would  not  be  sufficient,  should  the  agent/importer
              default on the payment date.


         Cape Town Harbour (fuel levies)


         Observations and recommendations


         11. The Committee  noted  that  current  losses  claimed  were  not
              checked and reconciled. The  Committee  recommends  that  Sars
              address this deficiency as a matter of urgency, as the  losses
              incurred would reduce duties payable to Sars.


         12. The Committee noted that controls over documents and  schedules
              were inadequate, thus leading to an account not having all the
              supporting  documentation  attached  to  it.   The   Committee
              recommends that Customs and Excise ensure that all  supporting
              documentation is attached before an account  is  accepted  for
              payment.


         13. The Committee noted that no audits were performed  at  the  oil
              companies. The Committee recommends that audits  be  performed
              by Sars  to  ensure  that  the  production  schedules,  losses
              claimed, systems in use, etc, are correct so as  to  enable  a
              certain level of reliance to be placed on the  correctness  of
              the accounts as received.


         14. The Committee noted that  it  was  not  possible  to  reconcile
              consolidated accounts, due  to  oil  companies  borrowing  oil
              supplies from each other in the case of shortages.


         15.  Furthermore,  the  complexity  of  fuel  accounts   makes   it
              extremely difficult to verify, and  Sars  does  not  have  the
              expertise, which makes it nearly  impossible  to  verify  fuel
              accounts.


         Cape Town Harbour (excise duties)


         Observations and recommendations


         16. The Committee noted  that  the  control  over  bonds  and  bond
              amounts were inadequate, as bonds held were in most cases  not
              sufficient. The bond register was also not regularly  updated,
              thus making reliance there impossible. The Committee is of the
              opinion that the actual bond should be sufficient to cover  at
              least six months' average duty. Furthermore, bonds should also
              be revised annually and originals kept in a safe.


         17. The Committee noted that there was little or no segregation  of
              duties, as one official would be responsible for receiving the
              account, checking the account and receiving the  payment.  The
              Committee recommends that  duties  be  segregated  as  far  as
              possible to ensure greater accountability and control.


         18.  The  Committee  noted  that  controls  over  the   DA32s   and
              information  schedules   attached   to   the   accounts   were
              inadequate.
         19. The Committee noted that  the  supporting  schedules  for  each
              DA32 were lacking or not attached,  making  it  impossible  to
              verify their correctness.


         20. The Committee also noted that losses were not verified  due  to
              the fact that supporting documentation to substantiate  losses
              claimed were  not  attached,  thus  making  it  impossible  to
              verify. The  Committee  recommends  that  Customs  and  Excise
              ensure that all supporting documentation is attached before an
              account is accepted for payment.


         21. The Committee noted that excise inspections  were  not  carried
              out on a regular basis, and that excise inspections  were  not
              done at large companies such as SAB, due to the complexity  of
              the task at hand.  The  Committee  cannot  over-emphasise  the
              urgent and increasing need for officials to intensify physical
              checks to curb the smuggling of  goods,  and  recommends  that
              inspections be carried out to  ensure  that  the  manufacturer
              comply with the Customs and Excise Act so that all productions
              are declared and duties are paid.


         Cape Town Harbour (State Warehouse)


         The State Warehouse is a premise that is provided for by the  state
         for the deposit of goods, the safekeeping thereof  and  the  duties
         thereon, thus  ensuring  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the
         Customs and Excise Act. If due clearance is not affected within  28
         days, the  containers  are  removed  to  the  State  Warehouse  and
         offloaded. The goods are recorded in  a  State  Warehouse  register
         and a reference number is assigned. The owners  of  the  cargo  are
         informed of the location of their  goods,  as  well  as  to  effect
         clearance  thereof.  The  goods  will  only  be  cleared  from  the
         premises if the appropriate rental has  been  paid.  In  the  event
         where the goods are not cleared within  the  prescribed  time,  the
         goods are either placed on  auction  or  destroyed,  in  line  with
         current legislation.


         Concerns


         An explanation was sought with regard to the  transparency  in  the
         process of auctioning uncleared goods.  The  explanation  was  that
         uncleared goods may only be sold after  three  months.  Sars  (Cape
         Town) has to obtain approval from its Head Office.  After  approval
         has been granted, the  auction  is  advertised  in  the  Government
         Gazette and in  Sars'  newspapers  two  weeks  in  advance,  and  a
         private auctioneer is appointed.


         An explanation was also sought as  to  whether  Sars  had  a  fraud
         prevention plan. The explanation  was  that  all  fraud  cases  are
         reported to the Sars Head  Office.  Various  committees  have  been
         appointed, tasked to assist in preventing fraud, such as:


         *  Penalty Committee  -  to  review  all  mitigation  forwarded  by
              clients.


         *  Tariff Committee - to ensure correct classification of goods.


         *  Valuation Committee -  to  ensure  that  the  correct  value  is
              declared at the time of import, which in turn  influences  the
              duty payable.


     F.     Conclusion


         The chairperson concluded the visit by expressing his  appreciation
         on behalf of the Committee to the  Sars  management  team  for  the
         opportunity  to  visit   the   Sars   facilities   at   Cape   Town
         International Airport, Cape  Town  Harbour  (State  Warehouse)  and
         Sars Head Office, and for  the  programme  that  was  presented  to
         members.


         A word of thanks also goes to DFID for  sponsoring  the  visit  and
         ensuring its success.


     Report to be considered.

4.    Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  dated
     25 February 2003:


     The  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts,  having   visited   the
     Magistrate's  Court  in  Umlazi  (KZN)  and  the  Master's  Office   in
     Pietermaritzburg, reports as follows:


     A.     Purpose


         The  purpose  of  the  visit  to  the  Department  of  Justice  and
         Constitutional Development by Committee  members  was  to  interact
         with  the  Department  in  pursuing  particular  matters  contained
         within their finance reports.


     B.     Background


         The Committee undertook the visits to selected  courts  during  the
         week of 1 November 2002. The visits formed part  of  the  oversight
         function that the Committee exercises  to  ensure  that  government
         policies are timeously  and  correctly  implemented,  that  service
         delivery is taking place, that problem  areas  are  identified  and
         isolated and that mechanisms are devised to address them.


         The Committee sought to be briefed by the head of  each  respective
         office, members of management and  heads  of  certain  departments,
         varying from regional to magisterial level, as well as  to  conduct
         an on-site inspection.


     C.     Umlazi Magistrate's Court
         The listing process conducted by  the  Department  of  Justice  and
         Constitutional  Development  shows  that  the  Umlazi  Magistrate's
         Office is one  of  the  10  worst-run  offices,  from  a  financial
         management point of view.


         1. Scope


              Four focused areas were identified, namely:


              (a) Financial management systems.


              (b) Cash office.


              (c) Information system.


              (d) Guardian fund.


         2. Delegation


              Committee members:


              Ms N Hlangwana
              Ms C Dudley
              Mr B Kannemeyer
              Mr M Lowe
              Mr D Gumede
              Mr B Nair


              Members of Justice Department:


              Mr P Mtshali (Director of Finance)
              Mr M J Langenhoven (Regional Head)
              Mr D Govender (PWHC)
              Mr M Mjamba (Internal Audit)
              Mrs Z S Pienaar (Office Manager)


              Support Staff:


              Ms B Letompa
              Mr K Dlamini
              Mr A van Dyk (OAG)


         3. Issues reported by A-G in 2001 and confirmed during visit


              (a) Lack of proper control on the  Maintenance  Account  which
                  forms  part  of  the  Trust  Account  (theft  cases   were
                  identified).


              (b) Difficulties in daily balances (books are not  written  up
                  daily).


              (c) Dereliction of duties.


              (d) No access to PERSAL/LOGIS at all.


              (e) Weakness in cash management and cash control.


         4. Observations - Maintenance Account and procedures  on  obtaining
              monies


              All  transactions  are  manually  done  and  recorded  on  the
              maintenance card.  There  are  6 000  cards,  of  which  3 000
              holders are  still  receiving  money.  Individuals  enter  and
              provide  the  maintenance  number  given  to   them   at   the
              maintenance  complaints  office.  Clerks  in  the  cash   hall
              physically check maintenance cards (J44) to see whether  there
              is money available (these are entered by the clerks  from  the
              remittance register, from  cash  payments  or  from  the  bank
              statements).


              If there is money, individuals are  advised  accordingly,  and
              their names are entered on a payment voucher (J492). Only when
              that list is full, names are called out and  they  wait  in  a
              queue. When the paymaster effects payment, they sign and enter
              their  identity  numbers  on  the  payment  vouchers.  If  the
              signature and identify number correspond with the specimen  on
              the maintenance card (J440), the  paymaster  will  pay.  If  a
              person cannot write, the paymaster will use  a  stamp  pad  to
              take a thumb print of the individual (witnessed by  two  other
              clerks) and then payment is effected.
              At 13:00, the payment office is closed. When the paymaster  is
              finished with the payouts, she then  hands  over  the  payment
              voucher (J492) to the checking office. The paymaster will then
              balance in the afternoon, checking the cash payout against the
              cash balance. Cash left over is then handed over  to  Fidelity
              Guards for banking.


         5. Problems


              Part of the problem in Umlazi is that clerks do not  write  up
              their books on a daily  basis  -  it  is  easy  for  money  to
              disappear.


              The other problem is that the staff members  do  not  want  to
              rotate - staff in  offices  do  not  want  to  move  to  other
              sections  because  they   refuse   to   be   given   different
              responsibilities. Everything is done manually.


              Recommendations


              (a) Disciplinary action should  be  taken  against  those  who
                  refuse to be given responsibilities.


              (b) Staff should be rotated to ensure that they are not placed
                  in a position where they can indulge in corrupt  practices
                  to the detriment of the public.


              (c) Multi-skilled  employees  are  needed  to  deal  with  the
                  changing environment, and the  Accounting  Officer  should
                  report to the Committee on this matter.


              (d) The speeding up of computerisation.


         6. Observations - PERSAL/LOGIS


              Umlazi does not have access to PERSAL  because  they  are  not
              linked to the national network and  they  are  not  automated.
              This poses  a  very  serious  risk  area,  both  in  terms  of
              personnel and stock.


              Although the office did look at  the  problem  and  was  fully
              aware of the risks involved, the biggest problem, as indicated
              by the internal audit, was that there was no significant  move
              towards creating the will to eradicate the  problem.  Fear  of
              victimisation and of  being  threatened  prevented  them  from
              taking appropriate action.


              Management identified the risks and provided  reports  to  the
              National Office, but at present there is no  movement  towards
              implementing this because of  budget  constraints,  a  serious
              problem at most magistrate's offices. Before computers can  be
              installed, there must be proper security in  place,  something
              with which the office is battling at present.  Some  computers
              were stolen, so  all  new  computers  were  removed  from  the
              premises into a safe storage.


              In  KwaZulu-Natal,  none  of  the  magistrate's  offices  have
              PERSAL. They only have  viewer  status  to  PERSAL,  centrally
              controlled from the regional office. Forms  are  processed  in
              one office and then go through  the  channels  of  supervisor,
              head  of  the  office  and  on  to  the  regional  office  for
              capturing.


              The Auditor-General's report  highlighted  the  weaknesses  in
              Asset Management. A physical count of all equipment  has  been
              done and submitted to national office to  profile  a  national
              inventory for the Department.


              Recommendations


              (a) Disciplinary action must be more vigorous and it has to be
                  done promptly.


              (b) There should be a request for additional budgeting for the
                  identified risk areas.


              (c) Urgent implementation of computer systems.


              (d) Security should be upgraded.


         7. Observations - cash management and cash control


              A key concern is that cash management is a weakness. Where one
              comes across problems, things are not being done  properly  or
              people simply do not record, or care about, daily activities.


              Six people work in the cash office. On  Monday morning they go
              to the bank, where the cash is counted, taken over by Fidelity
              Guards, sealed by the cashiers and delivered to the office  on
              a daily basis. Three people receive the  money  bags  and  two
              recording them. It is checked and then signed for.


              The office handles about R100 000 to R120  000  a  day,  three
              days a week (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday). The problem  is
              the lack of infrastructure -  drawers  and  cubicles  are  not
              locked  and  there  are  no  bullet-proof  windows  for  staff
              handling the cash. The staff handling the  cash  cannot  leave
              their counters and have to stay there the whole day.


     D.     Master's Office, Pietermaritzburg


         1. Delegation:


              Committee members:


              Ms N Hlangwana
              Ms C Dudley
              Mr B Kannemeyer
              Mr M Lowe
              Mr D Gumede
              Mr B Nair


              Members of Justice Department:


              Mr P Mtshali (Director of Finance)
              Mr M J Langenhoven (Regional Head)
              Mr D Govender (PWHC)
              Mr M Mjamba (Internal Audit)
              Mrs Z S Pienaar (Office Manager)


              Support Staff:


              Ms B Letompa
              Mr K Dlamini
              Mr A Van Dyk (OAG)


              During the said visits, the Committee sought to be briefed  by
              the heads  of  the  respective  offices,  conduct  an  on-site
              inspection and be briefed by employees.


         2. General overview


              The office is responsible for the administration of:


              *   Guardian's Fund.


              *   Deceased's estates.


              *   Appointments of insolvencies.


              *   Appointment of curatorships.


              *   Bonds security.


              At present the Guardian's Fund in Pietermaritzburg holds  R454
              million in trust, a  substantial  amount  of  money.  Only  12
              people are employed (with a minimum qualification of St 10) in
              the office, with no accounting  or  finance  background.  This
              clearly  indicates  high-risk  areas  in  terms  of  financial
              control.


              Each and every financial  transaction  is  recorded  manually,
              which  makes  retrieval  of  the  information  difficult.  The
              payment process is risky and is prone to major  errors.  There
              is a backlog of  processed  cheques,  waiting  for  signature,
              verification or approval by the head of  the  department.  The
              problem with the said process is that no-one is overseeing the
              work of the head of the department  (supervising  the  cheques
              signed  by  the  head).  No  internal  auditors   assist   the
              department in the office.


              If estate/inheritance  money  is  not  collected  within  five
              years, the  Master  places  it  in  the  Government's  Special
              Reserve Fund for a period of 30 years. At present they have 30
              000 clients. The names of those outstanding beneficiaries  who
              are  entitled  to  claim  and  are  not  coming  forward   are
              advertised once a year in the Gazette.  The  Committee  doubts
              whether there are proper checks  and  balances  to  track  the
              money and the accumulated interest.


              Example: The process of handling estate money is as follows:


              *   Post is received and given to Mrs Eichbauer to  record  on
                  computer.


              *   Post is given to six temporary workers to attach to cards.


              *   Maintenance and inheritance cases are taken to Mr Van Wijk
                  for approval.


              *   Payments are then processed by Ms Thandeka, Mlaba,  Laura,
                  Kim, Kavitha, Dees and Matilda, and are checked by Mr  Van
                  Wijk, Kim or Kavitha. All payments  are  recorded  in  the
                  Abstract Book and in the Cash Book by  Dees,  and  checked
                  by Mrs Loubser and Hack.


              *   Overcrediting  is  recorded  on  computer  by  Kim,  (Z53s
                  written by Thembeka or Prudence).


              *   Z53s, J341s and cheques are posted and all registered mail
                  is recorded by Thembeka.


         3. Recommendations


              (a)  The  Guardian's  Fund  needs  to  employ  people  with  a
                  financial background who can effectively  and  efficiently
                  deal with the early problems, and the  Accounting  Officer
                  must report to the Committee on what steps  are  taken  to
                  ensure  that  people  with  a  financial  background   are
                  employed by the Department.


              (b) Urgent implementation of an information system  that  will
                  assist the office to handle R454 million  effectively  and
                  serve their 30 000 clients efficiently.


              (c) The office must also use  national  media  to  inform  the
                  public, as well as  community  newspapers,  written  in  a
                  language that everyone is able to understand.


              (d) Staff must be enabled to understand the cycle of work.


     E.     Conclusion


         The Committee should follow up with other  site  visits  to  ensure
         that its recommendations are implemented by the offices  concerned.
         The Committee would like to extend a word of  thanks  to  DFID  for
         making financial assistance available to undertake the visits,  and
         to the Department and its officials for their co-operation.


     Report to be considered.

5.    Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,  dated
     25 February 2003:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having sent a delegation  of
     four  members  to  the  Mdantsane  Magistrate's  Office  and   to   the
     Grahamstown Master's  Office  on  an  oversight  exercise,  reports  as
     follows:


     Mdantsane Magistrate's Office


     Delegation:


     Mr F Beukman -    New NP (Committee Chairperson)
     Mr P Gerber  -    ANC
     Ms K Mothoagae    -     ANC
     Mr R Mofokeng     -     ANC


     Secretariat - Ms N Madide and Mr G Dixon.


     The group was  well  received  by  the  following  management  team  in
     Mdantsane:


     Adv N Cetywatyo   -     Regional Head
     Mr D Roux    -    Human Resource Director
     Ms M Nyumase      -     Finance Manager
     Ms Gqiba     -    Chief Magistrate: Mdantsane
     Ms Elliott   -    Office Manager: Mdantsane
     Ms Siqendu   -    Internal Audit


     A.     Introduction


         On 1 November 2002, the  delegation  undertook  the  visit  to  the
         Mdantsane Magistrate Office to display an interest  and  provide  a
         presence from the political perspective that a serious  effort  was
         being made to understand the  unique  and  difficult  circumstances
         under  which  the  Department   of   Justice   and   Constitutional
         Development (the Department), especially Mdantsane, operates.


         The visit followed a Committee resolution on interaction  with  the
         Department  regarding  progress  and  implementation  of  financial
         management systems and compliance with  the  PFMA,  as  well  as  a
         hearing on  the  Auditor-General's  Report  on  the  Department  of
         Justice and Constitutional Development.


     B.     Purpose of visit


         The  Department  is  facing  problems,   ranging   from   financial
         misconduct and maladmistration to corruption by officials.


         The purpose of the visit was to provide the Committee with  insight
         on issues relating to:


         *  Method of work


         *  Segregation of duties


         *  Financial Management Systems (FMS)


         *  Cash office control


         *  Staff complement


         *  Information systems.


         The Committee wishes to further improve  both  its  efficiency  and
         effectiveness in respect of oversight.


     C.     Concerns raised by Committee


         1. Staff complement


              (a) One Chief Magistrate, assisted by a Senior Magistrate  and
                  seven Magistrates.


              (b) Two Regional Magistrates.


              (c) One Senior Prosecutor, assisted by nine Prosecutors.


              (d) One Assistant Director (Office Manager), assisted  by  two
                  Supervisors and 25 Administration Clerks, Typists,  Telkom
                  Operators, etc.


              (e)  One  Principle  Court  Interpreter,  assisted  by   Court
                  Interpreters.


              (f) 24 Cleaners.


         2. Human resources


              (a) Poor performance led to  an  enquiry  in  respect  of  the
                  Office  Manager  and   Middle   Managers   involved   with
                  financial matters.


              (b) Lack of competent staff.
              (c) Removing of staff not able to perform.


         3. On the issue of adequate staffing, the view was  expressed  that
              there was not enough expertise, given that the office  had  to
              deal with all problems from the former Ciskei as well.


         4. Other issues that members and the management discussed:


              (a) Control Personnel  Officer  (Office  Manager)  not  up  to
                  standard


              (b) Middle Management not up to standard


              (c) Clerical staff, especially those dealing with finances and
                  maintenance, not up to standard


              (d) Training of staff in respect of cash hall,  vote  account,
                  new  Maintenance  Act,   human   rights,   equity   court,
                  provisioning and administration;


              (e)  Transformation  in  Magistrates  Courts,   anticorruption
                  awareness, Small Claims Court,  clerk  of  criminal  court
                  not up to standard


              (f) Institution of disciplinary  measures,  where  applicable,
                  not up to standard


              (g) Noncompliance with prescripts


              (h) Lack of proper management internal control


              (i) Lack of physical security and access control


              (j) Lack of segregation of duties


              (k) Missing records
              (l) Difficulty  in  reconciling  the  deposit  account  before
                  change-over to the new Trust Account in April 2000,  which
                  led to both intentional and  nonintentional  misstatements
                  of accounting records


              (m) Misappropriation of State money


              (n) About 700 inactive maintenance cards not being followed up


              (o) Difficult to reconcile the vote  account  and  to  monitor
                  vote account reports on a monthly basis


              (p) Payments to Sars were not made.


     D.     Recommendations


         1. The Committee noted that a "rolling stone" project  team  and  a
              task team from the Regional office had  visited  and  assisted
              all the sub-offices with the major problem of balancing  money
              in trusts. The Committee recommends that the management report
              to it on their progress within one month of  the  adoption  of
              this Report by the National Assembly.


         2. The Committee noted that Human Resources followed up  all  cases
              of misconduct and that there has been some staff  re-shuffling
              and transfers. A new control officer was appointed at the  end
              of 2001.


              The Committee recommends  that  the  management  of  Mdantsane
              Magistrate's Office deal with their staff complement as matter
              of urgency.


         3. The Committee noted that the office  of  the  CFO  is  currently
              piloting the outsourcing of cash management in cash  halls  in
              order to circumvent the theft of trust  money.  The  Committee
              recommends that progress be reported to it within one month of
              the adoption of this Report by the National Assembly.


         4. The Committee noted that two officials from the regional  office
              have been checking the old vote account records not filed,  so
              as to determine whether  they  were  ever  captured  onto  the
              system or not,  and  also  to  determine  which  vote  account
              transactions needed to be journalised.


              The Committee recommends that progress  on  the  capturing  of
              votes be reported to it within one month of  the  adoption  of
              this Report by the National Assembly.


         5.  The  Committee  recommends  that  all  offices  have   security
              doors/burglar bars fitted as a matter of urgency.


         6. The Committee recommends that the  Regional  Office  make  every
              attempt to update the Asset Register, and report on progress.


         7. The Committee recommends, as a  matter  of  priority,  that  the
              management appoint a Loss Control Officer.


     E.     Conclusion


         The Committee's main concern was the lack of communication  between
         the CFO  of  the  Department  of  Justice  and  the  management  of
         Mdantsane Magistrate's Office, which impacted on the  effectiveness
         and functioning of the office.


         The Committee recommends that the Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice
         and Constitutional Development be informed  in  order  to  try  and
         assist with improving the situation as part of its oversight duty.


     Grahamstown Master's Office: Administration of Guardian's Fund


     The delegation was welcomed by:


     Mr S S Moodley    -     Master of Grahamstown
     Mr Leon Keyter    -     Assistant Master: Grahamstown
     Mr K van der Merwe      -     Project Manager:
            Master's National Office
     Ms Mary Clayton   -     Chief Administrative Clerk


     A.     Background information


         The purpose of the visit to the  Grahamstown  Master's  Office  was
         specifically  to  look  at  the  management  and  the  systems  and
         procedures of the Guardian's Fund - who  was  responsible  for  the
         management of the account and who investigated the  extent  of  the
         corruption, as uncovered by the  forensic  audit  of  the  Auditor-
         General?
         The  group  also  needed  to  know  under  whose   the   Fund   was
         administered in the former TBVC states and what  steps  were  taken
         to hold anyone accountable  for  the  maladministration  that  took
         place with respect to the Guardian's Fund.


     B.     How Guardian's Fund works


         The Master's Offices receive  funds  from  various  sources.  These
         funds are deposited and credited to Control Accounts.  Payments  in
         the form of maintenance and interest are made to beneficiaries  and
         to SARS for funds belonging to the State.


         While the Fund was  being  administered  within  the  TBVC  states,
         there appeared to be no suitable accounting systems and  procedures
         in place to effectively and efficiently  run  it.  The  system  was
         primarily a  card  system  that  was  opened  for  each  individual
         account. Interest, deposits and  payments  were  reflected  on  the
         cards and were calculated by hand.


         The Fund, after being transferred to the Grahamstown  and  Pretoria
         Master's Offices, was upgraded to  a  computerised  system,  to  be
         implemented in February 2003.


         The overall responsibility  for  the  Fund  at  present  lies  with
         individual Master's Offices, but the post of National  Director  of
         the Guardian's Fund has been advertised and  is  to  be  filled  in
         February 2003.


         The responsibility for the Fund prior  to  1994  was  that  of  the
         individual Masters in Umtata and Bisho.


     C.     Problems associated with Guardian's Fund


         The reconciling of figures was calculated by hand and was  done  by
         unqualified people, which led to discrepancies in the  information-
         capturing system.
         The Fund was  understaffed  and  the  correct  expertise  were  not
         linked to the running of the Fund.  In  one  instance,  secretaries
         were allowed to calculate and record interest  in  respect  of  the
         individual cards. Coupled with the fact that the calculations  were
         time-consuming, this resulted in numerous  discrepancies,  mistakes
         and omissions.


         The Guardian's Funds in the Bisho and Umtata  areas  had  not  been
         audited, at least not since the incorporation of  the  TBVC  states
         in 1994. Integration of the Funds took place in 1996 and 1997,  but
         no audit was done on the accounts due to  the  Auditor-General  not
         having the authority to audit within the TBVC states.


         Due to an enquiry  by  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  into
         irregularities that occurred at these Guardian's Fund offices,  the
         Funds were subsequently transferred to the  Master's  Offices.  The
         Bisho and Umtata branch was  transferred  to  Grahamstown  and  the
         Mmabatho and Thohoyandou branches were transferred to the  Pretoria
         Master's Offices.


         Shortfalls amounting to R3 470 817,14 were recorded for  the  Bisho
         Guardian's  Fund,  and  shortfalls  in  respect   of   the   Umtata
         Guardian's Fund amounted to R2 592 610,17.


         The corruption uncovered by the Auditor-General has  been  referred
         for investigation, subsequent arrests have  been  made  and  people
         have been charged.


         The account  administration  needs  to  be  improved  in  order  to
         tighten security measures in respect of the accounts.


         The Guardian's Fund accounts have been moved to a  secure  building
         in Grahamstown, supplied by the Public Works Department.


         A safe has been requested to house the cards and accounts.
         Upgrading of the systems and procedures to  be  computerised,  will
         allow for tighter control measures to be implemented.


     D.     Reasons for deficits


         1. Overpayments, incorrect postings  and  irregular  payments  were
              made to persons not entitled to funds.


         2. There  was  a  lack  of  record-keeping  in  respect  of  direct
              deposits. As a result, beneficiaries' funds cannot be traced.


         3. Acounting practices were  not  adhered  to  in  respect  of  the
              administration of the Fund.


     E.     Problems faced


         1. Due to a lack of information, it is difficult to  determine  the
              exact  trust  obligation  to  beneficiaries  and  the   Fund's
              obligation to issue maintenance payments and final payments.


         2. Funding for a full-scale forensic audit by  the  Auditor-General
              is lacking due to the Department not being  able  to  pay  the
              expenses associated with the audit.


         3. The Guardian's Fund is understaffed and the  required  level  of
              expertise does not relate to the value of the job.


     F.     Recommended solutions


         The Committee recommends that:


         1. Funding be made available for the  Auditor-General  to  apply  a
              full-scale forensic audit to the accounts and entries.


         2. The appointment of the National Director of the Guardian's  Fund
              and  the  Accountant  to  each  Guardian's  Fund,  along  with
              adequate staff appointments, be expedited.


         3. The surplus funds accumulated for the  Guardian's  Fund  in  the
              PIC account be investigated in order to rectify the shortfalls
              and deficits.


         4. The computerisation of the  Guardian's  Fund  be  expedited  and
              that appropriate checks and balances and access by  authorised
              persons be put in place as soon as possible.


     Report to be considered.

6.    Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Public  Accounts,  dated
     18 March 2003:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having sent a delegation  of
     11 members to India, reports as follows:


     A.     Background
         A delegation from the Committee undertook  a  study  visit  to  New
         Delhi, India, from 16 to 24 November 2002.


     B.     Objectives of visit


         1. To meet with  the  members  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee
              (PAC),  the  Controller-General   of   Accounts   (CGA),   the
              Controller and Auditor-General  (CAG)  of  India,  and  senior
              officials from the two offices, to share experiences and learn
              aspects of public finance management and financial oversight.


         2. To observe how  the  PAC  conducts  public  hearings  and  other
              business.


         3. To investigate support and  other  resources  the  PAC  receives
              from their Parliament.


         4. To meet other  roleplayers  in  public  finance  management  and
              financial oversight in order to  gain  more  insight  in  this
              field.


     C.     Meetings with other role-players


         In addition to meeting government officials  and  Parliamentarians,
         the delegation met the following role-players:


         1. Academics at the  National  Institute  of  Financial  Management
              (NIFM).


         2. Academics at  the  National  Institute  of  Public  Finance  and
              Policy (NIPFP).


         3. Academics at the International Center  for  Information  Systems
              and Audit (ICISA).


         The multiparty delegation consisted of:


         NNP
         Mr F Beukman (chairperson).


         ANC


         Mr V G Smith
         Mr D M Gumede
         Mr B W Kannemeyer
         Mr P A Gerber
         Mr R Mofokeng
         Ms P K Mothoagae
         Ms N L Hlangwana


         DP


         Mr M Lowe


         IFP


         Mr L Vezi


         UDM


         Dr G W Koornhof


         Support staff


         Mr L Pakati (Control Committee Secretary)
         Ms B I Letompa (Researcher)


     D.     Meeting with SA High Commissioner in New Delhi, Ms Maite Nkoana-
         Mashabane, and Deputy High Commissioner, Mr Desmond Nxiweni, on  17
         November 2002


         The delegation had a brief but informative  courtesy  meeting  with
         Ms  Maite  Nkoana-Mashabane  and  her  Deputy,  Mr  Desmond   Monde
         Nxiweni. After the chairperson had outlined the objectives  of  the
         visit, the High Commissioner welcomed the  delegation  and  gave  a
         general briefing about India. Her input covered:


         *  Democracy in India


         *  The economy


         *  Levels of socio-economic development
         *  The nature of party politics.


         She also provided useful hints about how  to  conduct  business  in
         India. She referred to India as a country of a billion people,  yet
         very democratic. Its party politics is  robust;  it  is  a  shining
         model of  democracy  and  a  country  of  many  opportunities.  She
         mentioned  that  this  is  despite  abject  poverty  that   engulfs
         millions of its population. Another positive  element  about  India
         is that its citizens are very patriotic; they always portray  their
         country in a positive light.


     E.     Meeting with Controller-General of Accounts and Senior Officials
         in New Delhi on 18  November  2002  -  chaired  by  CGA,  Mrs  Usha
         Sahajpal


         The delegation met with a delegation from the CGA.  In  her  input,
         she mentioned that the accounting work of the government  of  India
         is handled by four organisations with distinct identities of  their
         own:


         *  Civil


         *  Defence


         *  Railways


         *  Posts and Telecommunications.


         The CGA also gave an overview of  the  legal  provisions  governing
         public accounts management in India.


         1. Legal provisions


              Her  starting  point  was  the  Constitution  of  India.   She
              mentioned that according to article 150 of  the  Constitution,
              the accounts of the Union and the States shall be kept in such
              form as the President may, "on the advice  of  the  Controller
              and Auditor-General of  India,  prescribe".  The  Constitution
              further states that the Accounts  should  be  divided  into  a
              Consolidated Fund, a Contingency Fund and a Public Account.


              (a) Consolidated Fund: All expenditure is incurred  from  this
                  fund.  No  amount  can  be  withdrawn  from   it   without
                  authorisation from Parliament.


              (b) Contingency Fund: The fund is placed at  the  disposal  of
                  the President  to  meet  unforeseen  expenditure,  pending
                  authorisation by Parliament.  Subsequent  to  Parliament's
                  approval, the money is  obtained  and  recouped  from  the
                  Consolidated Fund.


              (c) Public Account: The account contains public moneys such as
                  savings, reserve funds, trusts and endowments.
              (d) Annual Financial Statement (AFS)


                  Article  112  of  the  Constitution  prescribes  that  the
                  President tables the AFS every  year  in  both  Houses  of
                  Parliament. The AFS  must  show,  separately,  expenditure
                  voted  and  charged  to   the   Consolidated   Fund,   and
                  distinguish expenditure  on  revenue  account  from  other
                  expenditure. The  Constitution  further  states  that  the
                  estimates for Charged Expenditure should not be  submitted
                  to the Vote of Parliament, but should be submitted in  the
                  form of a Demand for Grants to the House of the People.


         2. Roles and functions of CGA


              The delegation learnt that critical functions of the CGA  were
              the following:


              (a) Consolidation of Monthly Accounts and placing them on  the
                  website, with a complete analysis by the last day of  each
                  month. This is a requirement of the IMF.


              (b) The analysis of receipts,  revenue  and  other  accounting
                  figures of the government of India.


              (c)  Reporting  to  Parliament  every  year  on   the   actual
                  expenditure  with  reference  to  the  budget   that   was
                  approved by Parliament and the variations between the  two
                  (ie actual expenditure and budget, together  with  reasons
                  for variations).


              The Annual Appropriation Accounts is prepared demand-wise.  In
              this sense, it contains a group of functions to be carried out
              by specific  departments/ministries  or  other  administrative
              authorities,   and   takes    into    account    supplementary
              appropriations,  reappropriations  and   surrenders.   Another
              responsibility of  the  CGA  is  that  of  monitoring  of  the
              recommendations of the PAC and Audit Reports.


     F.     Meeting with Comptroller and Auditor-General of India (CAG)  and
         senior officials in New Delhi on 18 November 2002


         As the most important instrument of accountability, the CAG  has  a
         dual role to perform:


         *  He acts as an agency to function on behalf of the legislature.


         *  He acts as an agency to function on behalf of the executive,  to
              ensure compliance by subordinate authorities  with  the  rules
              and orders issued by the CAG.
         The CAG, as head of the Indian Audit and  Accounts  Department,  is
         thus neither a part of the legislature nor the  executive,  but  is
         an office created by the Constitution to see  to  it  that  diverse
         authorities, in regard to all  financial  matters,  adhere  to  the
         demands of the Constitution  and  other  laws  that  govern  public
         financial management. To this end,  there  are  several  provisions
         that are enshrined in the Constitution of India, whose  aim  is  to
         safeguard the CAG's independent functions.


         The CAG is appointed by the President of  India  by  warrant  under
         his hand and seal, and the oath of office requires him  or  her  to
         uphold the Constitution of India and other laws in his or her  area
         of responsibility. He or she can be removed  from  office  only  on
         grounds of proven misbehaviour or incapacity after  an  address  by
         both Houses of Parliament and supported by a  two-thirds  majority.
         His or her administrative powers and the conditions of  service  of
         persons serving in the Indian Audit  and  Accounts  Department  are
         prescribed by the rules made by the President,  after  consultation
         with the CAG. The  expenses  of  the  office  are  charged  to  the
         Consolidated Fund of India and are not voted by Parliament.


         1. Role of CAG in other government institutions


              The  CAG  has  to  undertake  special  audits  in  respect  of
              parastatals.


              The CAG issues standardised guidelines to auditors on  how  to
              look  at  certain  issues  during  the  auditing  process   of
              parastatals.


              The CAG conducts a  supplementary  audit  on  all  parastatals
              after special chartered accountants have performed the audit.


         2. Formal body to oversee CAG


              There is no formal body that oversees the functions of the CAG
              in India, like the  Audit  Commission  in  South  Africa.  The
              Auditor-General is regarded as the final authority to  oversee
              accounts.


              The CAG is  fully  funded  by  the  government  of  India.  To
              supplement its income, the CAG recovers some of its money from
              agencies audited by it. There is  no  connection  between  the
              Accounts office and the  Audit  Office.  The  CAG  deals  with
              Accounts and Audits separately.


         3. General observations


              Although India is a federal state, the  Constitution  provides
              for a Unitary Audit by the CAG, who  conducts  audits  of  the
              accounts of both the Union and the State Governments.
              To   ensure   uniformity   in   government   accounting,   the
              Constitution also prescribes that the accounts  of  the  Union
              and of the  States  be  kept  in  a  form  prescribed  by  the
              President on the advice of the CAG.


              The CAG plays a fiduciary role in federal financial relations.
              He or she ascertains and certifies the net proceeds  of  taxes
              levied and collected by the Union and assigned to  the  States
              or distributed between the Union and the States.


              The CAG also authorises the salary and allowances of  gazetted
              officers serving  under  many  State  governments,  authorises
              payment of pension and other retirement benefits to  employees
              of  most  of  the  State  governments,  and  maintains   their
              Provident Fund Accounts.


     G.     Meeting at National Institute  of  Financial  Management  (NIFM)
         with Director, P K Brahma, and  senior  officials  on  20  November
         2002


         The Institute is an autonomous body under the Ministry of  Finance.
         It provides professional training to  public  officials.  The  NIFM
         has collaborative programmes with the  World  Bank  on  Procurement
         Procedures, and with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  on
         banking sector reforms.


         From the academics at the Institute,  the  delegation  learnt  that
         the primary objectives of the public  financial  management  system
         in India is to ensure the implementation  of  budgetary  and  other
         policy decisions, to  obtain  reliable  financial  and  other  data
         relating to execution of budgetary decisions, to  prevent  improper
         use of public funds,  to  detect  and  correct  instances  of  such
         improper use and to assess the efficiency of operations.


         The delegation also learnt that the CAG is regarded as the  supreme
         Audit Institution, according to articles 148 to 151 of  the  Indian
         Constitution. It is regarded  as  a  single  Audit  Authority,  for
         Union  and  States.  Accordingly,  they  audit  all  receipts   and
         expenditures  of  the  government  of  India,  States   and   Union
         Territories,  including  expenditures  incurred  through  voluntary
         organisations or NGOs. Moreover, they  audit  government  companies
         and other local self-governing bodies.


         1. Relationship between PAC and CAG


              The PAC considers reports of the  CAG  tabled  in  Parliament.
              During interaction with the members of the PAC, the delegation
              noted the following:


              (a) The role played by  the  CAG  in  assisting  the  PAC  has
                  significantly changed over the past years to keep up  with
                  the changing demands of the PAC.


              (b) For the purpose of assisting  the  PAC  in  examining  the
                  Accounts, the  office  of  the  CAG  prepares  a  document
                  outlining important  issues  the  PAC  could  look  at  in
                  respect of each audit.


              (c) The CAG is considered as the friend, philosopher and guide
                  of the PAC.


              (d) The CAG and its officials attend sittings of the PAC  and,
                  by convention, they take their seats by the  side  of  the
                  chairperson.


              (e) When scrutinising  expenditure,  the  PAC  places  greater
                  emphasis on  value  for  money  with  regard  to  economy,
                  efficiency and effectiveness.


              (f) The supremacy of  the  Audit  Institution  ends  once  the
                  Report has been presented to Parliament.


              After finalisation of a report, copies are made  available  to
              the  Ministry/Department,  which   is   required   to   inform
              Parliament's secretariat of the steps taken  by  them  on  the
              recommendations contained  in  that  report  within  a  period
              specified in the report (six months or less).


         2. Challenges facing PAC - view of academics (NIFM)


              The academics were of the  view  that  the  PAC  is  sometimes
              unable to  devote  sufficient  time  to  examine  all  reports
              presented to them. Each report contains a  massive  amount  of
              complex information, which requires more time.


              The PAC is not entirely independent, given that the office  of
              the CAG assists it by coming up with  recommendations  on  all
              observations highlighted in the Audit Report.


              There is continuous interaction between the CAG and the PAC.


     H.     Meeting at National  Institute  of  Public  Finance  and  Policy
         (NIPFP) in New  Delhi  with  Prof  Om  Prakash  Mathur  and  senior
         officials on 21 November 2002 - chaired by Prof Mathur


         The NIPFP is a centre for applied research in  public  finance  and
         public  policy.  It  was  established  in  1976  as  an  autonomous
         institution. Its aim is to contribute to policy-making  in  spheres
         relating to Public Economics. Its  governing  body  is  responsible
         for providing  general  policy  direction  to  the  Institute.  The
         governing body comprises a Chairperson, two representatives of  the
         Ministry of Finance, one representative from each of  the  Planning
         Commissions, a representative from the Reserve  Bank  of  India,  a
         representative  from   the   Industrial   Credit   and   Investment
         Corporation  of  India,  three  eminent  economists  and   taxation
         experts and 12 members representing State governments.


         Like  most  research  organisations,   the   Institute   undertakes
         research on matters relating to tax policy and tax  administration,
         public expenditure and control,  public  debt  and  the  management
         thereof, intergovernmental  fiscal  relations,  economics  and  the
         pricing of public and industrial enterprises.


         Furthermore, the Institute  organises  training  courses,  seminars
         and workshops and  facilitates  policy  dialogue.  The  aim  is  to
         enhance the understanding of public finance and policy.


         All the information gathered in the process  is  published  in  the
         form of books,  research  reports,  seminar  papers  and  journals.
         Moreover, and most importantly, the Institute assists the  Minister
         of Finance by providing research support.


         Views of Academics of NIPFP on challenges facing PAC


         One of the concerns raised at the meeting by the academics  relates
         to the fact that revenues in India  are  always  overestimated  and
         budgets underestimated. This has become  a  systematic  problem  in
         India.  One  of  the  reasons  for  this  is  that  income  tax  is
         relatively small. The  GDP  from  1997  has  also  been  relatively
         small, at 17%.


         Another  concern  is  a  lack  of  capacity  for  MPs   to   engage
         effectively with loads of complex reports.


         Yet another is that the work done by the PAC is seldom  debated  in
         the House. On this score, the academics argue that the  PAC  cannot
         be seen as a substitute to the House.


         They argue that the PAC cannot be seen to be effective  if  the  A-
         G's reports on the misuse of funds are dealt  with  three  to  five
         years after the problem had occurred.


         They were concerned about the fact that few actions  are  taken  on
         the misuse of funds; sometimes there is virtually no feedback  from
         departments/Ministers.


         The PAC has been exposed to  other  ways  of  dealing  with  public
         expenditure  and  subsidies,  with  particular  reference  to   the
         analysis of trends and structural shifts  and  its  management  and
         control - how to deal with government debt, both at the centre  and
         at State level.


         Tax policy and administration, especially in  reference  to  reform
         in the structure  and  administration  of  personal  and  corporate
         income tax; customs; excise; sales tax; as well as  the  impact  of
         tax incentives on particular sectors.


     I.     Meeting with PAC at Indian Parliament  on  20  November  2002  -
         chaired by Hon Mr Sardar Buta Singh, MP


         1. Composition and work methods


              The  PAC  in  India  historically  began   during   the   pre-
              independence days of British rule. The first  public  accounts
              committee was set up in 1921 and consisted of only 12 members.
              The committee now consists of 22 members, of whom 15 are  from
              the Lok Sabha (Upper House) and seven  from  the  Rajya  Sabha
              (Lower  House).  By  its  composition,  it  is   a   miniature
              Parliament, as  the  members  are  elected  on  the  basis  of
              proportional   representation   of   political   parties    in
              Parliament.


              However, once elected, the members  cease  to  function  along
              party-political  lines.  The  committee,   through   sustained
              scrutiny, highlights  cases  involving  losses,  instances  of
              waste, imprudence and financial irregularities.


              When a case of proved negligence is brought to the  notice  of
              the committee,  the  concerned  Ministry  is  called  upon  to
              explain what  action,  disciplinary  or  otherwise,  has  been
              initiated  to  pin-point   responsibility   and   to   prevent
              recurrence. The committee expresses no opinion  on  points  of
              general policy, but it is  well  within  its  jurisdiction  to
              point out whether there has  been  extravagance  or  waste  in
              carrying   out   policy.   The   government    always    takes
              recommendations  of  the  committee  seriously  and   suitable
              remedial action is taken.


              Being a sentinel  on  public  expenditure,  it  has  been  the
              constant endeavour of successive public accounts committees to
              ensure that money voted by Parliament is disbursed legally for
              the intended purposes approved by Parliament and in accordance
              with the rules and regulations framed by competent  authority.
              Indian  Parliamentarians  have  evolved  sound  accountability
              procedure to see to it that public money is  well  spent.  The
              committee has the proud privilege of  eminent  leaders  having
              adorned the office of chairperson, including two former  Prime
              Ministers. By convention, the chair of the  PAC  goes  to  the
              leader  of  the  opposition  or  his  or  her   nominee.   The
              Committee's deliberations have been marked by objectivity  and
              fairness, culminating in unanimity on recommendations.


         2. Lessons learnt


              The PAC has the privilege of having long-term serving  MPs  as
              members.  The  advantage  of  this  is  that  it  allows   for
              continuity and the accumulation of valuable experience.


              At the time of the visit by the delegation, the PAC  in  India
              was nine years behind with  the  processing  of  some  of  the
              reports. In India, the A-G audits all companies in  which  the
              State has more than 50% of the shares. Their books and reports
              are referred to  the  public  enterprise  committee,  not  the
              public accounts committee.


     J.     Meeting with International Centre for  Information  Systems  and
         Audit (ICISA) on 21 November 2002 - chaired by Dr Shri A Prasad


         The meeting with ICISA was the last engagement for  the  delegation
         in India. They learnt that the CAG of  India  has  been  active  in
         upgrading the skills of auditors and financial managers,  and  this
         is illustrated by the apparent prevalence of training  institutions
         in India.  Since  1979,  ICISA  has  been  involved  in  organising
         international training programmes in different  areas  of  auditing
         and accounting. The government sponsors all its programmes.


         ICISA  does  not  only  cater  for  Indian  students;  it  attracts
         students from many  countries,  including  the  EU,  former  Soviet
         Union Republics, Korea, China, etc.  Most  important  is  that  the
         Institute provides direct support to the  secretariat  and  members
         of the PAC. The government, also, from time to time  requires  that
         ICISA  do  research  and  look  at  specific  issues  that  require
         research.


         Challenges facing PAC


         Again, the challenges facing  the  PAC  were  highlighted  and  re-
         emphasised by academics of the Institute. They argued that the  PAC
         is facing monumental challenges. Every  year  the  CAG  presents  a
         plethora of reports with massive observations. Among  others,  they
         present reports of  wide-ranging  autonomous  bodies  with  massive
         loans from the government. In most cases, large sums of  government
         money are channelled through these organizations. Yet,  members  do
         not have time to scrutinise these reports,  because  they  have  to
         divide their time between Parliament and their  constituencies.  To
         help the PAC deal with these challenges, ICISA assists the  PAC  to
         simplify the reports and prioritises them. They also assist in  the
         drafting of committee reports.
     K.     Other observations


         1. India as a democracy faces challenges that  are  almost  similar
              to those of South Africa,  in  terms  of  both  socio-economic
              development and public finance management.


         2. Their PAC is almost similarly dealt with to  the  way  in  which
              SCOPA in South Africa is managed and organised.


         3. The activities of the committee are largely apolitical.  Members
              totally divorce party politics from committee work.


         4. The CAG is facing serious  challenges,  some  bordering  on  the
              undermining of their independence.  The  delegation  was  told
              that, at some point, the CAG was called in by  Parliament  and
              reprimanded.


         5. Like South Africa, India  is  moving  from  cash  accounting  to
              accrual accounting.


         In this context, the Committee feels that  it  should  continue  to
         use some of the lessons learnt in India.


     L.     Conclusion


         The Committee wishes to express its sincere gratitude to  the  High
         Commissioner of South Africa  in  India,  members  of  the  PAC  of
         India, officials of various government departments,  academics  and
         staff from the office of the High Commissioner, who made the  visit
         such a resounding success.


         The Committee would  also  like  to  especially  thank  Mr  Linford
         Andrews for the special assistance rendered to  committee  members,
         Ms Ava Dowling and Ms Ntombi Madide for assisting  with  logistics,
         and the Department  of  International  Development  for  sponsoring
         part of the visit and for  assisting  with  the  logistics  of  the
         visit.


     Report to be considered.

7.    Twenty-First Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts,
     dated 25 March 2003:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the Robben Island
     Museum for the year ended  31  March  2002  [RP203-02],  tabled  on  30
     September 2002 and referred to it, reports as follows:


     1.     Audit opinion


         The Committee commends the management of the Robben  Island  Museum
         for  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the  Auditor-
         General, and trusts that future  audit  opinions  will  be  equally
         unqualified.


         The Auditor-General, however, raised several issues of concern:


         (a)     PFMA noncompliance


              The Museum did not comply with the requirement  of  the  PFMA,
              which requires the submission of annual  financial  statements
              to the Auditor-General within two months after the end of  the
              financial year. The Committee also notes the reasons  for  the
              late submission as provided by the Accounting Officer  to  the
              Auditor-General, and finds the reasons unacceptable.


              The Committee recommends that all the sections of the PFMA  be
              complied with and that the management of the Museum  implement
              action plans to ensure that future financial statements fairly
              present its activities.


         (b)     Audit Committee


              The  Committee  notes  that  an  Audit   Committee   was   not
              established as required in terms of the PFMA.


              The Committee recommends that the management take urgent steps
              to rectify the situation, and that the Auditor-General  report
              thereon in his next audit report.


         (c)     Forensic audit


              The Committee notes that a forensic audit was instituted after
              allegations by individuals that certain  procurement  policies
              and procedures were not followed.


              The Committee recommends that the final forensic audit  report
              be submitted to it as soon as possible.


         (d)     Grants


              The Committee notes that the acting finance manager  requested
              that  additional  audit  procedures  be  performed  on  grants
              received by the Museum.


              The Committee recommends that the final audit report on grants
              be submitted to it as soon as  possible  when  all  the  audit
              requirements/procedures have been completed.


     2.     Conclusion


         The Committee is of the view  that  no  hearing  be  held  for  the
         financial year under review.


     Report to be considered.

8.    Twenty-Second Report of the Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts,
     dated 8 April 2003:
     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Annual
     Report, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
     Statements of Vote 21: Independent Complaints Directorate [ICD] for the
     year ended 31  March  2002  [RP149-02],  tabled  in  Parliament  on  25
     September 2002 and referred to it, reports as follows:


     1.     Tabling of Annual Report


         The  Committee  notes  that  the  Annual  Report  was   tabled   in
         Parliament  on  25  September  2002,  a  delay  which   constitutes
         noncompliance with the PFMA.


     2.     Audit opinion


         The  Committee  commends  the  management  of  the  ICD   for   the
         unqualified audit opinion expressed  by  the  Auditor-General,  and
         trusts that future audit opinions will be equally unqualified.


     3.     Emphasis of Matter


         The Committee notes that under "Emphasis of  Matter"  the  Auditor-
         General has raised an issue of concern which  needs  the  attention
         of the management and on which the Committee  offers  comments  and
         recommendations in paragraph 4 below.


     4.     Responses to Committee's Tenth Report for 2002


         The Committee welcomes the Executive Director's speedy response  to
         the issues raised in its Tenth Report for 2002 on the ICD.


         The Committee notes:


         *  That weaknesses  were  identified  during  the  risk  assessment
              process,  relating  mainly  to   reporting   lines   and   the
              segregation of duties


         *  That the Human Resources Component was  rated  as  a  high  risk
              area within the ICD


         *  That recommendations for the improvement of the  Component  will
              be made.


         The  Committee  recommends  that  it  be  kept  abreast   of   such
         improvements, and that the Auditor-General report  thereon  in  his
         next report on the ICD.


         With regard  to  the  Internal  Audit  Component's  impact  on  the
         control environment, the  Committee  notes  that,  in  addition  to
         implementing the Code of Conduct for Public Servants,  the  ICD  is
         developing a Code of Ethics to improve corporate governance  within
         the ICD, and that the ICD has completed a Code of Conduct  for  ICD
         staff members to further foster integrity within its own ranks.


         The Committee requests that copies of the Code of  Ethics  and  the
         Code of Conduct for ICD staff members be  furnished  to  it  by  30
         June 2003.


         The Committee notes the submission of  the  minutes  of  the  Audit
         Committee's two meetings, as requested. It further notes  that  the
         Audit Committee could not evaluate  the  financial  statements  for
         the 2001-02 financial year before the Auditor-General approved  the
         effectiveness of internal controls.


         The Committee welcomes the plan of action, which has been  compiled
         to improve the effective management of  the  ICD's  assets,  within
         the relevant time-frames, especially in  relation  to  stock-taking
         and a centrally-driven Assets Register.


         The Committee requests  that  the  ICD  submit  a  formal  progress
         report on asset management to Parliament by 30 June 2003.
     5.     Internal audit function


         The Committee notes with concern that, although an  internal  audit
         department was established during February 2002, no audit plan  was
         drawn up, and that no audit work  was  performed  for  the  2001-02
         financial year.


         The Committee welcomes the Auditor-General's  indication  that  the
         internal audit function will  be  evaluated  during  the  financial
         year ending 31  March  2003.  The  Committee  recommends  that  the
         Auditor-General report thereon on his next report on the ICD.


     6.     General


         In terms of the Introduction by  the  Executive  Director  and  the
         Foreword by the Minister of  Safety  and  Security,  the  Committee
         notes that:


         *  During the year under review, the ICD received 3 369  complaints
              which fell within the mandate  of  the  ICD,  representing  an
              increase of 14,9%, compared to the previous year


         *  The figure for deaths in custody as a result  of  police  action
              decreased by 12,8%


         *  The ICD received much acclaim internationally on the basis  that
              it conducts its own independent investigations, and  that  the
              South African model of policing oversight has  been  commended
              and lauded.


     7.     Conclusion


         Having  noted  the  unqualified  audit  opinion  expressed  by  the
         Auditor-General, and having considered  the  issue  raised  by  him
         under "Emphasis of Matter", the Committee is of  the  view  that  a
         hearing  on  the  Independent  Complaints   Directorate   for   the
         financial year under review is not necessary.


     Report to be considered.


