---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 June 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-06-25
---

WEDNESDAY, 25 JUNE 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Chairperson of Committees  took  the  Chair  and  requested  members  to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NEW MODEL OF MACE

                               (Announcement)

The  CHAIRPERSON  OF  COMMITTEES:  Members  will  notice  that  we  have  an
additional item on the floor of the House. This is a model of the  new  mace
for the National Assembly. Members and the public are invited to make  their
comments on the model. The model will be displayed outside the Chamber  when
the House adjourns for  members  to  view.  A  comment  book  will  also  be
available for members to make an input.

    REPORT REQUESTED ON APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTOR GENERAL OF INTELLIGENCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on behalf  of  the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the  draft  resolution  printed  in
his name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, notwithstanding the resolution adopted on 16 April 2003, the  House
  requests the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence to  report  to  the
  House on the appointment of the Inspector General of Intelligence  on  or
  before 1 September 2003.

Agreed to.

                    NATIONAL ROAD TRAFFIC AMENDMENT BILL
                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chair, I want to take this opportunity to thank
the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Speaker's Office, the Chair, Deputy
Chair and all hon members for the good wishes, the prayers and the support
that I have received. Thank you very much to all of you. [Applause.] I am
not quite out of the woods yet, but I think I am fit enough to begin to
resume my duties incrementally, so thank you for this opportunity.

I rise to introduce the National Road Traffic Amendment Bill. You will
recall that on 30 April this year, driving licences contained in identity
documents ceased to be valid driving licences. At the time of the deadline,
an estimated 800 000 people had not converted to the CCF licences. The
implication of the deadline is that driving licences contained in identity
documents are, from 1 May 2003, no longer deemed to be valid driving
licences.

Persons who did not convert their driving licences contained in identity
documents do not have driving licences any longer. They will have to go
through the entire process of applying for a learners' licence, doing the
K53 driving test and obtaining fresh driving licences.

Members will also recall that in Government Notice 336 of 2003, special
exemptions are granted to persons who could not apply during 1 March 1998
to 30 April 2003 to convert their driving licences contained in identity
documents.

The Bill under discussion addresses the problems that we faced during the
conversion period. Section 18(6) of the National Road Traffic Act is
relevant, and authorises the Minister to determine a date on which a
driving licence contained in an identity document shall cease to be a valid
driving licence. That provision does not empower the Minister to extend the
period determined, neither does the provision allow the Minister to make
exemptions.

It is in view of these problems that the Bill before the House proposes the
following amendments. Clause 1(a) of the Bill caters for several categories
of persons who were unable to convert their driving licences contained in
identity documents to the prescribed driving licence format within the
prescribed time periods. These categories are persons on missions or
assignments in overseas countries, persons incarcerated during the period
in which they were required to convert, persons on contract of employment
outside the borders of the Republic and full-time students at foreign
academic institutions.

Clause 1(a) of the Bill provides for a window period to enable persons to
convert their driving licences to the credit card format before being
liable for penalties for not being in possession in a driving licence in
the prescribed format.

Clause 1(b) amends the Act to provide for the date after which driving
licences contained in identity documents and those that are not so
contained shall be deemed not to be driving licences in terms of the Act.
The Bill empowers the Minister to set different dates for different classes
of persons to substitute their driving licences and also to set different
dates for persons holding different types of driving licences to substitute
the driving licences.

Clause 2 of the Bill caters for persons who acquired their driving licences
from the former TBVC states and self-governing territories and who could
not convert because their records were only available at those offices in
their so-called self-governing territories, or TBVC states, or because
those offices no longer exist. The Bill empowers the Minister to set a
different date for such persons to convert their licences. The Bill seeks
to regularise and rationalise the process of conversion to the CCF driving
licence.

I want to conclude by thanking the portfolio committee for its work. I also
want to thank the Acting Minister, who cannot be here today, who has been
so very good as to stand in for me and will continue to do so for some
time. But, more importantly, we often focus on those who have not converted
their licences and we forget that between 4 and 5 million people have
actually, over the period of five years, converted their licences to the
credit card format. [Applause.]

I want to say a special word of thanks to those millions who have actually
taken the trouble to convert their licences and to say that we appreciate
their sacrifices, and that the time they spent and the effort that they
have made are all appreciated by Government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Chairperson. It's wonderful, Minister, to have
you back here, but also participating actively. It is really wonderful. We
are very pleased to have you.

As you said, we have all been required to convert our driving licences from
the old format to the new credit card format. I think we are all aware of
that; it received a lot of media attention. The deadline to complete this
process ended just two months ago and I would also like to add my word to
the Minister's and, on behalf of the committee, express our thanks to all
of those drivers - and there were, as the Minister has told us, 4 to 5
million drivers - who converted their licences in good time. We would also
like to thank all of the traffic department officials who often worked very
long hours to clear backlogs and who sometimes had to deal with long and
impatient queues.

The fact that the national Department of Transport had to shift the final
deadline is an indication that there are still many South Africans who do
not take their responsibilities as citizens seriously. The conversion of
licences isn't just a bureaucratic process. It is designed to help all of
us. We want to ensure that the system of licensing is clean. We want to
have a format that enables traffic officers to accurately and rapidly
verify a driver's licence. Those who drive around on our roads with illegal
licences are a threat to themselves, they are a threat to their passengers
and they are a threat to all who are using our roads. We know that the
great majority of South Africans agree with this perspective and we support
Government's initiative to get a clean licensing system.

In terms of the National Road Traffic Act, we are also required to renew
our credit card driving licences on a regular basis. If we comply on time,
then it should be a fairly simple process. It, too, is designed to ensure
that the records are up to date and that we are still competent to drive in
terms of eyesight and other issues like that. This is quite a normal
practice in most countries and, again, it makes a lot of sense.

As the Minister has said, in the course of the conversion process, moving
from the ID format to the credit card format, a number of problems cropped
up. We discovered in particular that there were people who were for good
reason simply not able to make the conversion in good time. There were
soldiers, for instance, who were posted to Burundi and places like that and
who were unable, therefore, in some cases to meet the deadline. There are
South African diplomats serving in foreign countries. There were people
admitted to hospital for long periods who were unable to meet the deadline
and there are also people serving prison sentences.

Then we also discovered that there was another problem, and that many
licence holders from the former Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Ciskei and Venda
entities found that conversion was difficult, because - as the Minister
said - their records were held in the particular office at which they
received it and were not on the national computing system. Now this is a
small matter, a technical matter that must be addressed and will be
addressed, but it makes sense to allow them more time to effect a
conversion.

In all of these cases the national department and its provincial
counterparts went ahead with allowing a certain flexibility and we
certainly supported them in applying this flexibility to the public.

However, there were concerns, of course, that somewhere someone might
challenge this flexibility. We are living - and we are glad to be living
here - in a constitutionally governed country, and someone might say,
"Well, how can you apply a flexibility here when you did not apply it to
me?" So we thought, and the department thought, that it was important to
entrench in law a certain degree of flexibility - well-defined flexibility
- to enable this to happen.

So, in the Bill that was first brought to our committee the categories that
we have mentioned already were recognised as categories in which there
could be a postponement of the deadline: people posted overseas by
Government, people in hospitals for a long period of time, people serving
prison sentences and also those with the anomaly of the TBVC licences.

When we discussed the draft Bill that we had in front of us in the
portfolio committee, a number of colleagues raised other categories of
people who should be covered, in particular the case of South Africans not
posted by Government, but on private business, working on contract in
foreign countries, or South African students who are studying abroad.

I am sure Mr Farrow would say that despite my crazy economic policies I
sometimes have good intentions. Well, I would like to return the
compliment. Despite the crazy economic policies of his party, Mr Farrow
actually contributed constructively to helping us with this and drafted a
formulation which we all accepted. [Interjections.] I'll come to that in a
moment. So we agreed to extend the exemptions to South Africans who are
working on contract abroad and to South African students studying abroad as
well. Obviously it is not an unlimited extension. Within six months of
returning to the country or coming out of prison or hospital, you would
then - within those six months - have to renew your licence.

This amendment, by the way, also makes very clear that failure to renew a
licence will result in having to reapply for a driving licence afresh,
going through the required tests and so on. So it is important to do this.

Finally, in our hearings, our attention was drawn to a couple of matters
which we didn't feel should be put into the Bill as such, but which are
practical matters which we think should be addressed. The first one, if you
take a look at your credit card format drivers' licence - and I am one of
the compliers - you will see that the only date that appears on it is the
date of its issue. Apparently this has caused some problems, in insurance
cases, we understand, and also in people staying abroad and trying to hire
a car and being told, "Well, in terms of your licence we see you have only
been driving for three or four weeks, and therefore you are a novice
driver", and therefore there are particular liabilities, and more expensive
arrangements and so on.

What we have said to the department is that it is a simple matter of
indicating the date on which we actually qualified originally and not the
date on which we substituted licences. That date is in the system, but it
is not reflected on the credit card that we have and we have asked the
department please to correct that. In future, credit cards will reflect the
date on which we qualified as drivers. They have undertaken to do that and
we would like to remind them to do that.

The second matter, which is probably a more complicated matter, relates to
the large number of people who have not converted their licences. Some may
well have done that out of just being lazy or not seeing their duties as
citizens as being important, but we do think there are many people - I have
encountered cases - who simply couldn't afford to make the conversion. It
was literally a financial matter. We have also picked up that the charge
varies quite enormously between one province and another, and so we would
ask the department to look into this matter so that where there are really
deserving financial cases ... Sometimes you find people whose profession is
driving, but they are not earning very much and they battle actually to
make the substitution and failure to convert means that they actually lose
their jobs as well.

With those additional practical matters, the ANC supports this Bill. Thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Chairperson. I would also like to wish the
Minister well. It is good to see you back at this podium leading the
Transport debate again. We wish you well.

The Bill before us came about as a result of the High Court ruling relating
to a prisoner who, as a result of his incarceration, was unable to comply
with the conversion of his drivers' licence to the credit card format. The
department also realised that there was a need to accommodate TBVC licences
which could not be captured on the system as well as drivers' licences not
yet converted in respect of Government employees on foreign missions and
assignments.

The Bill now legitimises these categories and the Minister will now fix a
date in the Gazette whereby these motorists will be able to convert,
subject obviously to adequate proof. This is a most commendable process,
but, on scrutiny of the Bill, the DA felt that this could not be done by
excluding other categories of motorists, who for reasons of employment or
studies outside the borders of South Africa, could also lay similar claims
for having been unable to convert by the cut-off date.

The DA felt that the exclusion of these two categories of motorists would
be deemed to be unfair, in some way discriminatory or, for that matter,
unconstitutional. And the question was asked: Why should only Government
employees on missions and assignments abroad or persons in state
institutions benefit from this extension? Chairperson, I must say that in
putting forward these proposals for amendment, I was met with understanding
and full co-operation by members of the portfolio committee, and I would
like to thank them again for that. It is this sort of co-operation, I
believe, that bodes well for our multiparty democracy; even more so when
the other side of the coin is put forward by the DA in debates in this
House.

The problem, however, of the tiresome and often troublesome conversion of
credit card format licences does not stop here. There still remains the
problem associated with the renewal and my colleague has given us some sort
of background to that. As the House is aware, motorists now have to renew
their licences every five years. This in itself is facing similar problems
as experienced with the conversions. The DA strongly believes that many of
those approximately one million motorists who never converted and now have
to redo their licences will no doubt put additional pressure on the licence
and testing stations. With present capacity, this will again cause undue
and unnecessary delays.

Many of those motorists who did not convert were motorists who could not
afford the cost of converting. Presently, and I talk from experience, if a
motorist needs to apply for renewal, the costs incurred are approximately
R100, depending on the province, at least R30 for additional photographs -
both the renewal and temporary licence - and this R42 licence that I am
showing you here.

This is all very costly and there is also the process of queueing,
travelling, taking time to have the photographs taken, fingerprinting and
verification, as well as the issue of this temporary licence. In some
cases, it might not be a problem. But to others of us it is, because those
who cannot get time off from work or people that are in one-man businesses
do have this difficulty and I think we need to look at a process whereby we
can go and speed the thing up as quickly as possible. I believe that,
surely, these processes can be speeded up, and we also need to investigate
how one can accommodate motorists who generally could not and cannot afford
to convert or renew their licences, or, for that matter, whether this
temporary licence is really necessary, once a licence has been verified.

In other countries this service is provided free of charge and I am not by
any means suggesting that we go the socialist route that my colleague, the
hon Cronin, was talking about earlier, but certainly, we need to look at
how we can actually cut the cost of this. [Interjections.] Having said
that, there is now an urgent need for the department to keep the public
informed about these amendments, and clearly an extensive communication
campaign needs to be launched at home here and also through embassies
abroad, in order for these people to be told about how to go about this
process. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Mr Chairman, hon Minister, we are pleased to have you back
and hope you will soon be behind the wheel.

Just a few months ago, we witnessed the large-scale confusion and indeed
chaos when motorists had to convert their ID-based drivers' licences to the
new card format. This chaos came against the background of at least two
extensions of the deadline for conversion and a five-year period of grace
in which to do this. Of course, it also went accompanied by mostly unfair
public accusation against Government and the Department of Transport. These
accusations were probably to be expected in the light of the fact that
South Africans of all walks of life seemed to have very little regard for
the laws and regulations of the country.
Road safety is one such area where lawlessness has been the order of the
day. For many years, our accident rate and death and injury statistics have
underwritten the situation. The new credit card drivers' licence will soon
have two immediate benefits: Firstly, its use will remove thousands of
illegal and forged drivers' licences in ID books from circulation.
Secondly, it will allow for the implementation of points-based systems that
will assist our traffic authorities in better law enforcement. There can be
little, if any, argument against the necessity for such a type of licence.
Of course there were extenuating circumstances where certain licensed
drivers could not convert in the allocated period and during the extension
period.

The Bill before us addresses the fact by enabling the Minister to allow
four categories of licensees to convert their old ID licences to the new
type of licence within a period of six months from either returning to
South Africa or being discharged from medical or correctional facilities.
This is an eminently reasonable decision by Government and should be
supported.

The Bill also contains a disappointment for drivers who have not converted
or will not convert their old licences in the allocated period. The old
licences will be deemed invalid and then they will have to go through the
entire process of obtaining drivers' licences again as if it was their
first application.

Government will no doubt come in for heavy criticism for this decision and
there is every possibility that the matter might even be taken up in a
court of law. Whatever the outcome, the IFP feels this is a sound decision
based on the country's needs and our national interests. In this particular
case, national interest means reducing the number of deaths and injuries on
our roads, as well as enabling authorities to effectively enforce the
country's traffic laws. The IFP supports the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J NIEMANN: Mnr die Voorsitter, Minister, ek wil my aansluit by die
ander wat goeie wense uitgespreek het en u terugverwelkom. Dis werklik
wonderlik dat u 'n tweede geleentheid gekry het om u nooienstoespraak te
hou. Dit is baie min van ons beskore om dit te kan doen. Ek sê vir jou:
Welkom terug, en ek is bly u is terug.
Dit is ook 'n besonderse geleentheid vir my vanmiddag om hier te staan,
want ek kry net twee minute om te praat en dan word ek stilgemaak. En nou
kom die Voorsitter en hy sê vir my: "Jy het beseringstyd van een minuut
bygekry." Baie dankie. Dis fantasties dat 'n ou 'n minuut in hierdie plek
bykry.

Ons het gehoor wie in hierdie wet ingesluit word en wie uitgesluit word.
Die Nuwe NP het dit gesteun, maar ons het so 'n knop in die keel, want ek
dink daar is een groep wat ons gepleit het ingesluit moet word wat nie
ingesluit is nie. Hier word voorsiening gemaak vir alle mense wat op
kontrak is vir die staat in die buiteland; studente, soldate in die Kongo
of Burundi, hulle kan terugkom en dadelik geakkommodeer word en lisensies
kan aan hulle toegeken word.

Maar die mense wat geëmigreer het, wat drie of vier jaar reeds in die
buiteland is of was en nou antwoord op die oproep van die President, wat
hierdie mense nooi om terug te kom na Suid-Afrika toe om te help om die
nuwe land en nuwe nasie te bou - om verskeie redes, want ons het hulle
kundigheid en vaardigheid nodig - daardie mense word uitgesluit. Ek dink
werklikwaar u moet uit u pad gaan om dit moontlik te maak, want daar is
derduisende van dié mense wat uitgesluit is, veral in die lig van die
President se versoek en die Regering se versoek: Asseblief, kom terug na
Suid-Afrika toe. Ons plaas 'n belemmering op daardie mense. Sodra hy hier
kom, mag hy nie in sy eie voertuig klim en ry om, argumentshalwe, werk te
gaan soek nie. U mag sê dit is 'n bietjie erg, maar ek dink dit grens aan
erge diskriminasie, en ek wil graag by u pleit dat u hierdie saak in die
reine sal bring. Dít sal dit ook vir daardie mense wat ons wil hê moet
terugkom, moontlik maak om terug te kom en ook dadelik te kan aansoek doen
om 'n lisensie, wat hulle reeds het, maar nie kan gebruik nie. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J J NIEMANN: Mr Chairman, Minister, I wish to concur with the wishes of
goodwill as expressed by others and welcoming you back. It is truly
wonderful that you have been granted a second opportunity to deliver your
maiden speech. Very few of us are afforded that privilege. I say to you:
Welcome back, and I am glad that you are back.

It is also a special occasion for me to be standing here this afternoon, as
I only have two minutes to speak and then I shall be silenced. And now the
chairperson comes along and tells me that I have been granted one minute of
injury time. Thank you very much. It is fantastic that a guy can get an
additional minute in this place.

We have heard whom have been included in this act and who are excluded. The
New NP has supported it, but we have a lump in our throat, because I think
there is one group whose inclusion we have begged here, and they are not
included. Provision has been made here for all persons abroad that are
contracted to the state: students, soldiers in the Congo or Burundi - can
return and be accommodated immediately and licences can be issued to them.

But those that have emigrated, who have already been and still are abroad
for three or four years and are now heeding the call of the President, who
is inviting these people to come back to South Africa to help in the
building of a new country and a new nation - for various reasons, because
we need their expertise and skills - those people are excluded. I really
think you have to go out of your way to make it possible, because thousands
of these people are excluded - particularly in the light of the President's
request and the request of the Government: Please return to South Africa.
We are encumbering those people. As soon as he arrives, he may not climb
into a vehicle of his own to drive around, say, for the sake of argument,
to seek employment. You may say that this is somewhat severe, but I think
it borders on profound discrimination, and I want to plead to you to
resolve this matter. This will also make it possible for those people whom
we want to return, to return and apply immediately for a licence, which
they already have, but cannot use. I thank you.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, hon Minister, a very warm word of welcome.
May you be blessed with continued health and strength, and may you be with
us for a long time.

A lot of controversy surrounded the issue of the new card drivers' licence
system. Accommodation, though, was made for the many drivers who had failed
to transfer from the old licence to the new card system. The MF did have
some reservations about the cost of the change that drivers incurred. Just
attaining a licence is costly these days and though the change to the new
card systems has its benefits, it has been costly.

Concern is also expressed about South Africans abroad who, on their return,
are refused these renewals and need to undergo new tests. This is not only
costly and inconvenient, but these persons have taken the necessary steps
to attain the original drivers' licence and should be accommodated in this
regard.

The MF, however, supports the department's efforts to make travelling safer
for all. The provisions and amendments made in this Bill are adequate. The
MF supports the National Road Traffic Amendment Bill.

Chairperson, I want to thank hon Jeremy Cronin for bringing to the
attention of the House the fact that when you go to obtain this licence,
you will find that it is registered only from the day it is issued. I have
been a driver for 32 years and, on that licence of mine, it says that I
have only been driving from 2000. I have 32 years of driving experience
without a black mark against my licence. I am a very safe driver. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Agb Voorsitter, ek wil ook graag die Minister hartlik
terugverwelkom.  Ons is saam met hom dankbaar dat hy weer sy pligte op
hierdie manier kan hervat. Ons hoop ook die bietjie grys hare wat deurkom,
gaan binnekort weer donker en swart wees soos altyd. Sterkte vir u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Chairperson, I would also sincerely like to welcome back
the Minister. We are thankful with him that he can resume his tasks in this
manner. We hope that the few grey hairs appearing will soon be dark and
black again as always. All of the best for you.]

The hon Cronin started his speech by saying that everyone had to convert. I
thought he was speaking about converting from Communism to capitalism but
it seems to me I was mistaken. It's about licences. [Laughter.]

To drive a car is a right and not a privilege. But to drive a car on a
public road is a privilege. When driving on a public road you enter the
public domain. And for that you need a permit. Therefore I want to appeal
to the public to co-operate in this. It is not a right to drive on a public
road. You need a permit from those to whom those roads belong.

There is an example in this Bill of unforeseen consequences of the original
legislation and, indeed, this Bill corrects those unforeseen consequences.
Therefore we support it.

The National Action appeals to Government: There are other laws as well
with unforeseen consequences, for instance, the labour laws. Please, do the
same with those laws and fix their unforeseen consequences.

Ons stem saam met die verteenwoordigers van die DA en die Nuwe NP dat dit
nie net diegene is wat vir die staat werk wat in die buiteland is wat
hierdie reg moet kry om spesiaal hul lisensies te kan hernieu nie. Die feit
dat jy vir die staat werk, gee jou geen addisionele reg bo iemand wat nie
vir die staat werk wanneer dit kom by die gebruik van publieke geriewe soos
paaie nie. As ons hierdie saak ook kan regstel, sal ons daaroor verheug
wees. Die Nasionale Aksie steun graag hierdie wetgewing. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We agree with the representatives of the DA and the New NP that it is not
only those who work for the Government who are abroad who should be given
this special right to renew their licences. The fact that you work for the
Government does not give you additional rights above someone who does not
work for the Government when it comes to the use of public amenities such
as roads. If we could rectify this matter as well, we will be very happy
about it. The National Action has pleasure in supporting this legislation.
I thank you.]

Mr A R AINSLIE: Thank you, Chairperson. For a minute I thought I had been
elevated to a very high station, but it was very short-lived. Thank you
very much. Chairperson, Minister, it's a great pleasure to see you once
again in the driving seat, even if it is as co-driver. It is an absolute
pleasure to see you here this afternoon.

Chairperson, the National Road Traffic Amendment Bill makes a very valuable
contribution to the road safety programme. I need hardly remind members
that South Africa has a very high accident rate. There are, on average, 512
000 motor vehicle accidents each year, with enormous social and economic
costs. The economic costs alone of our high accident rate have been
estimated to be in the region of R13 million each year. But how do you
quantify the human costs? How do you attach value to the loss of loved ones
to motor vehicle accidents? There is no value that one can put on the loss
of loved ones to motor vehicle accidents.

This amendment boosts one of the core elements of our strategy to promote
safety on our roads: driver fitness. It is the drivers' licence which
reflects whether a driver is fit to drive or not; whether he or she is
technically competent; whether he or she is physically competent. It is
essential for law enforcement, therefore, that the drivers' licence and
licensing are beyond reproach. To achieve these objectives, all drivers are
required to convert their licences from the old format to the new credit
card format, and failure to convert to the new licence will lead to those
affected having to reapply for a drivers' licence. They will have to
complete the whole exercise  of learning how to drive once again - from the
learners' licence all the way to the actual drivers' licence.

During the conversion process it became very apparent that, for reasons
beyond their control, there were people who could not meet the conversion
deadline. These people fell into five broad categories. Firstly, there were
people admitted to a medical facility or detained in a state institution,
and examples have already been given by previous speakers and I won't go
into that. Secondly, there were those posted by the Government on a foreign
mission or assignment, and Mr Cronin gave the example of those of our
members in the SANDF who have been posted to Burundi and other areas as
peacekeepers. Thirdly, there were those on contract of employment outside
the borders of South Africa. Fourthly, there were full-time students at
foreign academic institutions, and fifthly, those licence holders from the
former so-called TBVC states.

The amendment before us today brings much needed clarity to the whole
question of licences, because, in terms of the Bill, the Minister is
empowered to postpone the conversion or renewal of the licences of all five
categories I have referred to. But, it is important that we do not lose
sight of the reasons that the Minister has advanced on previous occasions
for the conversion to the new credit card format. There are a number of
significant advantages that the new licence has over the old ID-type
licence. And at this point I would have liked to put my hand in my pocket
and draw out my licence and flash it around as the hon Cronin has done, and
as Mr Farrow did earlier on, but I discovered I don't have it with me.

The old licence had virtually no security features and could easily be
forged. The new licence has state-of-the-art security features. It is very
difficult to forge and there are no successful forgeries in circulation.
These security features include machine-readable technology, which will
make it possible, for example, for traffic officers at the roadside to
verify the identity of the driver and his or her competence to drive. This
is very advanced technology and South Africa will be one of the few
countries in the world using it.

The licence also incorporates fully automated fingerprint technology. Over
the past five years, the Department of Transport has collected more than
seven million fingerprint records of drivers. These fingerprints have been
matched and verified automatically. The credit card format drivers' licence
was introduced mainly to eliminate the issuing of fraudulent licences. And
since its introduction, over one million licences have been removed from
the system.

The new licence is also fully compliant with SADC and international
standards. Then there was also the question of the time it took to have a
licence included in one's identity document. Often, it took up to six
months for that to happen. The new credit card format licence is produced
within eight weeks of application. And what about convenience? Paper-type
licences age very quickly and become difficult to read. ID-type licences
are inconvenient to carry. In contrast, the new licence has a life span of
10 years and is extremely convenient to carry. In addition to this, the old
licence was available in English and Afrikaans only. The new licence is
available in all 11 languages.

The new licensing system is already having the desired effect. Fraudulent
licences are being removed from the system. Those attempting to convert
licences obtained by fraudulent means have been stopped in their tracks.
There was a widely reported case in Cape Town last week when several people
arrived at the Hillstar centre with false licences, hoping to convert these
to the new licence format. They were prevented from doing so, and promptly
arrested. Several other arrests followed. So the system is working. Drivers
who are not fit to be behind the wheel of a vehicle are being identified
and they are being taken off our roads.

As the new system of licences permeates through the road safety programme,
we will see the results on our roads in terms of a safer driving and
travelling environment. Chairperson, the ANC supports the National Road
Traffic Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Thank you, Chair, hon members. Allow me first to
thank all hon members who have participated in this debate and discussion.
I think a number of very useful points have come up and I want to assure
the House that the suggestions and concerns which have been raised are
matters which will certainly receive the attention of the department. I
also believe that, at an appropriate time, the portfolio committee will
review the situation: how the credit card format system has been working,
what the weaknesses are, and where the problem areas are that need to be
addressed - and we should not be afraid to look at the problem areas to see
how we can deal with them.

I also want to thank all hon members for their kind remarks.

Agb mnr Aucamp, baie dankie ook vir u opmerkings. U het verwys na my grys
hare. Daar was 'n stadium toe daar geen hare was nie, nou's daar darem so
'n bietjie hare. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon Mr Aucamp, thank you also for your comments. You referred to my grey
hair. There was a stage that I had no hair at all, but now there is at
least a little hair.]

I also remember the saying that grey hair is not a sign of old age, it is a
sign of wisdom.

Ek weet nie of dit waar is nie; ek hoop so. [I don't know whether that is
true; I hope so.]

I want to say to members of the public and public representatives that
there are many motorists - members of the public - who have felt
exasperated; who have raised concerns; who felt that the system is
punitive, and that the Public Service does not care. I want to give them
the assurance that that is not so. I know that there have been problems
with procedures. There have been delays, and there have been complaints
about costs and the issue of differential charges in different provinces to
which hon Cronin referred. Why do we need temporary licences? Hon Mr
Niemann raised the question of emigrants, for example. Then, the fact that
the date of issue appears on the credit card format and does not give an
indication as to how long a person has already had a licence.

So, I think members have raised a number of concerns. A number of them, I
believe, are legitimate and need to be looked at. With regard to emigrants,
I would like to say to hon Niemann that this is not a case of
discrimination, and while certainly we need to look at the issue to see
whether one can be of assistance, I would reject the notion that there has
been discrimination of any kind. After all, people who have emigrated did
so with the intention of settling in other countries, giving up their South
African citizenship and not coming back. But, if people are going to
return, then certainly it's an issue we should look at - the portfolio
committee needs to look at it too. I do not know whether it is possible to
assist in that regard, but we must certainly look at it.

I also take the point, hon Farrow and others, that the communication
process is going to be important. I want to assure the House that, in fact,
the department is looking at that. I want to make the point about the fact
that we brought this Bill to Parliament, and that the number of exemptions
and opportunities that have been created are only for a limited category of
persons. They are not going to be extended, and the general public - all of
us - must be aware of the fact that this law has been successful; between
four and five million people have complied with the law, and all of us need
to do so.

As the hon Ainslie has pointed out, there are many advantages;
harmonisation within the SADC region is a very important one. Moving in
line with international norms and standards is also very important. Law
enforcement, road safety and road traffic management in general are all
going to benefit from the effective implementation of this system.

Allow me once again to thank the portfolio committee, and hon members for
participating. It is great to be back. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate.

Hon members, before we proceed to put the question, I wish to add my good
wishes, and those of the Presiding Officers, to the Minister of Transport.
We wish him strength to deal with his illness, and trust that he will be in
full strength very soon. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS 16 TO 23 OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Mr F BEUKMAN: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members and specifically members
of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, on behalf of Scopa, I want to
introduce the reports as indicated on the Order Paper and that were
published in the ATC for consideration by the House.

I want to specifically focus this afternoon on the Scag task team report.
This report was approved and adopted by Scopa on 20 August 2002, and the
new procedure was subsequently implemented with immediate effect. Now, the
Scag report is in essence a practise document to improve oversight and
accountability and serve as a method of work guideline for Scopa.

Scag is an acronym for Scopa and the Auditor-General on the one hand, the
pre-eminent committee on parliamentary oversight, and the Chapter 9
institution responsible for the audit and report of accounts, financial
statements and financial management of national, provincial and local
government.

The establishment of the Scag task team and subsequent report originated
from a workshop held by Scopa in Gordon's Bay in June 2002, that was held
to take stock of its current operations with the view to increasing its
effectiveness, efficiency and credibility. Various meetings of the task
team took place to finalise the report.

I want to thank the following members who played a vital role in the task
team: the hon Bruce Kannemeyer; the hon Nigel Bruce; at the Auditor-
General's office, Mr Cobus Botes, Mr Paul Mosaka and Anton van Dyk;
Parliament's Scopa secretariat and Mr Gershwin Dickson, who acted as
secretary of the task team. Their input and suggestions were vital for the
success of the project. I also want to extend a word of thanks to the FID
for their financial support in making the report possible. I also want to
thank Miss Ava Dowling and her team for their kind assistance.

Although Scopa's oversight role is explained in Rule 206 of the National
Assembly Rules, there is a clear need to further formalise and strengthen
the operating procedure of Scopa to improve oversight and accountability.
What are the conclusions and recommendations of the Scag report in a
nutshell? Firstly, it is an improvement of the systems and procedures of
Scopa, we now have a prioritised report system; the introduction of a
grading system, and we now classify Government departments in terms of
their audit reports. For instance, this morning we had the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development before us; they were classified as
an A in terms of the audit reports.

Another conclusion reached is to reduce the Scopa review process of 80
reports from approximately 32 weeks to 20 weeks and to empower the
secretariat to fulfil their multitude of tasks more effectively. On
average, this new process would be about three months shorter than the
previous one, and will be completed in full before the next review cycle
begins in September of every year.
Now, with regard to systems and procedures of Scopa, decisions on
categories, for example, to decide on what department to call, may not only
be informed by the following guidelines, but the membership of Scopa may
deem a hearing necessary due to public opinion. Serious or recurring
issues, material amounts in question, subsequent events or the political
context at the time all play an important role in determining effective
oversight and accountability.

The high volume of reports and tasks flowing into Scopa requires that some
form of prioritisation should be undertaken to ensure that the most urgent
issues receive priority attention, and that all departments and
institutions should, over a three-year cycle, receive a turn to be
considered, irrespective of priority.

Scopa will endeavour to have interaction with every Government department
in a three-year cycle. Scopa is obliged to consider all matters referred to
it by the National Assembly. However, it is clearly not expected that all
matters should be dealt with in the same priority order, but that Scopa
should apply an effective sifting in terms of agreed-upon criteria that
would ensure that attention is given to reports that merit attention.

Mostly this would involve cases where maturity, accountability or
governance in financial management terms has failed, ie problem cases. In
terms of our operating procedures, we operate in terms of groups, and
groups will make recommendations first based on the categories I will
discuss in a minute or two, and then refer these to plenary for
ratification.

Now, the three categories of priority for sifting of reports are as
follows. We classify Government departments in terms of A, B and C and we
usually also indicate that to a department when they come before us at a
public hearing. A category A department is usually a department that would
come before the committee for a public hearing and the matters that are of
relevance here are: the audit opinion on Votes and public entities that are
adverse, disclaimed or qualified; special reports of the Auditor-General;
highly inadequate tabled responses to Scopa recommendations; matters of
serious public concern not reported on by the Auditor-General; size of
budget and/or assets; unqualified reports with material losses; cases of
misconduct, and/or fruitless or unauthorised expenditure. Now, since August
last year, all the departments that appeared before Scopa received an A
classification.

Then the second category is departments for further interaction, or follow-
up with those departments or institutions. These are matters that do not
necessarily require a hearing, but a specific resolution or a letter to
express issues of concern or to acquire further explanation from accounting
officers or authorities. Usually it is unqualified audit opinions,
unsatisfactory responses to Scopa recommendations and also relates to the
size of a department's budget, assets and impact.

And then we come to the category C classification and that is really the
departments that are performing excellently, and also the Government or
state institutions that are doing well in terms of the Auditor-General's
report. The category C covers matters that require no overt action by
Scopa, but a standard resolution or letter and that is usually unqualified
audit opinions and satisfactory responses to Scopa recommendations, and it
also includes success stories, and departments or public entities with
dramatic improvements or progress.
The above sifting of reports will be done, as indicated earlier, by the
Scopa work groups and scheduled into Scopa's working programme. A cluster
motivation report will be produced, detailing the above information that
will serve as motivation and background information on departments selected
to appear for hearings.

The report further highlights the following with regard to documentation
and record-keeping. The secretariat's filing system, filing capacity and
resources at present are inadequate in fulfilling the needs of Scopa. The
committee section's or the Scopa secretariat's resources for the storing of
information needs to be urgently addressed.

One recommendation would be for Scopa to include, in its vision, the need
to acquire its own proper budget in terms of designing and maintaining its
own record-keeping facility. This would ensure that the responsibility and
resources for the creation and maintenance of Scopa's filing rest with the
committee.

With regard to tracking and follow-through, we have created a mechanism
consisting of a chairperson, conveners, and the secretariat in the Office
of the Auditor-General that meets on a weekly basis to prioritise follow-
ups and oversee tracking and follow-through. A formative status report on
matters outstanding for the benefit of efficient administration of cluster
and plenary meetings is also produced as a matter of standard practice.

Die verslag van die Scag-taakgroep is 'n bewys dat Skoor die afgelope jaar
deur die verfyning van sy werksmetodiek objektiewe riglyne daargestel het
om ook omstrede kwessies te hanteer. Konsensus is, in wese, die grondslag
van die komitee en daar moet deurlopend gepoog word om inhoud aan hierdie
kernbeginsel te gee. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The report of the Scag task group is proof that Scopa has, during the past
year, through fine-tuning its working methodology, introduced objective
directives also to handle contentious issues. Consensus is, in essence, the
foundation of the committee and continual efforts must be made to lend
substance to this core principle.]

During our workshop at Gordon's Bay, Richard Calland of Idasa highlighted
issues that should form part of the debate regarding the role of the
committee. And we, as a committee, have discussed these issues during our
activities as this task group. Those issues perhaps need to be debated in
future.

There is a need to establish conventions regarding oversight and we think
that our report, in that regard, sets a precedent. This should be done with
wider processes and Scopa should play that role. A distinctive role should
be defined for Scopa oversight on behalf of the citizens of the country.

Oversight is dialogue; democracy is not a zero-sum game. People should be
persuaded that Scopa is not there to make heads roll. It is about making a
better democracy on behalf of the people. Scopa's role is not just number-
crunching, but assessing also the quality of expenditure in its opinion.
Scopa must therefore work with portfolio committees and policy committees.

The following conventions seem important: A chairperson from the nonruling
party; appointment of members for a parliamentary term; access to special
resources, and also assistance by research facilities. Scopa has made a
concerted effort to involve portfolio committees in their preparations for
hearings and in the public hearings themselves. We have achieved mixed
results in this department. Some portfolio committees reacted very
positively, others not.

The need for the involvement of portfolio committees is essential to
improve oversight and the monitoring of Government departments. I can
perhaps single out the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, which
played a very active role in our hearing and in our preparation. I think
they set a very good example of how we can jointly achieve oversight.

Skoor het tydens sy studiebesoek einde verlede jaar na Indië die volgende
belangrike aspekte waargeneem, en dit word ook vervat in die verslag:
Soortgelyke uitdagings in terme van sosio-ekonomiese ontwikkeling en
openbare finansiële bestuur kom in beide lande voor; aktiwiteite van die
komitee is ook grootliks apolities ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[During its study visit to India at the end of last year Scopa observed  the
following important aspects, and these are also  contained  in  the  report:
Similar  challenges  in  terms  of  socioeconomic  development  and   public
financial management occur in both countries; activities  of  the  committee
are mostly a political ...]

... and India is also moving from a cash accounting  to  accrual  accounting
system.

En dan, die Kantoor van die Ouditeur-generaal staan ook voor groot
uitdagings wat sy onafhanklikheid en kapasiteit in Indië betref. Skoor het
ook verlede jaar vir die eerste keer in sy geskiedenis oorsigbesoeke
gebring aan staatsdepartemente waar kontroleprobleme ondervind word, waarna
verwys word in die ATK. Dit sluit in die kantore van die
justisiedepartement in die Oos-Kaap, die Mdantsane-landdroskantoor en
Grahamstad se Meesterskantoor en in KwaZulu-Natal die Umlazi-
landdroskantoor en Pietermaritzburg se Meesterskantoor, asook die Suid-
Afrikaanse Inkomstediens by Kaapstad Internasionale Lughawe en Kaapstad-
hawe.

So, dit is 'n aanduiding dat ons nie bloot na die verslae kyk nie, maar dat
ons ook kyk na wat op die grond aan die gang is. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[And then, the Office of the Auditor-General also faces great challenges in
terms of its independence and capacity in India. Last year, for the first
time in its history, Scopa paid visits to state departments where control
problems are experienced, which are referred to in the ATC. This includes
the offices of the Justice Department in the Eastern Cape, the Mdantsane
Magistrates' office and the Master's Office in Grahamstown and KwaZulu-
Natal, the Umlazi Magistrates' office and Pietermaritzburg Master's office,
as well as the South African Revenue Service at Cape Town International
Airport and in Cape Town Harbour.

So, this is an indication that we don't merely look at the reports, but
that we also look at what is happening on ground level.]

In 2001, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Study Group on Public
Accounts Committees issued a report with several conclusions and
recommendations on the role of the Public Accounts Committee. There should
be greater direct conduct between parliaments, especially the public
accounts committees and international financial institutions. Auditors-
general should take account of the views of public accounts committees in
framing their work programmes.
Public accounts committees should keep under review any proposal to change
the auditor-general's audit mandate. The main aim of public accounts
committees should be guided by the work of the auditor-general. There
should always be sufficient experience and seniority to membership of the
public accounts committees, and public accounts committees should also be
adequately resourced to carry out their functions.

And then an important point, I think, is that public accounts committees,
while not being bound to act unanimously, should strive for some consensus
in their reports. Parliament should hold an annual debate on the work of
public accounts committees.

I think the discussion of this report may lay the foundation with regard to
that.

And then, finally, regarding the road ahead, the introduction of a best
practice handbook for public accounts committees by the Ad Hoc Committee on
Public Accounts chaired by Vincent Smith in May 2003 is an indication that
the improvement of good governance and prudent financial management is a
priority for members of Parliament represented in public accounts
committees.

Skoor gaan ook in die derde kwartaal 'n handleiding vir rekenpligtige
beamptes publiseer, wat as grondslag gaan dien vir die optrede van die
direkteurs-generaal tydens openbare verhore van die komitee. Die doel is om
toe te sien dat die toepaslike en tersaaklike inligting die grondslag van
openbare verhore vorm. Skoor probeer ook deur sy ontleding van openbare
verhore daartoe bydra dat ons ten minste die kwaliteit daarvan kan
kontroleer en ten minste kan beoog om dit op 'n beter grondslag te plaas.
Ek wil graag alle lede van Skoor in dié verband bedank.

Die Scag-verslag is 'n beskeie poging om oorsig en verantwoording in die
wetgewende konteks te verskerp. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[In the third quarter Scopa is also going to publish a guide for accounting
officers, which will serve as basis for the conduct of the directors-
general during public hearings of the committee. The aim is to see to it
that the appropriate and relevant information forms the basis of public
hearings. Scopa is trying, through its analysis of public hearings, to
enable us to at least control their quality and at least to be able to
envisage placing it on a better foundation. I would like to thank all
members of Scopa in this regard.

The Scag report is a humble attempt to improve oversight and accountability
within the legislative context.]

Thank you very much, Chairperson.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


  That the Sixteenth Report be noted and the Seventeenth to Twenty-Third
  Reports be adopted.

Sixteenth report - SCAG Task Team noted.

Seventeenth to Twenty-Third Reports adopted.

             ELECTION OF MR E M SIGWELA AS TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:
  That the House elects Mr E M Sigwela to preside during today's sitting of
  the House when requested to do so by a presiding officer.

Agreed to.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We will proceed but before going on to
the next question, I wish to make an announcement and that is: The vacancy
caused by the resignation of Mr M D Msomi has been filled by the nomination
of Miss Madolose with effect from 23 June 2003, and the vacancy caused by
the resignation of Mr P Uys has been filled by the nomination of Miss C B
Johnson with effect from 25 June. Both members have been sworn in in my
office this afternoon. [Applause.]

I must say that the addition of two more women in this House strengthens it
considerably. [Applause.]

Deputy President, I need not ask you. I am sure you will agree. We will now
proceed to Question 18 which has been asked by the hon Beukman.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Question 20 has been withdrawn. But before we come to
questions to Ministers in the economics cluster, I wish to give a ruling on
a matter outstanding for over a week, and I apologise.

On the 13th of June, in a response by the Minister for Safety and Security
to a statement by Mr Gibson, the hon Mr Ellis raised a point of order
regarding a remark made by the hon Minister.

Having had an opportunity to study Hansard, I would now like to give the
ruling. Hansard indicates that the hon Minister for Safety and Security
accused the hon Gibson of ``deliberately misleading the public and the
media''.

This is unparliamentary and must be withdrawn. It makes no difference that
the allegations by the Minister relate to statements made by a member
outside this House. The issue is that the hon Minister's remark was made in
the House and clearly reflects on the integrity of another member. I would
therefore ask the hon Minister to please withdraw the remark.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the
fact that it was never my intention to demean the hon member, or rather to
attack his publicity-seeking stunt, I apologise unreservedly. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you. Would that the spirit prevailed. [Laughter.]

      TRANSLATION OF SADC PARLIAMENTARY FORUM INTO REGIONAL PARLIAMENT

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Prof B TUROK: Madam Deputy Speaker, I was fortunate in that in the 25 years
that I spent in exile, I was able to work in Africa, to write about Africa
and to do research about Africa. I learnt a great deal, for which I am
eternally grateful. It is clear to me, on the basis of my experience, that
there is no more important issue today than installing a sound
parliamentary system right across Africa.

I lived under the dictatorship of President Kenyatta. I lived under that
one-party state of Tanzania of Nyerere, which was benign, but it was a one-
party state. I also lived and worked under the one-party state of Kaunda in
Zambia. It is quite clear that the legacy of those systems is now over, and
that there is an agreement right across the continent that we need
parliamentary rule and that we need democratic governance right in the
forefront.

I would say that this acknowledgement and this understanding is not simply
due to external pressure, because there is pressure from outside that
democratic governance and a parliamentary system should be installed, but
it is understood by Africans themselves that a parliamentary system is
central to good governance and to a good society. I also want to say to
those people who say that the failures of the previous decades should be
understood as the failures of Africans to govern, that this is fallacious.
If you look at the whole of the Third World, and particularly Latin
America, and you analyse the problems of Latin America - the migration, the
problems of shack settlements, and so on - you can see that the patterns of
underdevelopment which occurred in Latin America have also occurred in
Africa. These problems are not the consequences of Africans' inability to
rule themselves, but are consequences of a system of underdevelopment which
is now clear and scientifically analysed. It is because the legacy of
underdevelopment is so well understood now that people in Africa and in
this region are saying that we need a parliamentary system, not only within
countries, but also multilaterally.

I was fortunate, very recently, on 29 April, to attend a meeting in
Livingstone in Zambia, where the SADC Parliamentary Forum, which consists
of 12 countries, met to discuss the question of the future of the SADC
Parliamentary Forum. Interestingly too, there were delegates from the West
African Regional Parliament and also from the East African Regional
Parliament, because we now have a situation where there are regional
parliaments formally constituted in West Africa, and also in East Africa,
and so, the SADC Parliamentary Forum, which has been a kind of transitional
arrangement for some time, expressed itself very strongly that we must have
a full regional parliament with legislative powers, and that the priority
for this, in this year of 2003, is the highest possible priority for the
region. South Africa has offered to host the first meetings of such an
assembly, and it will be an interesting process.

But let me just say that there is a lot of discussion in Africa about
whether such an assembly should be deliberative, or whether it should be
legislative. Recently the president of the European Union Assembly or
Parliament, visited South Africa and there was a workshop in Cape Town.
What he said to us was that, in Europe, the experience has been that it is
not an either-or situation of being a deliberative assembly or a
legislative assembly: there is a process and a graduation. I believe, just
as with the Pan-African Parliament, that it will start off as a
deliberative institution, and move to being a legislative institution. So,
similarly in the SADC region, we will have, no doubt, a movement from the
forum, which is in a sense an informal institution, gradually through a
series of stages, to become a legislative institution.

I was invited to this particular meeting to do a presentation on Nepad. A
great deal of interest and a great many questions arose, and it is clear
that the Nepad issue is closely linked to the future of this region, and to
the emergence of parliamentary democracy.

In the available time, I want to raise the broader issues that were raised
at this meeting, and not deal so much with the technical issues. Among the
important issues are: What will be the relationship of national parliaments
to the Pan-African Parliament? What will be the relationship of national
parliaments to the regional parliament? And above all: What will be the
relationship between such a regional parliament and the structure of SADC,
which is largely an institution run by officials? Related to that: What
will be the separation of powers in such a situation? What will be the
separation of powers between executive functions and parliamentary
functions, within countries, within regions and across the whole of Africa?
So, a whole fascinating scheme of institutional reform and adjustment is
under way, to which our own working group in this Parliament is paying a
great deal of attention.

I want to say that Dr Mutukwa, the secretary-general of this institution,
raised enormously important questions of principle about the relationship
between parliament and democracy. He raised a number of questions, and I
want to repeat them: Can there be democracy if there is a denial of
fundamental rights? [Interjections.] The great democrats on my left are
trying to disrupt democracy. Thank you. [Laughter.]

He asked what the benchmarks of democracy were, and what the institutions
of democracy were. [Interjections.] Don't be so petty. [Interjections.]
Relax. He asked: ``How do we strengthen democracy?'' Above all, he asked:
``What is the role of Parliament in strengthening democracy?'' You can see
that this Zambian, who has come out of a one-party system, that has gone
through the trauma of presidential elections, is raising the most
fundamental questions about parliamentary democracy to which we and the
region must pay attention.

He asked the question: ``Can there be democracy without democrats?'' You
will remember that President Nyerere raised the question: ``Can there be
socialism without socialists?'' because he felt that Tanzania had
insufficient socialists. But now the question is different, and it's rather
interesting given the era in which we live: ``Can there be democracy
without democrats?'' Above all: ``What of the role of political parties?''

Dr Mutukwa gave a number of answers: Firstly, parliamentary democracy is
about choice. Democratic governance is a matter of definition. Who decides
on the definition? Is it the IMF and the World Bank or the G8 who decide on
a definition of democratic governance? That was a very important question
for us, and the answer that came from the meeting was that Africa must
decide what democratic governance means for us, and for our parliaments. He
also mentioned that essential to democracy and the parliamentary system is
a bill of rights, the rule of law, a free media and, he stressed, an active
civil society.

Indeed, as part of this process of creating this parliament, the question
of norms and standards for elections has been raised, and interestingly
enough, it is the parliament of Angola which has raised the question in its
parliament that the norms and standards of elections are crucial to
parliamentary democracy. It is clear that a SADC parliament will have to
engage in the following issues: peace-building, essential in a region torn
by strife and conflict, which has seen the most devastating domestic wars
and cross-border wars; democratic government, an essential ingredient; and
gender equality. Interestingly enough, in that assembly that I was present
at, the question of gender was raised again and again, and it seems to me
there is a heightened consciousness that parliamentary democracy must raise
the question of gender equality as a high priority.

Also, there is the question of harmonising the regional laws. We are
pulling together a number of highly disparate countries: people who speak
Portuguese, people who speak English, people who speak a whole range of
languages, and legislation which has come out of a different colonial
history. If you compare the Angolan history with the South African history,
or the Mozambican with the Zimbabwean, or Malawian, you can see a whole
range of statutes have emerged over time as decolonisation has taken place.
Now we have to begin to harmonise those statutes among ourselves.

What is the relation of the regional parliament to SADC? Up to now, there
has been a bit of a wall between the two. SADC officials have regarded
themselves as an autonomous sphere of interest, and the SADC Parliamentary
Forum has also been treated as an autonomous area of activity.

But now we come to the crucial issue of oversight. Oversight is going to be
one of the most contentious, most problematic and most difficult issues
which are going to come up with the Pan-African Parliament, and also with
the regional parliament. If we have a parliament in this region, how will
it exercise oversight over the executive, over the President, for that
matter? In the region how will it exercise oversight over heads of state
and over the SADC officials? These are difficult issues. There is going to
be a lot of constitution-making and a lot of protocols, and treaties will
have to be worked on.

What was made clear is that a regional parliament, like the Pan-African
Parliament, will not be an arena for appeals from national parliaments. In
other words, these parliaments are not higher bodies, in the sense of
exercising control, or places where national parliaments and national MPs
will be able to go to make appeals. No, they are different kinds of
institutions. The rules have to be developed, and so on.

Then what came up at that meeting, as has come up at our meetings here, and
which came up at the meeting of African parliaments which we had some time
ago, and which will come up again in the meeting which we will have here on
Monday, is the question of sovereignty. People have formulated this in a
different way, that it is not a matter of surrendering sovereignty, or
ceding sovereignty, but a matter of pooling sovereignty. Here we have a
number of countries which come together for a common purpose, and the
sovereignty issue stands as an obstacle to them uniting, and therefore the
concept we want is a concept of pooling democracy so that we all work
together in the common interest.

This parliament is going to need operational structures of many kinds. It's
going to have the problem, as the Pan-African Parliament has, and as the
African Union had, of sanctions on violations. You all know about the
African peer review mechanism, which has been approved, and which is now
being instituted. You all know about the Peace and Security Council which
is on the way, which is being established. What sanctions do we use,
collectively, for violations against the very institutions that we are
talking about?

How do we build institutions which are sustainable, which are financed and
which are funded properly? And then, the question that must be of interest
to all of us: What happens to a member of parliament - a regional
parliament, or the Pan-African Parliament - who violates certain issues? Do
they have immunity? It's absolutely clear, and the advice from the
President of the Parliament of the African Union was that no matter where
your parliament is located, whether it is multilateral, or multinational,
immunity for members of parliament is essential, so that they're able to
speak freely and correctly.

One of the points that came up, which I found interesting, was that many of
the members of parliament who attended the meeting in Livingstone were
arguing that members of parliament are the greatest custodians of
democracy. One of them even said that members of parliament are closer to
the people than the executive, because they operate in constituencies, they
operate directly with and close to the people, and they have to do so,
because they come from the people, from constituencies.

I would not want to push that too hard, but it's clear that members of
parliament are seen to be close to the people, as having a great
responsibility, and that in itself is a guarantee that the parliament will
be important and will have to function in a democratic manner. Since my
time is nearly up, let me come to the conclusion.

It is clear that the Pan-African Parliament, and this regional parliament,
will have powers and influences that we don't yet understand, that we
haven't yet quantified, but they will be substantial. The Pan-African
Parliament, in particular, will report directly to the heads of state, to
the assembly; and the regional parliament, similarly, should have a certain
position in relation to the heads of government in this region, which is
similar to the Pan-African Parliament.

If we do this right, and if we look at the oversight in the correct manner,
we ought to have very sound building blocks which will build both regional
unity and continental unity. I think that is an exciting prospect for us. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairman, the subject before us is the translation of the
SADC Parliamentary Forum into a regional parliament. This causes us to ask:
Do we need a regional parliament? Will it contribute towards good
governance, towards democracy and to development in our region? And
secondly, is the SADC PF achieving its necessary purpose? I have had the
opportunity of serving on this parliamentary forum for the last four years,
and I must say that I have come to the conclusion that the forum,
constructed as it is, is playing no significant role in the affairs of the
region, nor is it contributing materially to the process of integration
that is taking place in our region.

I have found the biannual meetings agreeable, the camaraderie enjoyable,
the hospitality excellent, the discussions interesting. But, having said
this, I have come to the conclusion that the parliamentary forum
constructed as it is, is an expensive interparliamentary talk shop with
little or no influence on the policies or workings of SADC. Yes, it has a
role as interparliamentary talk shop, but it has very little bearing on the
workings of SADC. The reason for this is to be found in the fact that,
although the parliamentary forum was founded through and on the SADC
Treaty, it is in fact an independent body with its own identity, its own
constitution, its own administration and its own budget. And what is more,
this forum has no direct formal links with SADC or its organs and, as a
consequence, it has no opportunity to influence its decisions.

As it is structured at present, the forum cannot legislate, it cannot
oversee the work of SADC and it cannot make any reasonable representative
input into the decision-making structures of SADC. It's got no contact with
SADC. It is a forum separate from SADC although it is a creature of SADC.

Given the progress we have made towards integration, not only in our region
but in the other four regions in Africa, SADC needs a regional parliament.
It needs one which is available to legislate with this when it becomes
necessary. It needs a parliament that is empowered to oversee the work of
the various SADC structures and through which the voice of the people can
be heard on matters relevant to the region. To do this, the parliamentary
forum will have to be transformed from a forum to a fully fledged organ and
a fully fledged parliament of SADC. This can be done either through the
amendments to the SADC Treaty or through a new SADC protocol or through a
combination of the two.

This is going to be discussed at meetings over this weekend and naturally
later on in the parliamentary forum. While this organ should have an
identity as a parliament clearly defined, it must have a relationship with
other organs of SADC. In our South African Parliament we pride ourselves
that we have oversight of our executive. There is no institution in SADC
which has oversight over the executive, and that should be the function of
a regional parliament. It must have relations with the other organs so that
it can carry out its oversight role and make inputs on behalf of the people
it represents.

The Constitutive Act of the AU, article 17.1, gives a motivation for a Pan-
African Parliament and it says:


  In order to ensure the full participation of African peoples in the
  development and economic integration of the continent, a Pan-African
  Parliament shall be established.

And I believe, for exactly the same reasons, a regional parliament should
be established in Southern Africa.

The second reason for transforming the forum into a regional parliament
flows from the development of the African Union. The AU, while it will have
constitutional structures such as the Pan-African Parliament, the Peace and
Security Council and the commission, envisages using the five regional
structures as the building blocks for implementing the development of
Africa. It sees the regional structures as the building blocks and in this
process it is envisaged that there will be a functional link between the AU
organs and the regional counterparts and, for this linkage to operate
effectively, it is essential that all five regions have appropriate
regional organs in place and that means having five regional parliaments in
place.

The East African and the West African states have already got theirs in
place. We believe that it is important that even though there is the matter
of the details, such as my friend has mentioned - the funding, the
location, the composition and the method of election, the powers on the
field of legislation, the oversight, and the relationship to national
parliaments - if we are serious about Africa, if we are serious about
development in Africa, if we are serious about development in the Southern
African region, it's essential that a start be made to the formation of an
African regional parliament and that that start be made right now. Thank
you. [Applause.]
Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Deputy Speaker, the ultimate goal of developing into a
regional parliament was again stressed at the 2002 bi-annual forum plenary
assembly in the Republic of Mauritius when that country's national assembly
speaker, Premnath Ramnah, stated that the time has come for the forum to
transform itself into a regional parliament so that parliamentarians can
take their rightful place in the regional development process.

The transformation of the forum into a regional parliament is therefore
common cause. Last year's plenary assembly also reiterated that the
objectives of the forum included accelerating economic co-operation,
development, integration and encouraging good governance, transparency,
human rights, gender equity and equality and accountability in the region.
It also committed itself to concentrating on poverty reduction and
increasing parliaments' role in monitoring budgets and poverty reduction
programmes.

Herein lies the crux of the challenge of transforming the forum into a
regional parliament. Millions of people in Southern Africa face poverty,
hunger, famine and general deprivation on a daily basis. This is
unfortunately not a new phenomenon, although the extent of deprivation has
been deepened by recent political and socioeconomic upheavals in some of
the region's countries.

The regional parliament will have to set up poverty alleviation programmes
through accelerating regional development and co-operation at the top of
its agenda. Parliamentarians have a special responsibility in this regard.
Parliamentarians are in a position to be closer to the people. I support
what Prof Turok said at the beginning. They are closer to the people of the
SADC region than governments which sometimes operate at a very high level.
I think we should note this. In a certain sense, parliamentarians will
therefore have to be the voice of the people to make their needs and
aspirations known to government institutions and other affected parties.
This is, in many ways, the classical role of parliamentarians and, in other
words, representing the people.

The regional parliament will also have to fulfil another of
parliamentarians' classic roles - that is, acting as a watchdog and
oversight body to ensure that the executive does not abuse its powers. This
is a vital role in any democracy and becomes even more so when poverty
alleviation is a higher priority. A regional parliament would have to
monitor states' budgets and poverty reduction programmes throughout the
region and to ensure that states' resources are effectively applied in
improving the lives of the region's inhabitants. Transforming the SADC
Parliamentary Forum into a regional parliament will undoubtedly strengthen
the region's participation and inputs into the Nepad process and the
institutions of the African Union.

Much criticism was expressed at the launch of the AU and Nepad that the
views of ordinary Africans and civil society had not been taken on board
during the decision-making process. The merits of such criticisms are not
really an issue here. However, what is important is that a regional
parliament must enable ordinary citizens and civil society to be heard and
to participate meaningfully in debates and decisions that affect their
lives. A regional parliament must do so in order to foster participatory
democracy and consolidation.

In conclusion, the IFP supports the transformation of the forum into a
regional parliament, provided that it focuses on giving the people of the
SADC region an effective voice in how their lives are governed and
meaningful input into decision-making processes. Furthermore, a regional
parliament has to be an effective instrument through which regional
problems such as poverty can be solved. Such a body should never be allowed
to become a debating forum where words speak louder than actions. I thank
you.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Deputy Speaker, I agree fully with the previous speaker.
The SADC Parliamentary Forum should, undoubtedly, be transformed into a
full-fledged regional parliament. To put the hon member Donald at ease, I
also agree fully with the hon Colin Eglin. The Parliamentary Forum cannot
remain a talk shop forever.

Currently, SADC, like the African Union, can be compared to a house without
a foundation. The various institutions of SADC, for example the summit and
the council, should be subjected to oversight and should be accountable to
a body representative of the people of the region. Only a full-fledged
regional parliament would be able to fulfil this function effectively.

Having said that, however, it would have been better to have established a
regional parliament after transformation of the region into an economic
community encompassing a free trade area. One should not lose sight of the
fact that even the Pan-African Parliament, in terms of the Abuja Treaty,
was originally also supposed to be established once an economic integration
process of the whole of Africa had been completed over a period of 34
years.

It was also envisaged, at a certain stage, that SADC be transformed into a
free trade area over a period of eight years. Unfortunately, it seems as if
we are still light years away from achieving this objective.

Article 3.9 of the protocol establishing the Pan-African Parliament says:
``The objectives of the Pan-African Parliament shall be to facilitate
cooperation among Regional Economic communities and their Parliamentary
fora.'' The protocol, however, is silent on how this co-operation should
take place in practice.

Transforming regional parliamentary fora into proper regional parliaments
may provide the answer in the sense that regional parliaments could then
send representatives to the Pan-African Parliament. The ideal situation
would have been a bottom-up approach instead of a top-down approach, even
if that implied amending the protocol establishing the Pan-African
Parliament.
I want to flaunt the idea that national parliaments send representatives to
the regional parliaments which, in turn, send representatives to the Pan-
African Parliament. In other words, the Pan-African Parliament should not
be composed of members of national parliaments, but of members of regional
parliaments. This would ensure a much more cohesive African parliamentary
structure, with a functional link between national parliaments, regional
parliaments and, of course, the Pan-African Parliament. Thank you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, the translation of the SADC Parliamentary
Forum into a regional parliament is an important step towards the
rationalisation of regional institutions on the continent.

There is a myriad of overlapping regional institutions, which have
contributed greatly to the slow rationalisation of economic groupings.
Africa has about 200 organisations dealing with co-operation and
integration. With such a maze of regional structures and a dire lack of
capacity, it is incumbent to speed up rationalisation.

The Cairo Agenda for Action, endorsed by the 31st Ordinary Session of the
Assembly of the OAU, recommended the speeding up of the rationalisation of
the institutional framework in order to achieve economic integration at
regional level. Rationalised regional structures are major instruments in
facilitating economic co-operation and in facilitating an integration
strategy of Africa, and constitute building blocks or cornerstones of the
AU.

Indeed, one of the objectives of the Pan-African Parliament, according to
Articles 3.4 and 3.9, is to facilitate co-operation of regional economic
communities and their parliamentary fora. Article 11.7, in terms of the
functions and powers of the Pan-African Parliament, states: ``Promote the
co-ordination and harmonisation of policies, measures, programmes and
activities of the Regional Economic Communities and the parliamentary fora
of Africa''.

The effects of the slow pace on the full integration process of Africa has
caused untold suffering for the poor masses. To illustrate how far behind
Africa is in its vision of an African Renaissance, foreign direct
investment in Africa as a whole and exports have fallen to below 10%,
whilst imports into the continent from outside have increased
astronomically to about 95%.
The absense of accelerated regional integration has caused Africa to lack
bargaining power in multilateral institutions. Only a common, holistic, all-
sector regional vision, instead of state-based trade, will help in the
eradication of poverty.

Intratrade, but not structural transformation of the regional economic
communities in Africa, has not resulted in the acceleration of trade,
unlike elsewhere in the world. African states still marvel at having
bilateral trade agreements with Western countries, thereby contributing to
the further fragmentation of African trade to the detriment of the
collective vision. Thank you.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Chair, there has never been a more exciting
time than today for Southern African member states that constitute SADC. We
have just witnessed the birth of the African Union, which seeks to unite
and develop Africa into a prosperous continent. To set Africa on this new
and challenging course, we have Nepad as a blueprint to bring about the
envisaged development changes.

The parliamentary forum over the years has managed to bring together
parliamentarians of member states to discuss and test solutions to their
pressing problems, albeit in a nonbinding manner. It is through this
experience that parliamentarians themselves saw a need to have the
institution formalised so as to make and monitor effective implementation
of these laws.

We are confident that once the forum has been disbanded, its aims and
objectives will continue to be realised, because the new institution, in
the form of a regional parliament, will have more teeth as it will also be
backed by the African Union.

It is through this regional institution that context-sensitive legislation
will be initiated to advance the interests of the bloc within a broader
context. As South African parliamentarians we are challenged with
discharging our loyalty and professionalism to make this initiative work.
We have to ensure that we continue to share whatever resources we have with
other members of the proposed regional parliament. [Time expired.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, congratulations! Halala makhelwane!
[Congratulations, neighbour!] [Laughter.] Our approach to this debate is
unambiguously an Africanist one. We support the view that African unity is
critical and urgent.

When we procrastinate because we fear and mistrust each other, we are
tempted to create structures which we then get used to and fear demolishing
later. In a small way, this Parliament of ours, and the Union Buildings and
Palace of Justice in Pretoria are a case in point, as are our homeland
parliaments, provincial parliaments and legislature villages.

When delay takes the form of mortar and bricks, it often results in
permanent postponement. So this is our first comment underlying the urgency
of Pan-African unity in action. The SADC community is a homogeneous one,
thanks to colonialism. We share common weather patterns, and agricultural,
mining and industrial experiences, as well as roads and communications
infrastructures, which make us one community.

Most SADC states could develop into a powerful economic state, which could
become a model for the rest of the continent and the engine of Nepad. The
development of a large nature reserve, cutting across boundaries of states,
is a very good model of closer unity in SADC.

The scarcity of water in the region points to the need for a water
conservation policy in that Kariba, the Lesotho Highlands Water Project and
Lake Malawi could ensure that the dry areas of SADC develop without major
problems. Regionalism and parochialism can retard progress and development.
[Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson ...

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr E M Sigwela): I have given you one more
minute. So, you have three minutes now.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. Congratulations to you! Within the
South African terrain we may boast a rich supply of ecological, natural and
human resources. Yet, our communities are unfortunately prey to horrific
circumstances which are rooted in poverty, hunger, disease, famine and many
unfortunate others.

The MF strongly supports the Southern African Development Community which
has united to overcome these challenges that cripple our people. Angola,
Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland,
Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe, we thank you for joining forces with us to
promote democracy, stability and a better life for all within the region.
United we stand strongly to attain the ends that we work towards.

The SADC Parliamentary Forum has been a strong contributor to the success
of SADC and comprises 1 800 members of parliament. The forum has been
successful in hosting a number of auspicious gatherings to architect the
master plan of SADC and move it into action. Many years have passed since
the Windhoek Initiative, and the transformation of the SADC Parliamentary
Forum into a regional parliament has now dawned upon us. Many decisions are
to be taken and time is of the essence since SADC aims to achieve that by
the end of the year. The MF feels that meetings, discussions and
organisation need to be intensified so as to ensure that the regional
parliament that we aim at achieving will constitute and represent an
efficient and effective delegation.

The MF feels that the time constraints have to be overcome effectively. The
MF supports the formation of the SADC regional parliament. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr E M Sigwela): Hon members, there is one point
that I must address. I noticed that there was some unhappiness when I said
I was giving Miss Rajbally one more minute. It's the time that she has been
able to get from other speakers before her. That is the position.

We will now listen to the hon Mr McIntosh since Rev Aucamp is not here.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Mr Chairman, I am pleased to hear that the time
allocation wasn't gender biased because there is another lady who is going
to speak after me. I hope that she will not get more than 15 minutes. We
understand that the hon Aucamp is not in the debate.

I think that it is fantastic to have a debate like this because I think
that our Parliament comes into its own. It has a real sense of collegiality
because when I can find myself, and Mr Eglin as well, agreeing with
somebody who represents a tiny party, like the one that the hon Prof Turok
is a member of, and we agree on the need for multiparty democracy in our
region, then I think it's great. It's wonderful to participate in such a
debate. I think that what we need to understand, and it's been pointed out
by the hon Eglin, is that we have had a parliamentary forum for four years.
It was also pointed out by the hon Prof Turok who said that we need a
process. It's quite clear that we, in this Parliament, want a regional
parliament.

I just want to raise some of the concerns which I think we need to address.
I call them stepping stones because I don't want to see them as stumbling
blocks or as problems. First of all, I think that we do need to get a
proper mandate unless we believe we are an autonomous group. So, it means
that we have to go to SADC and get a protocol. We have to move in that area
because it's not a good idea to be unmandated. I think that we need to
address that. People need to address that tomorrow.

We also have to address this question of sovereignty which is not so easy
because we, of course, do not have parliamentary sovereignty in this
country. We are a constitutional democracy. Before 1994 we had
parliamentary sovereignty whereas the other countries didn't necessarily
have that. I think that one has to look at that. We also need to recognise
that SADC is growing and that there could be conflicts in terms of what the
region is. Tanzania, for example, is a member of the East African
Community. Should it not in fact be a member of its parliament and not of
the SADC parliament? Maybe we must look at what we might call a Southern
African parliament. What about the position of Madagascar? Is that going to
come into SADC or does it remain in East Africa, as it were?

I think we have to agree that a deliberative process is the one that would
start and yet could move on to being legislative. Let's look, for example,
at the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security which was a real
problem in SADC, initially, because you will recall that that organ did its
own thing and it was a real problem in bringing peace to the DRC.
Fortunately that situation has been corrected and those of us who look at
what comes through our pigeonholes would have seen that thick document as
well as the one on transfrontier parks. To me, those protocols should
certainly be deliberated on in a SADC parliament, or whatever we may call
it, such as whether Tanzania, for example, will not be in the parliament.

I do think that we also need to look carefully at things like budgets and
representation. I think that hon Eglin made those points. What's also
important is to recognise that we need practical growth and development. We
don't want a candyfloss parliament which will, with one lick, just
disappear. We want parliaments which count and are effective. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, we can't let you pass your maiden session in the
Chair without a point of order. My point of order is this: I was in my
office following the debate on the screen and I observed that you called my
name as if I was supposed to take part in the debate. I just want to inform
the House that I asked my secretary to phone the relevant officers and
notify them that I would not be able to participate. I don't want to create
the impression that I just dropped out of the debate.

It seems that you didn't get the notice but I did excuse myself from the
debate.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr E M Sigwela): Hon member, you probably didn't
hear properly because I said that the next member could speak since you
were not in the House.

Mr C AUCAMP: Yes, but I did apologise.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, your time has expired. Hon Motubatse-
Hounkpatin, please proceed.

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Chairperson, I think you will be the first
person to need interpretation because I'm not going to speak in English and
I'm not going to speak in Northern Sotho either.

Eupša ke tlile go bolela ka Sepedi. Le gona ka Sepedi sa mmakgonthe a
kgodi'a kgokgo ya lerotse.

Modulasetulo, SADC ga bjale e na le dinagaditho tše e ka bago tše
lesomenne. Seo ke tlilego go se dira lehono ke go bolela ka ga naga ye ya
gaborena le tšeo re nyakago gore di direge mo lekaleng la SADC. Sa mathomo
ke nyaka gore re boeleng kua Kliptown, gore ka 1955 bakgalabje ba gaborena
- baetapele ba rena - ba be ba e ra eng ge ba be ba re: ``There shall be
peace and friendship''. Ke kgopela gore re kwešišeng taba ye ka botlalo
gobane ka wona ngwaga woo baetapele ba ANC ba be ba šetše ba kwešiša gore
re ka se kgone go tšwela pele re le noši; gore re swanetše go šomišana le
dinaga tše dingwe, le gore re swaraneng ka diatla gore re be le tšwelopele.

Mo go SADC, go na le dilo tše ntši tšeo e lego dinyakwa tša rena ka moka.
Eupša lehono ke kgopela gore nke re lekoleng tše tharo tšekhwi gore ke eng
seo re bonago e le se bohlokwa kudu go rena setšhabeng. Sa mathomo, ke
nyaka gore re lebelele khutšo. Ka moka re a tseba gore ntwa yona ga e na
bothakga. Ga ke tsebe gore o kile wa bona ge banna ba ngaparelane, ba e
lwa. Ba tloge ba tšitšibala, ba befa ka kudu. Ka gore ntwa ga e na
bothakga, le ge yo mongwe a lomile yo mongwe dinko ga a mo fe le nako ya
gore a ka phumula le mamina. Ke ka mokgwa woo ntwa e lego bošaedi ka gona.
Ka tsela yeo, o ka nagana gore ge ntwa e e tla setšhabeng gona e befa go le
go go kae.

Sa bobedi, ke nyaka gore batho ba gaborena ba nyaka tšwelopele. Batho ba
gaborena ba tennwe ke mohlako; ga ba sa nyaka go diila. Se, se ka re thuša
gore re kgone go hlokomela dinyakwa tša rena ka magaeng. Ke bolela ka
motlakase; ke bolela ka meetse ao a hlwekilego; ke bolela ka mello le yona
metato ya gore re kgone go bolela le balešika le bao re ba ratago, ge ba le
kgole le rena.

Ge re e tla go tša thuto, ka moka re nyaka go tseba go ngwala; re nyaka go
bolela sejahlapi le baagišane ba rena; re nyaka mešomo ya maemo, gape re
nyaka gore re kgone go boledišana le bao ba tšwago ka Angola, Mozambique,
Lesotho, Swatseng, go ya ka maleme ao ba a bolelago mo dinageng tša bona.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[But I am going to speak in Sepedi. And in Sepedi in the true sense of the
word.

Chairperson, SADC now has about 14 member countries. What I am going to do
today is to talk about our country and what we think should happen in SADC.
Firstly I want us to think back to Kliptown in 1955, and what our old men -
our leaders - meant when they said: ``There shall be peace and
friendship.'' I would like us to understand this clearly because in that
year the leaders of the ANC understood that we could not move forward
alone; that we should co-operate with other countries, and that we should
unite to develop.

In SADC, there are many things that are our needs. But today let us focus
on three needs and find out what is really important to us as the
community. Firstly, I want us to look at peace. All of us know that the
aftermath of war is a mess. I do not know if you have ever seen men holding
each other tightly, fighting. They really get very ugly. Because war always
leaves a mess, when one has bitten off his opponent's nose, he does not
give him a chance to wipe off the mucus. That is how ugly war is. So you
can imagine how ugly war gets when it affects the community.

Secondly, I want to say our people need development. Our people are tired
of poverty; they no longer want to be poor. This can help us to be able to
take care of our family needs. I am talking about electricity; I am talking
about clean water; I am talking about fires and telephones to talk to our
families and those we love, when they are far from us.

When it comes to education, we all want to be able to write; we want to
speak English with our neighbours; we want good jobs, and we want to be
able to speak with people who come from Angola, Mozambique, Lesotho and
Swaziland in the languages spoken in those countries.]
I want to say that without development there is no access to resources. We
cannot build a lasting peace if there is no development. Without education,
we cannot speak of respect and dignity. Politics do have a profound
influence on development. If people take decisions on development and
become responsible for what happens in their lives, it means they have
political power and thus can drive development on their own.

But, it is also important to note that local politics are also influenced
by regional and international politics. South Africa, Mozambique, Angola
and Malawi are examples of how difficult development can be if politics are
not in order. Peace is often threatened by lack of discussions or gaining
access to available resources. This is a political action that leads to
conflicts in many countries on this continent.

My colleague hon Turok has already spoken about the process and
recommendations on establishing a SADC parliament with full legislative
powers. Let me remind the House that the ANC in the 1950s realised the need
for regional co-operation. Already in the 1950s we had migrant workers
coming from the SADC countries, who were brought to South Africa to work in
the mines. The struggle against oppression was not confined to South
Africans only but we remember that the Rhodesians, now Zimbabweans, and the
people of South West Africa, now Namibians, were also engaged in the
struggle.

But I cannot forget the effort of the disabled people of South Africa. They
are working tirelessly in the region. Presently, there is a booklet that
has been published with a plan until 2013. This booklet is about the
integration of disabled people in society, articulating their needs and
also their aspirations. Also on the SADC level, there are discussions about
the rights of children. I must say that there are some strides that have
been made in this regard.

Some of us were lucky enough to attend the SADC Gender Unit in Malawi
recently. There was a lot of training for MPs that helped them to deal with
gender stereotypes in our communities and in our society.

Modulasetulo, ke nyaka gore mehla le mabaka di fetogile bjale. Mengwageng
ya go feta ge motho a be a belege ngwana wa segole goba ngwana yo a se nago
ditho tše di feleletšego, o be a bewa ka kua mafuri, a fihlwa gore a se
bonwe ke motho. Nako yeo e fetile. Batho ba gaborena le bona ba nyaka gore
ba hwetše dinyakwa go swana le batho ka moka; ba hwetše thuto gore ba kgone
go tšwela pele. Eupša seo se nthabišago ke gore se ga se direge fela
bathong ba gaborena mo nageng ya rena; dinagamabapi le tšona di swere ka
maatla di šomišana le ba gaborena. Ke nako ya gore digole di tšwele pele
gomme le tšona di amogelwe ditšhabeng ka moka go swana le batho ka moka. A
ke re le bona ke batho ba a phela le gona ba na le dinyakwa bjalo ka rena.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[I want to say things have now changed. In the past, if a woman gave birth
to a disabled child, the child would be put in the backyard, so that people
would not see the child. That time is over. Our people also want to have
their needs addressed, like all people; and get education so that they can
develop. But what makes me happy is that this is not only happening to our
people in our country; the neighbouring countries are also co-operating
with our country. It is time that the disabled developed and were accepted
in all communities, like all people. Let me say they are also people who
are living and have needs like us.]

Presently in the SADC countries, women are participating at different
levels. In 1997 the heads of state signed a declaration in which they
committed themselves to 30% participation by women.

Ke nyaka go gopotša setšhaba gore lehono ge re bolela ka ga 30%, ga se yeo
e tlilego fela. Ke 30% yeo e tlilego ka baka la go lwela tokologo, go
kwešiša ditshwanelo tša botho le gore ANC e ipotše gore yona e tlo dira
gore basadi ba tsene ka mo. Manyami ke gore taba yeo gabjale e šongwa ke
lekoko le la ANC fela. Se se ra gore ge makoko a mangwe a ka tšeya pušo, re
ilo boela morago. Basadi ba ka se be gona mo Palamenteng. Basadi ba tla
boela ba yo gelela meetse le go thotha dikgong. Ga se mošomo wa basadi fela
woo. [Legofsi.] Ka gona, kwešišo ya ka ke gore ge makoko ao a lego mo
Palamenteng a itlemile ka moka; gore ke lefe leo le bušago, re tlo dika re
tseba gore ge e le dinyakwa tša basadi tšona di tlo fela di šetšwa, di ka
se šalele morago.

Pele ga ge ke dula fase, ke kgopela gore nke ke boele dipolelong tšeo di
rotošitšwego ke bahlomphegi bao ba boletšego pele ga ka. Ke nyaka go leboga
ka kudu tšeo di rotošitšwego, kudukudu ge ba be ba lemoša gore re a e hloka
yona palamente ye. Ke therešo gore re a e hloka ka ge re e kwešiša.

Ke a kgolwa gore mohlomphegi Mme MmaMbuyazi ge a šoma kua karolongkgetho ya
gagwe o kwešiša gabotsebotse gore bothata ke eng ka gore dinyakwa tša batho
ba gaborena di swanetše gore di thuše le bao ba tšwago dinageng tša kantle,
le gore re be re se ra beakanya tšhelete ya gore batho ba le bona re ka ba
thuša. Ke ka moo re swanetšego gore palamente ye ya SADC e be le maatla a
gore melao e beiwe; gore re šomišana bjang le dinagamabapi tše gore
dinyakwa tše tša rena ge di gogwa ke ba go tšwa dinageng tša kantle, re ka
šomišana bjang le baetapele ba bona.

Ge ke boela go mohlomphegi Mna Eglin, ke kwešiša gabotsebotse nhla yeo a e
laetšago. Gape ke rata go mo gopotša gore dilo tše ntši ge re di lebelela
mo kontinenteng ya rena, ka ge re sa bolele maleme ao a swanago gomme re sa
tšwe mafelong ao a swanago, re hwetša e le gore tsela yeo re šomago ka yona
le yona ga e swane. Gantši ka sekgowa ba tle ba re go na le ``a working
culture''. Rena re le baetapele ba Afrika-Borwa, a re eteng pele kontinente
ye gomme re ba thuše, re ba laetše gore ke sefe seo se swanetšego go dirwa.
Ge ke e tla go mohlomphegi Mna Mogoba, aowa bishopo, ke go kwele; eupša ga
ke dumelelane nago Monare. Re ka se leboge bao ba bego ba re busa ka tsela
ya bokoloni. Re ka se ba leboge le gannyane. Ba re senyeditše ka
kudukudukudu. Nkabe re tšwetše pele ge nkabe ba se ba tle. Eupša re a bona
gore nako yeo ba re senyeditšego yona re leka gore re kitime, re lokise
ditaba tšeo ba re senyeditšego tšona.

Ke kgopela gore re ke re leboge gape le mohlomphegi Mna Geldenhuys. Ke a
bona gore dinhla tšeo a di laeditšego di bohlokwa ka kudu ka gore ge re sa
ngangišane ka taba ye, ra leka go lebelela tshepedišo ya yona, re ka se
holege. Ke therešo gore nka se ke ka no tloga mo ke sa tsebe gore ye ya
rena Palamente e nyaka gore re šomišane bjang le palamente ya SADC. Ke ka
mokgwa woo, ge re setse re boledišane ka dilo tše ka moka, re tlago swanela
go dumelelana gore ke dife dilo tšeo baetapele ba Afrika Borwa bao re
emelago ka go SADC ba swanetšego gore ba di iše moo gore di dirwe ka
botlalo.

Aowa Modulasetulo, ke a bona ka mokgwa woo diboledi tše ntsi di boletšego
ka gona, di laetša gore re a e hloka e bile re a e nyaka palamente ye.
Eupša re re mathata ao a lego gona a a lokišwe gore e tle e šome ka tsela
ya tshwanelo. Ga ke nyake gore ke tšeye nako ye ntši, ka ge ke kwešiša gore
maloko ke kgale a dutše mo, bontši bja wona bo šetše bo thapile ka kudukudu
gomme ba nyaka go ya go khutša. Ke a leboga. [Legofsi.] (Translation of
Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[I want to remind people, when we talk about 30% today, that it did not
just happen. The 30% came about because of our fight for freedom, to
understand the needs of humanity and because the ANC told itself that women
will be here. The sad thing is that at the moment that is only done by the
ANC organisation. This means that if other organisations were to win the
elections, it would be a step backwards. There would be no women in
Parliament. Women would go back to fetching water and firewood. That is not
a woman's only job. [Applause.] In that, my understanding is that if the
political organisations that are represented in Parliament are all
committed, it would not matter who the ruling party is, we would always
know that the needs of women are being addressed; they would not be
overlooked.

Before I sit down, I would like to go back to some of the comments made by
hon members who spoke before me. I want to appreciate what was raised,
especially when they indicated that we need this Parliament. It is true
that we need it as we understand it.

I believe that when the hon Mrs Mbuyazi works in her constituency she
understands the problem well, because the needs of our people should also
include help to foreigners, and we have not yet budgeted to help these
foreigners. Hence we should empower the SADC parliament to make laws and
find a way to work together with these neighbouring countries so that when
foreigners use our resources we may have a way to deal with their leaders.

Going back to hon Mr Eglin, I understand the point that he raised very
well. I also want to remind him that when we look at many things on our
continent, as we do not speak the same languages because we are not from
the same areas, we find that the way we do things is not the same. In
English we usually say there is ``a working culture''. As the South African
leaders, let us lead this continent and help them, and show them what
should be done.

Coming to the hon Mr Mogoba, the bishop, I heard you; but I do not agree
with you, Monare. We cannot thank those who governed us the colonial way.
We cannot even thank them a bit. They spoilt things very badly. We could
have gone very far had they not come. But we see the time that they wasted
and we should make it snappy and address the things that they spoilt.

I would also like to thank the hon Mr Geldenhuys. I can see that the points
he raised are very important because if we do not debate this issue, and
try to look at its procedures, we will not get anywhere. It is true that I
cannot just go without knowing how our Parliament wants us to work with the
SADC parliament. That is why, after we have talked about all these things,
we will have to agree as to what our South African leaders who represent us
in SADC should take to SADC to be addressed in full.

Chairperson, I see that the way most speakers have spoken shows that we are
poor and we want this parliament. But we say that the existing problems
should be properly addressed. I do not want to take up much time, as I
understand that members have remained for a long time, most of them are
already tired and want to rest. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.
                    ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES PROHIBITION BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

Bill agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:59.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent:


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 25 June 2003:


         (i)     Anti-Personnel  Mines  Prohibition  Bill  [B  44D  -  2002]
              (National Assembly - sec 75).
National Assembly:

1.    Membership of Assembly:


     (a)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr M D  Msomi  vacating  his
         seat with effect from 19 June 2003, has  been  filled  with  effect
         from 23 June 2003 by the nomination of Ms M M Mdlalose.


     (b)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr P Uys vacating his seat
         has been filled with effect from 25 June 2003 by the nomination of
         Ms C B Johnson.

2.    Membership of Committees:


     (1)    Mr M K Lekgoro has been elected as Chairperson of the  Portfolio
         Committee on Communications with effect from 25 June 2003.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly:

Papers:
1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Special Report of the Auditor-General pertaining to Allegations
         on the Joint Investigating Team (JIT) Arms Deal Report [RP 56-
         2003].


     (2)    A letter from the Minister of Communications dated 6 June 2003
         addressed to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing her of
         the appointment of a new South African Broadcasting Corporation
         (SABC) Board of Directors.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on  Reparations,  dated  24  June
     2003:


     1.     Introduction
         The Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Reparations (the Committee) has been
         established by decision of the Speaker and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces to consider recommendations made by
         the President in terms of section 27 of the Promotion of National
         Unity and Reconciliation Act (Act No. 34 of 1995).


         The Committee first met on 3 June 2003 and elected two co-
         chairpersons, Mr A Mlangeni and Ms N C Kondlo, according to the
         Rule 55 of the Joint Rules of Parliament. The Committee met for
         the second time on 10 June 2003 and identified four key
         recommendations from the President's speech delivered to the Joint
         Sitting of Parliament held on 15 April 2003, namely:


        (i)      symbols and monuments; (ii) rehabilitation of communities;
              (iii) medical benefits and other forms of social  assistance;
              and (iv) final reparations.


         The Committee also appointed a subcommittee  to  advise  it  on  an
         appropriate response by Parliament to  these  recommendations.  The
         subcommittee met on  11,  12,  17  and  23  June  to  consider  the
         recommendations, as well as written  public  comments  received  in
         this regard, and submitted a report to the Committee  on  24  June,
         which report was accepted and adopted as the final  report  of  the
         Committee.


     2.     Context


         The Committee proposes that the four recommendations identified be
         grouped into two main categories, namely:


         *  Recommendations that seek to redress injustices of the  past  in
              a more holistic manner  by  focusing  on  gross  human  rights
              violations inflicted upon whole communities  and  the  broader
              society, on the one hand; and


         *   Recommendations  that  seek  to  redress  gross  human   rights
              violations suffered by individual victims  identified  through
              the TRC process by granting them some degree of relief.


         A view was expressed, but not carried, that victims as defined in
         the Act and the reparations due to them, as defined, are governed
         by sections 3, 4, 5, 25, and 26 of the Act, and that symbolic or
         community recognition cannot serve as a substitute for inadequate
         individual reparations. Alongside adequate reparations, they would
         be a welcome addition.


         The Committee rejects the assertion that the Act was aimed
         exclusively at the granting of reparation to individuals only and
         not in granting redress to communities and the broader society for
         harm suffered as a result of gross human rights violations of the
         past.


         In addition, the Committee rejects the contention that symbolic
         and community recognition serves as a substitute for what is
         perceived to be inadequate individual reparation.


     3.     Recommendations


         3.1     Symbols and Monuments
              The Committee supports the President's recommendation calling
              for systematic programmes to project the symbolism of struggle
              and the ideal of freedom through academic and informal records
              of history, cultural and art forms, erecting symbols and
              monuments that exalt the freedom struggle, including new
              geographic and place names.


              The Committee notes the work that has already commenced at
              various levels of government in this regard. This includes
              work-in-progress towards the establishment of Freedom Park,
              the Garden of Peace and the renaming of streets and towns in
              various parts of the country.


              The Committee, having deliberated on the matter, agrees that
              the focus here is on the struggle that led to the current
              democratic dispensation ushered by the new constitutional
              order in 1994. In this regard, the Committee, having further
              deliberated on the matter, is of the view that unity and
              reconciliation should also be projected in such symbols.


         3.2 Rehabilitation of Communities


              The Committee supports the government's commitment to the
              continued placement of special emphasis on the rehabilitation
              of communities that were subjected to intense acts of violence
              and destruction. The Committee notes the work that has already
              begun in this area and endorses the focus on a partnership
              approach between communities and government in pursuit of this
              objective.


              The Committee, having deliberated extensively on the matter,
              agrees with the view that not only individuals but also whole
              communities suffered and are still in distress.  It therefore
              recognises the need for such communities to be rehabilitated
              through various programmes, such as alluded to by the
              President.


         3.3     Medical Benefits and other forms of Social assistance


              With regard to the specific cases of individual victims
              identified by the Act, the Committee notes the assurance given
              by the President of programmes put in place to provide for
              medical benefits, education assistance and provision of
              housing as well as other social benefits to address the needs
              of individual victims identified by the Act.


              In this regard, the Committee's attention was drawn to the
              assertion in the TRC report that "the failure of the
              responsible government bodies to provide the required
              information, combined with the fact that victims return
              constantly to the President's Fund and the RRC empty-handed,
              points to a complete breakdown in the agreement forged between
              government (inter-Ministerial Committee on Reparation) and the
              RRC". 1


              The Committee therefore proposes that Parliament, in line with
              its oversight role, be provided with regular reports by
              government on progress made in this regard at least once a
              year.


         3.4     Final Reparations


              The Committee, having considered the President's
              recommendations regarding final reparations, endorses the
              commitment of the government to provide a one-off grant of
              R30,000 to those individuals or survivors designated by the
              TRC, over and above the other material commitments already
              mentioned.


              The Committee notes, but does not accept, the contentions put
              forward that the amount proposed is inadequate and that at
              minimum the 2975 declared victims whose rights to seek legal
              recourse against successful amnesty applicants for damages
              have been extinguished, are entitled to assessment of the
              losses suffered and to commensurate compensation.


     4.     Conclusion


         The Committee therefore recommends that Parliament accept the four
         recommendations made by the President, as identified in this
         Report. Further, the Committee anticipates that all the necessary
         practical arrangements for the effective implementation of these
         recommendations will be provided for in the regulations to be
         promulgated and implemented by the President in accordance with
         the provisions of the Act.


     Report to be considered.

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members'  Legislative
     Proposals  and  Special  Petitions  on  the  proposed  Medical  Schemes
     Amendment Bill, dated 18 June 2003:


         The Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals
         and Special Petitions, having considered the proposed Medical
         Schemes Amendment Bill, submitted by Mr B G Bell and referred to
         the Committee, recommends, in accordance with Rule 235(4), that
         the proposal not be proceeded with.


         The Committee further reports that, while it has sympathy with the
         intention of the proposer to assist Medical Aid Members that are
         on retirement, it is of the opinion that the above proposal does
         not address the matter.


         The Committee believes that this matter should be addressed, and
         therefore advises that the proposer take up the matter with the
         Departments of Health and of Labour, and, if possible, with
         NEDLAC.


         The Committee notes the dissent of the Democratic Alliance.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members'  Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions on the proposed Patents Amendment Bill,
     dated 18 June 2003:


         The Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals
         and Special Petitions, having considered the proposed Patents
         Amendment Bill, submitted by Mrs S V Kalyan and referred to the
         Committee, recommends, in accordance with Rule 235(4), that the
         proposal not be proceeded with.


     Report to be considered.

3.    Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs  and
     Tourism on the  Southern  African  Development  Community  Protocol  on
     Fisheries, dated 24 June 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Southern African Development Community Protocol on Fisheries,
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.


     Request to be considered.

