---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 March 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-03-18
---

TUESDAY, 18 MARCH 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                        RESIGNATION OF MR ROBIN COOK

                             (Notice of Motion)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice
that I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes that Mr Robin Cook, the leader of the House of Commons in
       Britain, has resigned in protest against the imminent military
       campaign by the US-led forces against Iraq;


  (2) believes that any campaign of this nature, conducted outside the
       ambit of the UN organisation, is wrong; and


  (3) congratulates Mr Robin Cook on his principled stand and urges all
       humanity to continue identifying with the side of peace.

[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: May
I ask whether the hon Chief Whip of the ANC is aware of the Rules of the
House and the arrangement that has been made that members' statements would
take place on Tuesdays and Thursdays when arranged.

Today is not one of those days and notices of motion should not be
routinely made by parties. The only purpose of making these notices is when
there is a serious intention of debating the matter, and raising the
question of Mr Cook's resignation is hardly a serious matter for this House
to take note of. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, the time for members' statements
was, as you say, agreed upon to be Tuesdays and Thursdays. The hon member
is giving notice of a motion. His views as to whether this is a matter that
can actually be debated by the House is something that he has a right to.

So I do not think that this is an issue that we can now debate on the basis
of the substance of his motion. I would really like us to move on to see
whether there are any other notices of motion. It is the presiding officers
and the parliamentary staff who are going to process the notices of motion.

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has just referred
to the Chief Whip of the Majority Party as ``a cheat'' and I did not hear
whether he said he was ``dishonest'' or ``dishonourable.''

An HON MEMBER: Dishonourable!

Mr A C NEL: I submit that that is unparliamentary and that the Leader of
the Opposition should withdraw it.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did the Leader of the Opposition say that?
[Interjections.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for withdrawing.

     SOUTH AFRICA'S CONSTITUTIONAL VALUES VERSUS SOCIETY'S MORAL VALUES

                             (Notice of Motion)

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  a Government-initiated moral regeneration forum is an
           acknowledgement of the rapid moral decay in our country,
           witnessed by increased child rapes, pornography, prostitution
           and girl-trafficking - what others, unfortunately, call the sex
           industry;


       (b)  the series of carefully orchestrated court applications to the
           Constitutional Court to promote homosexual rights that are
           envisaged in the Constitution are inimical to our African
           societal values; and


       (c)  the Constitutional Court's decision to promote these rights is a
           condictio sine qua non for moral degeneration and a setback to
           the Government's initiative.


  (2) calls on the Government, Parliament and interested civil society
       organisations to embark on a national debate on whether our
       constitutional values need adjustment to be in line with our dominant
       societal values and the promotion of a true African Renaissance.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I really wish to appeal to members to
remember what we have agreed on in relation to notices of motion, ie that
they must be very brief, to the point and should really be about something
that we do intend to debate in the House. They should not be what we used
to have in the past, which were really statements that we wanted to make. I
really want to make this appeal.

         ALLOCATION OF SPEAKING TIME TO DISCUSS IMMINENT WAR IN IRAQ

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I ask the Secretary to read the first Order of
the Day, hon members, I would like to bring to your attention that the
Speaker this morning received a request from the Leader of the Opposition
to have a debate as a matter of urgent public importance on the imminent
war in Iraq.

As the First Reading debate on the Appropriation Bill is a wide-ranging
debate, it provides an opportunity to raise the matter proposed by the
Leader of the Opposition. It has, therefore, been agreed that 30 minutes be
added to the time allocated to that debate, to allow members to raise
matters in relation to the imminent war in Iraq.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Ms B A HOGAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, John Maynard Keynes, one of the
greatest economic thinkers of all time, when looking at the issue of how
long do you go back in the past or how long do you look into the future in
economics in order to make a decision and in order to be able to compare
what happened then to what is happening now - to evaluate how well we are
doing - finally gave up and said, ``In the long run we are all dead''.

However, when we look at this Budget, it would not be simply good enough
for us to say,``Let's look at this Budget and compare it to the last two or
three years and let's look at the Budget in terms of the two to three years
ahead'.' I think that we have to go way back to 1994, when we came into
this House, to look, evaluate and see how far we have, indeed, progressed
from that time when democracy blessed our land. That is what I want to
propose to do.

Much has been said about the goodness of this Budget. It is a Budget that
is bold, confident and buoyant. It is a Budget that has been very well
received and has created enormous confidence. In fact, it has ridden on a
wave of confidence. So, I am not going to spend my time there. I would like
to spend my time more on the medium to long-term assessment of where we are
going in terms of our economic policies.

Let us go back to 1994. Let us go back to that time when we arrived here in
Parliament several years after the ANC had been unbanned. We had weathered
a period of time in which, literally, this country teetered on civil war.
Our inheritance was a long recession, from 1989 to mid-1993, with negative
rates of growth; low levels of investment spending right from the 1980s; an
economy that was characterised by lack of competition, inward-looking and
obsolete technology; an economy that was stagnant; massive outflows of
funds - in one year alone, 1993, R15 billion left this country; very high
and worrying levels of public sector debt and borrowing, and falling
employment - the total formal sector employment fell by 7,8% or by 430 000
people from 1989 to 1993. In fact, the entire employment growth over the
period of eight years from 1981 to 1989 was wiped out over the ensuing four
and a half years of transition and negotiation.

This was a war economy - bear that in mind. From 1960 to 1976 real fixed
investment from general government increased at an average of 7,5%, whilst
from 1976 to 1993 - the years of real political strife, conflict and at
times war - fixed investment by government declined at an average rate of
2,5% between those years.

Let us just recall those times. Let us recall the funeral of Chris Hani and
those dark moments when we did teeter virtually on the edge. When we look
at that we have to recognise that, probably, the most apt term that we used
as the ANC when we came to Parliament in order to describe what we had to
do was to say we had to reconstruct and develop - the Reconstruction and
Development Programme - because that was in actual fact what it was: the
reconstruction of our economy. It wasn't simply just growth and to make the
economy better. We had to reconstruct an economy which had been shattered
by a subterranean war.

We have often been accused of not being brave enough to take courageous
decisions economically. It has been said that we need decisiveness and that
we need to move forward. I would like to argue that, perhaps, the ANC was
at its most courageous in its period of reconstruction. Yes, we were
courageous in entering into negotiations. But, in that period thereafter we
showed even more courage. I say this because we came - as a government - to
power on a platform which said that the lives of people would improve
dramatically under our Government. We came when the expectation was that
Government's spending would be reoriented from the privileged few to the
underprivileged majority. We came with the expectations from our membership
that we would do great things for those who had never had the benefit of
government's benefits.

Yet, what we were faced with was a situation where, instead of being able
to spend freely and be able to benefit from a healthy and prosperous
economy, not only was the economy not growing but we had massive debt. That
was a contradiction that we had to face: a contradiction of scarce
resources; not being able to expand those resources at the pace that we
wanted to spend, and enhanced and great expectations of us. I think that
it's to the credit of this Government, Cabinet and those in leadership that
we took on that challenge. We faced it squarely and we have seen it through
to this day and we have won.

We did clip spending but we did not stop spending. Every year we spent more
but we didn't increase the pace at which we spent. Every year we borrowed
but we limited the amount of borrowing that we did. That cut into the bone
of our society. It was not without pain. We know just what the cuts on
capital spending alone cost. But the fruits of that were clear for all of
us, seeing that in these last couple of years the economy has grown and our
debt has decreased. We are now able to not borrow simply just to pay back
but we are able to borrow to invest. Our debt has declined dramatically and
our Budget deficit is well within control at 1,5% from the 6,6% at which we
did that.

Anyone who says that the ANC Government lacked decisiveness and courage in
the face of populist demands needs to rethink what they say. But, over and
above that, it was not just simply cutting spending that we were looking
at. We were also looking at a total reform of our revenue collection and
its systems, and a policy of our taxes which underlay revenue collection.
In that regard, we undertook one of the most far-ranging and far-reaching
tax reform policies that any government in this country has ever taken in
that we brought this country - some of its members kicking and screaming -
into the new globalised economy. We modernised our tax reform systems. We
brought that in harmony with the world out there. We also brought
substantial tax relief to the citizens of South Africa. From 1995 to the
present, we have granted R49 billion in tax relief to South Africans. That
was no mean achievement when we talked about the tasks that face us.

There is yet another contradiction that we had to straddle: the
contradiction of keeping the growth path in line with our vision - the
growth trajectory that we need from our economy and at the same time
meeting the needs of our people. So we have had to balance the tax relief
that we grant, which is essential for the stimulation of the economy,
against the redistribution of resources to those who desperately need them.
I think that, indeed, we have achieved a remarkable balance in that regard.
If you look this year at expansion on spending for the underprivileged, for
those who have never had opportunities, and if you look at what we have in
fact achieved in terms of water, electricity and power provision, it is
indeed remarkable.

So, once again, I say that it was an ANC Government which made crucial
decisions about balancing those needs of the people who desperately require
basic resources and the needs of an economy which also needs to be fuelled.
We have not simply fallen into a populist trap, nor have we moved into a
neoconservative growth-and-damn-everyone-else approach.

Above that, we have also paid very serious attention to getting value for
the money that we spend. The money that we spend is budgeted for. It is
embarrassing when you look at the 1994 documents that were given to us here
in Parliament: a slim little volume this thick. Today the information that
is given in our Budget is volumes and volumes of information. Anyone
wanting to know what the strategic plans are of Government in any single
department and in any single programme can locate those in our budgetary
documents. Those documents, this year, spell out the output of what
Government is going to deliver.

There is no space at this stage for anyone to argue that it is not clear
what the Government is trying to achieve and that Government cannot be held
to account. This is critical. Government must be held to account for what
it promises to deliver, for I would argue that we have moved beyond just
the debate on macroeconomics. We have stabilised this economy. We have
brought it out of a war economy situation. It is in a period of
stabilisation. We have moved onto the microeconomic debate. We have said
that it's the microeconomics that now must drive our economy. But, even
further, we have moved into the debate about what is the role of
Government; what is the role of service delivery; and how do we as
Government improve that delivery. That is going to be as essential a theme
as it was in the President's address to this House a few weeks ago.

The Budget allows us that very essence of being able to hold Government to
account on what it is delivering. There is an injunction on public servants
and senior management within Government to be able to deliver more
effectively, more efficiently. Certainly, this Budget will help us. But in
saying that, let us not overlook the profound changes that have taken place
in terms of budgeting, which have also helped to stabilise the economy:
bringing in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework over a three-year period;
bringing in the substantial reforms to the way that the Budget is
presented, and bringing certainty and confidence to the economy out there
that we know where we are going, and how we are transparent about where we
are going, which have been a major boost to the confidence in this economy.

Improved asset and liability management has also assisted. We have been
able to improve the way that we manage our assets and liabilities to such
an extent that that is no longer a major issue with us. We are able to
improve revenue for Government precisely because we are able to better
manage our liabilities and assets.

There are issues that we need to deal with. We have brought this economy to
this stage and to the takeoff point where we have performed in a way that
few other economies in the world have performed. The resilience that this
economy has shown in the light of the international slowdown, generally and
economically, has been remarkable. We have been able to maintain rates of
growth over and above the average rate of growth internationally. In this
climate of international depression, it is truly amazing that we have shown
the resilience that we have. That does not mean that there aren't
challenges ahead of us. That does not mean that because there are
challenges we haven't succeeded.

What we have succeeded in is in stabilising and setting the growth path
forward plus the redistribution of resources to those who need them. What
we need to move onto now is paying concerted attention to unemployment,
improved stimulation of the domestic economy, improved service delivery,
and massive skills retraining and development. I say these things not
because they are the so-called failures of Government, but these are the
inevitables of what has confronted us by an economy that was wrecked by war
and by a siege that apartheid inflicted on this country.

We have moved forward. We have stabilised. We have energised. We have moved
this economy forward to a point where we can start isolating the very
issues that are at the heart of a lot of what we need to deal with.
Certainly, the growth and development summit which we are going to be
engaged in in May becomes critical in this regard. Here, we need to have
partnerships. We must not come with long lists of grievances: grievances
from Government, business and labour. We must come with a list of issues
which unite us and which give us a vision of what makes all of us proud to
be South African; what makes this country tick, and how we can all unite to
make this country tick and build on the most incredible base that we have
been able to build in just nine years of Government from a base of zero
forward.

Finally, we bear in mind that we are facing a war. It is an unwarranted war
and as one economist said to us, ``This country simply does not need that
war.'' I would like to say to all of us that it is a great tragedy for
every developing country that this war is being unleashed. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, forgive me for not following
the arguments of the previous speaker, Ms Hogan. But I rise in response to
the Speaker's decision that a separate debate on the imminence of war in
Iraq is not going to be granted and that this appropriation debate would be
extended to accommodate that subject. I refer to the Speaker's decision and
wish to address Parliament accordingly.

It is now almost certain that force will be used to disarm and depose the
regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq. [Interjections.] We have reached this
point, because of the failure of multilateralism. The fault line in the UN
Security Council reaches around the world, and into this continent of
Africa itself.

We believe that three points must now guide South Africa's approach in the
fateful period ahead. Firstly, we must accept that war is almost
inevitable. Sadly, there is nothing South Africa or most other countries
can do to restore the diplomatic process, whose collapse will have far-
reaching consequences for all of us, inside and outside this House.

Secondly, we must stop our flirtation with Saddam Hussein. We have coddled
the Iraqi regime for far too long. [Interjections.] A continued
relationship with Saddam is, frankly, not in our national interest.
[Interjections.]

Thirdly, we can and should play a role in the reconstruction of Iraq. In
the aftermath of war, South Africa must lend its experience and commitment
to building a peaceful, stable, and democratic Iraq.
The Security Council was unanimous about the danger posed by Saddam and his
weapons of mass destruction, but equally divided about how to deal with him
and them. In the end, both sides at the UN must share responsibility for
the failure of multilateralism. We have also in part failed. We have
continued to embrace delinquent states which have weakened our
international institutions and undermined the principles of Nepad and the
African Union, to which this House has so commendably committed itself.

As a result, the world today is divided between two pessimistic views of
the human condition. One holds that the common efforts of the international
community have done nothing to ensure peace. The other believes that the
bold action of strong nations will do nothing but ensure war. The one view
denies us our abilities as individuals; the other denies us our capacity as
a collective whole. The decision to go to war is a choice between these
two, frankly, very bad alternatives.

Our hearts go out to the people of Iraq, not just because of the suffering
they are almost inevitably about to endure, but because they have never had
the chance to govern themselves or to choose something other than the
brutal regime that rules them. Today, the entire world stands with them.
Some want to be their liberators; others want to be their shields. All of
us share their anxiety and their doubt.

Yet we know that South Africa can make a modest but certainly very
honourable contribution to building a new Iraq, founded on principles of
human rights and democracy. In doing so, we can help reconstruct the
fractured framework of multilateralism, and restore the optimism and hope
of humanity. [Applause.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, our debate this afternoon is taking place
against the background of developments in the international arena that make
it impossible for us to continue as though it is business as usual. On that
point - and that point alone - I agree with the hon Tony Leon.
The ultimatum by President George Bush to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq
to go into exile in 48 hours or face military action has taken the US-Iraq
crisis to a new and extremely dangerous level, with serious implications
for everyone in all parts of the world. Let us be clear: this ultimatum has
been issued without any sanction of international law and without any
authorisation from the only body competent in this regard, the UN Security
Council.

Indeed, the small coalition that is chosen to walk this path has elected to
act unilaterally, precisely because they know that they have no chance of
convincing the UN Security Council to support them. Mr Leon, this is not a
failure of multilateralism, but a failure to respect multilateralism and
the principles of joint decision-making. [Applause.]

Those that are walking in this route are acting with flagrant disregard for
the views of the majority in the Security Council and without the backing
of the UN arms inspectors, despite their claim that they are taking this
step because Iraq refuses to disarm and constitutes a threat to world
peace. As the mass protests across the world in recent weeks have made
clear, they are also acting against the tide of global opinion.

Iraq and the Iraqi people face the imminent prospect of massive loss of
life and further material damage that cannot but exacerbate the acute human
crisis that is already facing them. Even if President Saddam Hussein were
to bow to the ultimatum and move into exile, Iraq would face an unwanted
and unpopular military occupation by the US which, let us not kid
ourselves, would be of long duration. This would create the conditions for
the annexation of the country's oil wealth, which many believe is one of
the core factors which is leading to this war in the first place.

Emboldened by one success at regime change, who knows where the next target
would be. Iran and Syria are definitely in the crossfire, but who knows
where all this might end. All of this constitutes a major threat both to
world peace and to the fundamental principles of multilateralism. Good
governance and democracy are principles which are now universally held to
be essential to the promotion of human progress, development and economic
wellbeing.

Developed countries - and the US is prominent among them - have over the
years insisted that these are essential elements for any programme of co-
operation they participate in with developing countries. Of course, this
has been highly selective, with useful allies being excused any minor
transgression, like having a military coup, so long as they provide
logistical support for militaristic adventures.

Those who have defended multilateralism have argued that precisely the same
principles of good governance and democracy must apply to international
relations. The defence of multilateralism is rooted in the conviction that
rules-based systems in which rules bind the strong as well as the weak, and
in which the strong submit to joint decisions, are the only way to advance
an equitable, mutually beneficial and development-orientated global
project.

Since the election of George W Bush - and let us not forget, in dubious
circumstances - we have seen the US increasingly displaying scepticism for
multilateralism and multilateral decision-making processes. This was
evident when the US administration refused to sign the Kyoto protocol, and
in their attitude to the World Conference Against Racism.

What we are now witnessing is a qualitative shift, with complete contempt
now being displayed for multilateralism, international law and the
principles of joint decision-making. This is a dangerous path. The US may
feel it can get away with it for now, but who knows what Pandora's box it
has opened and with what consequences. One only needs to reflect on the way
in which the demise of the League of Nations contributed to creating
conditions that led to the Second World War, to know what a danger we are
now facing.

South Africa, Mr Leon, has, I believe, taken a clear stand in this
unfolding crisis. We have not been in any partisan way cuddling up to
Saddam Hussein. While we have consistently stood with the majority of
humanity for peace and multilateralism, our Government has acted with great
credit and with considerable skill to avoid the scenario which now seems
inevitable.

Power may be prevailing over respect for rules and for principles for now,
and this will undoubtedly create new realities whose impact, in the
fullness of time, we are going to have to analyse and assess. However,
while might might prevail for now, the struggle for peace and progress will
continue, and I am certain that it will gather pace in the face of this
blatant display of arrogant disregard for the peoples of the world by US
imperialism. Aluta continua, victoria asseta.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I now want to participate in the Budget debate.
[Interjections.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible]
Dr R H DAVIES: You certainly will! The Budget debate offers a unique
opportunity each year for parties represented in this Parliament to put
forward their views on economic policy issues. It is an occasion,
therefore, that allows contending perspectives to be identified,
differences to be demarcated, and the alternatives being presented to be
debated both by us as MPs and by the public and the electorate at large.

The ANC, as the party in Government, has put forward its approach in some
detail, both in the President's state of the nation address and in the
Budget Speech. Our current perspectives were widely canvassed and debated
in processes that culminated in the adoption of resolutions at our 51st
national congress held in Stellenbosch in December 2002. Our fundamental
objective is an unshakeable commitment to roll back the frontiers of
poverty and bring a better life to our people.

Our basic approach is to see the challenges of promoting economic growth,
increasing the output of goods and services, and improving human
development as inextricably interrelated and therefore requiring integrated
and multifaceted strategies. As the hon Barbara Hogan has indicated, the
complex reality created by the appalling legacy of apartheid and the new
challenges of globalisation have required different emphases at different
phases of our struggle.

Our approach has been to consolidate on achievements of one phase to bring
us ever closer to being able to promote lasting and sustainable solutions
to the problems of poverty, inequality and underdevelopment confronting our
people. Priorities in the current phase include pushing forward the
microeconomic reform strategy as a key component of raising investment and
promoting growth. Key initiatives here include infrastructure development,
as well as promoting a transition from dialogue to collective action by
stakeholders within the framework of an Integrated Manufacturing Strategy
and the Growth and Development Summit.

Simultaneously, we have recognised the need for a number of new focused,
integrated initiatives to combat poverty and unemployment. These include
expanding public works programmes, accelerating efforts to promote income-
generating opportunities for people in the so-called informal sector,
encouraging the growth of a viable co-operative movement and expanding the
social security system. All of this is informed by targets we set ourselves
in Stellenbosch of halving the number of people who are unemployed by the
year 2014.

The hon Hogan has already eloquently addressed a number of these points,
and other speakers from our side will elaborate on various aspects later. I
want to use the time that is still available to me today to reflect on the
alternative that has been offered by the party which is today physically on
my left, but which in political and ideological terms is far to the right.

What alternatives does the Official Opposition in this Parliament have to
offer? We have recently seen a series of populist interventions from the DA
on various issues of poverty and social transformation. We are told that
the DA will be launching a new economic policy document in a few days'
time. No doubt this document will offer us more of the same.

Anyone who dropped in from Mars and had no other idea of what the DA was
about could be forgiven for imagining that this was a party preoccupied
with promoting the Basic Income Grant, reducing poverty and unemployment,
and promoting access to treatment for sufferers with HIV/Aids. Those of us
who don't come from Mars, however, know that behind this new-found facade
of concern with poverty, promoted with all the sincerity of a used-car
salesman, lurks another, more familiar DA. [Applause.]

This is the DA whose core economic policy perspectives have frequently been
presented in the form of a whinge about reducing taxes for the benefit of
the rich. If you doubt what I am saying, I suggest you consult your own
economic policy document, which is called DA Economic Policy Information,
2001. The first substantial chapter of that document, entitled ``Fiscal
Reform'', begins with a call for the reduction of the tax burden. This is
immediately followed by a more specific call to reduce the maximum marginal
rates of tax on individuals.

If you want another example, consult the speech of the hon Ken Andrew - he
has not been around much lately - in the 2001 Budget Vote debate which is
recorded in Hansard, 15 March 2001, cols 1251 - 1257. Most of that speech
is a rant about the alleged excessive tax burden on middle- and upper-
income taxpayers, and the impact this was allegedly having on the
emigration of what he called ``high-income and high-wealth individuals''.

This is the DA that we are familiar with. [Interjections.] It is the DA
that has consistently opposed capital gains tax, because it would hurt the
same high-wealth individuals. This familiar DA, let us remind ourselves,
has also consistently championed less progressivity in the tax system by
advocating a shift away from income- and profit-based taxes in which the
rich pay proportionately more, in favour of expenditure taxes like VAT,
where the poor pay proportionately more. This DA which we know, is a party
that has instinctively supported less regulation driven by a naive belief
that ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Davies, order!

Dr J T DELPORT: Will the hon member take a question?

Hon MEMBERS: No! [Interjections.]

Dr R H DAVIES: This is a party that has instinctively supported less
regulation, driven by a naive belief that markets will always deliver, when
in fact many Government activities arise precisely because markets have
failed to deliver. This is a party whose instincts have led it blindly to
champion corporate demands on issue after issue, resulting in what its
leader later acknowledged was its biggest tactical blunder when in 1996 it
slavishly responded to lobbying the pharmaceutical companies and opposed
the Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill. This, too, is a party
that has championed and continues to champion a big-bang, ideologically
driven approach to privatisation.

I won't pretend that this has been an easy issue for us in the ANC or in
our alliance, but we are agreed on a number of fundamental principles.
These include agreement that the fundamental issue with regard to state-
owned enterprises is one of restructuring, not privatisation and that the
main goal of restructuring is to make state-owned enterprises operate more
effectively as public institutions operating according to a public and
developmental mandate.

The second principle is that where restructuring involves elements of
privatisation or nationalisation, the decision may be taken on a case-by-
case basis on a balance of evidence. In other words, there is a strategic
approach to this issue. The DA's view, by contrast, sees privatisation on a
large scale as a panacea in which state-owned enterprises are mere cash
cows to be milked for revenue to avoid having to tax the rich, and in which
privatisation is seen as an unmitigated benefit based on the naive belief
that the private sector and profit-seeking institutions will always deliver
services better.

The DA, in other words, has come to defend the kind of big-bang,
ideologically driven approach to privatisation which Nobel economics
laureate Joseph Stiglitz - speaking, take note, from the perspective of
support for privatisation - has severely criticised. In his recent book,
Globalisation and its Discontents, Stiglitz argues that, while in his view
strategic privatisation of certain assets can be beneficial under the right
circumstances, proponents of big-bang approaches ignore the reality that
there are a range of vital services that profit-maximising institutions are
simply not equipped to deliver.

He also criticises the cavalier dismissal of concerns and fears of workers
about threatened layoffs, arguing that -


  ... moving people from low productivity jobs in state enterprises to
  unemployment does not increase a country's income, and certainly does not
  increase the welfare of its workers.

Even the DA's new flagship populist gesture, its supposed support for a
Basic Income Grant, is fundamentally flawed by its overall ideological
perspective. [Interjections.] The Basic Income Grant emanates as a proposal
from a commission appointed by this Government, and is being championed by
forces within our tripartite alliance.

The Deputy President confirmed last week that it is a proposal that remains
under consideration, within the shared perspective that accepts the need
for a comprehensive extension of social security. The DA has
opportunistically taken up the call for a grant of R100 per month, but has
added a proposal that this be financed by an increase in VAT. What the one
hand giveth, the other hand taketh away. [Applause.]

When a similar proposal was put by an academic economist not linked to the
DA, in the hearings which were held by the finance committee, it was
suggested that VAT be raised to 21%. It was further suggested in those
hearings that this would be of net benefit, because families that would be
dependent on the grant consume only a few zero-rated commodities. Perhaps
yes for the very poorest of the poor, but for many other poor people and
ordinary working people, raising VAT to 21% would be a cause of great
hardship.

What this debate has highlighted is the total unacceptability of proposals
that envisage the burden of redistribution falling on other strata of the
poor rather than the rich. Even the DA's flagship populist gesture is
constrained by the need to prioritise the interests of its core
constituency, the rich and the privileged.

This is the DA that we are familiar with - the DA we know as a party that
has consistently rooted its core economic policy perspectives in calls for
tax relief for the rich, rapid big-bang privatisation, weakened labour
rights and opposition to affirmative action, which its current policy
document calls ``race-based quotas.'' If you doubt that, look at the
section of their policy document headed ``Priorities'', which says, and I
quote:


  Many of the impediments to savings, investment and growth will disappear
  if the DA's macroeconomic privatisation and labour policies are
  implemented.

This is the DA that we are familiar with. It is, in short, recognisable as
the local peddler of an ideology that is well known internationally. It is
an ideology described by prominent British commentator, Will Hutton, in his
recent book The World We're In in the following terms:


  The rights of the propertied and the freedom of business come before any
  assertion of public interest or social concern. Taxation is depicted as
  confiscation, an intolerable burden that should be reduced. The social,
  the collective and the public realm are portrayed as enemies of
  prosperity.

Whether they know it or not, the DA are our own local Tories or
neoconservatives, the purveyors of an ideology that continues to enjoy
support in powerful circles across the world, but which is, increasingly,
widely recognised as incapable of producing answers to the central
challenge facing peoples across the world, promoting inclusive growth and
development, eliminating poverty and reducing inequality within countries
and globally. Theirs is an outmoded and passé neoconservative approach
whose claims to offer a way forward has patently proved false.

But this is an ideology that is of critical importance to them. The past
decade or so has seen the DA increasingly abandoning the human rights
liberalism of its predecessors, under whose banner a small number of
individuals campaigned with honour against human rights abuses of
apartheid. The contemporary DA has abandoned this approach in favour of an
aggressive economic neoliberalism which marks it as a conservative force
today. It is this ideological shift that underpinned its transition from a
fringe group in the previous order to becoming today the authentic
representative of a sizeable section of the most backward and reactionary
forces in our country.

For such a group to present itself as a champion of the poor is rather like
the Sheriff of Nottingham masquerading as Robin Hood. The DA's campaigns on
poverty issues are ill-thought-through, populist gestures aimed at
opportunistically broadening its electoral support. But I've got news for
the DA: neither we nor the electorate come from Mars. We know who you are
and what you represent. Tony's new facade of concern for the poor, to shift
the metaphor, is like the emperor's new clothes. It won't take long to
recognise there is nothing there. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I begin by making my party's statement
on the situation in Iraq, and that is that we remain in support of the UN's
resolutions and the majority decisions of the Security Council. This keeps
us in favour of multilateralism and we would wish that more was being done
to achieve a peaceful resolution of the potential conflict. But if the
United States does, indeed, lead an invasion of Iraq, we would pray that
human casualties are not high.

We are going to say that if Iraq is invaded and weapons of mass destruction
are found, it would mean one thing, ie who was right and who was wrong. But
if Iraq is invaded and no weapons are found, it would mean something else
as to who was right and who was wrong. In our opinion there are just simply
too many facts which we remain unsighted of to take positions as strong as
those being taken by many others who express themselves on the other side
of the divide.

Thank you, I will now move on to my contribution to the appropriation
debate.

Yes, Mr Minister, we agree and acknowledge that in many important ways you
are doing the right thing. Even the so-called neoliberal-type approaches
towards foreign investment, capital formation and trade flows, together
with other facilitatory and stimulatory tendencies evident in the Budget,
are essentially the right things to do. And how this all encourages
economic growth can be seen in the steady growth that has been achieved in
South Africa in recent times.

But as we can see elsewhere in the world, particularly in the developing
countries, the approach does have its limitations in so far as the growth
and successes are accrued, by and large, to the existing capitalist and
professional classes, from which Government does of course get its slice
through taxes.

The limitation is that it achieves little in bringing those from the poor
masses into the formal economic activity of the country. In fact, the type
of growth that we see even seems to cause growing disproportionality in the
pattern of national income distribution. With credible figures now showing
the richest 17% in this country to be getting 70% of the income pool and
the poorest 60% to be getting only 4%, this seems to confirm the growing
poverty which is visually evident in many parts of the country,
particularly the rural areas.
So the positive effects of economic growth somehow do not and are not
cascading down to the poor. In fact, they do not even trickle down to the
poor. In view of this problem, the Budget is however doing the right thing
by taking more from the rich - which it does not do through higher taxes,
but through more effective collection of taxes due and through various
grants, poverty relief and other social spending programmes in an attempt
to ease the lot of the poor.

But as we know, this does not resolve the structural problems which keep
the poor out of the activities in the real economy. Against this problem,
Government policy and, indeed, this Budget, do right things where they try
to create jobs and to equip the disadvantaged people to take up such jobs.
This is the right thing, because it is a pro-poor policy which looks beyond
distributing handouts or waiting for a trickle to arrive.

We must ask questions as to why, after five years or more of a number of
jobs and skills initiatives, the situation has not improved. This, Mr
Minister, is where we do note a weakness in your repertoire of doing the
right things; not because you - and I must include the Minister of Trade
and Industry here - are not doing the right thing, but because it is not
being done properly when it comes to job creation, especially through
market expansion, and when it comes to skills training.

We could go through a long list of exciting and innovative policies, plans,
dedicated funds, structures and laws that you have initiated, but as the
situation on the ground shows, you will see that virtually none of these
ever comes near to achieving their intended possibilities. They are almost
all poorly implemented and poorly managed, causing a disgracefully poor
socioeconomic return on investments and these initiatives.

We would like to ask the two Ministers concerned to please examine all
these underperforming initiatives and then do their ruthless best to get
them to produce the jobs and the people for those jobs in sufficient
numbers, to reduce the country's shameful income gap and thereby its levels
of poverty, which is where doing-the-right-thing results are most urgent.

Moving on, I will not say much about the Budget's revenue side, other than
that the Minister is here again, by and large, doing all the right things
in terms of tax rates, the structure and proportions of the tax system and
of course, the collection of those taxes. In fact, let me say that, in our
opinion, all the praise given to Sars understates the true extent of the
success story.

I want to acknowledge some people in this regard. The first will be Gill
Marcus, the former chairperson of the Finance committee. I think she did
more than anyone to get the former revenue service on the agenda. And then
there is the former Deputy Minister of Finance, Alec Erwin, who pioneered
the studies which laid the basis for the more efficient revenue-collection
agency.

There is also the current Minister of Finance, who oversaw the birth of
Sars, the introduction of the new approach and the strengthening of the top
structures, and the commissioner, Pravin Gordhan, who just seems to always
demonstrate his remarkable ability to make things happen, ie to identify
shortcomings, to work out effective solutions to those shortcomings, to
efficiently implement those solutions to achieve the desired results and
then to move on to further improvement.

So we see Sars continually moving and keeping at the cutting edge of
becoming professional and efficient. I think Pravin shows some qualities
which might stand him in good stead to become a future president.

I now turn my attention to the expenditure side, where we once again see
much of the right thing being done, including the various spending
divisions and mixes and, in particular, the social spending patterns. The
Minister has now proven his ability to keep spending within these laid-down
parameters and I am sure that must in time gradually elevate him to a
legendary status. However, less of the right thing to do is in evidence
when it comes to the value-for-money performance of Government spending. I
will argue this for two reasons.

Firstly, while Treasury's PFMA implementation plan is generally sound,
methodical and well managed, it fails the real essence of financial
management performance as intended by the PFMA. And I think I speak with
some authority here, having been involved in the research, the model
construction, the writing of the relevant PFMA clauses and the selling of
all this to the Portfolio Committee on Finance's legislative process back
then. I have on a number of occasions brought these concerns to the
attention of Treasury.

Secondly, there is the general inability across Government of officials to
properly respond to the PFMA's performance content, due to a very serious
lack of appropriate expertise - a situation which will be greatly
exacerbated when the Financial Management Bill comes into force later this
year.

We are paying - and will continue to pay - a very high price because of
this problem. Departments can continue to spend outrageously large amounts
of money on the instant colleges set up by retired old-school Treasury
officials or on universities where no practical experience or real insights
exist, but without the desired results.

Minister, I must say that I am disappointed at your rejection of my
proposal to establish a state financial management college where you could
lay down the appropriate curriculum, the standards of courses and teaching,
and the outputs and outcomes. I think the faith you placed in Samdi in this
regard for them to get some attention to this very costly failing is, with
respect, misplaced. Just look at Samdi's track record and you will see that
it is the worst-case example of the very same problem I am talking about.

Mr Minister, amongst your very impressive array of doing the right things,
this is one that is missing. Thank you.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, comrades, ladies and gentlemen, I am
sorry that Mr Leon has left, because I was going to tell him to stop
dancing on the potential graves of the men, women and children in Iraq when
he refuses to lift a finger on the deaths of men, women and children in
Palestine. To Mr Leon and in this instance the DP, the problem is not the
failure of the United Nations as a multilateral institution, but the total
disregard, as we have seen it, of the United Nations at the hands of both
the USA and Israel.

Yes, I agree with him that the heathenistic view of the human condition is
a vulgar one. The vulgarity of those of us who are possessed with power -
obsessed with it, as some of the people in the Middle East are - is wrong.
But equally, the heathenistic condition of the human mind or the human
condition is bad when in America today we see people who have already got
tenders, have already decided as to who is going to control which oil well,
and who is going to mop up Iraq or reconstruct Iraq. Mr Leon, this is an
anomaly that we cannot tolerate.
In respect of the weapons of mass destruction and the call that we as South
Africans must not flirt with Saddam Hussein, we are on record as having
made our position very clear. But we need to now re-emphasise to the DA,
and to Mr Leon in particular, that the masters of weapons of mass
destruction are the Americans themselves. [Applause.] They have pioneered
it, stored it and have used it. They used napalm bombs in Vietnam, which
incinerated vast areas of that country. They used the atomic bomb in
Nagasaki and Hiroshima. Who gives them the moral right to come and say to
the rest of the world today: ``You should not be in possession of weapons
of mass destruction''? [Applause.]

Let me come back to the debate on the Appropriation Bill. Mr Minister,
thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to talk on the question
of black empowerment. Our budget, in the words of the hon Minister, makes
an important contribution to the extension of our freedom and the unlocking
of our capabilities. He goes on to say we remain true to the spirit,
courage, passion, commitment and values that drove our historical struggle
for freedom.

The ANC-led Government is charged by its history and the hon President to
do more to push back the frontiers of poverty, to return pride to our
people, to build confidence, to care for the poor and to enhance the
dignity of every South African. So we are on track. Despite the arrogance
and glibness of a particular sector of this House, we in the ANC, with
respect, chose inclusion, partnership and stability for our common humanity
and the freedom to transform our society. We fought for this freedom
because it was the right thing to do - the Minister has made this very
clear.

For me ``right'' means in accordance with the accepted standards of moral,
legal behaviour or justice. This rightness, this ethic, is a central thesis
which is the product of our social reality. It is this social reality that
compelled us in the ANC to note at our last conference that, despite our
efforts, South African society remains characterised by vast racial and
gender inequalities in the distribution of and access to productive assets,
income skills and employment.

We went further and noted that little progress has been made in achieving
greater operational participation and control in the economy by black
people. We have instead seen the rise in fronting. And here, I believe, Mr
Minister, we need your intervention.

We in the ANC resolved that black economic empowerment is a moral,
political, social and economic requirement of this country's effective
future. It is true that the BEE component on the stock market had reached
9% in 1994, but currently this component has dropped to around 2%. In 1990
Nafcoc had set an ambitious target with regard to its BEE policy.

It was reasonable for it to target that by the year 2000, 30% of all equity
would be in black hands; that 40% of all managers in South Africa and 50%
of directors of listed companies would be black, and that 60% of all goods
and services bought by companies would be sourced from black businesses.
This has not happened. The reasons are pretty obvious and I agree with
Comrade Joel Netshitenzhe's statement that the market will never push
empowerment on its own.

But when the market does, more often than not it defeats the objective of
broadening economic participation. The isolated successful empowerment
deals are more because of the black entrepreneurial spirit than blacks
being fully accepted into the mainstream of business. Because black
economic empowerment has a central role in sustaining South Africa's
growth, we in the ANC, in pursuing this objective, will work with the
emerging black capitalist class to ensure joint commitment and practical
action to attain increasing investment, job creation and employment, equity
and poverty alleviation.

It is here that the ANC-led Government goes beyond platitudes and rhetoric
by setting aside R10 billion over the next five years to support the
funding of new ventures and business expansions that need agreed
empowerment criteria. This will directly impact positively on the promotion
and the design of empowerment programmes. Having declared our hand, shown
with deeds and the knowledge that the market will never push empowerment,
the ANC-led Government has to say that legislation is essential. This
legislation must be accompanied by enforcing, monitoring and evaluating
mechanisms. It must be promotional, but also punish those who resist
change, as well as those blacks who conspire as fronts to make change not
possible.

With fiscal discipline, accompanied by our more efficient tax collection,
Government now has enlarged spending power. It is my view that government
procurement at all levels, from national to provincial and local
government, together with procurement by parastatals and other Government-
controlled organisations, must support this BEE legislation.

Furthermore, Government must visibly influence and urge companies that
enjoy large Government contracts and tenders to purchase from BEE
companies. It must insist that these meet other employment, social spending
and BEE targets. This legislation and enforcement must shift from being
activity based to outcomes and results based. For this purpose, I believe
quotas and predetermined financial and other targets are essential.

Millions of South Africans, especially blacks, having savoured political
freedom and democratic rights, are demanding and are entitled to economic
freedom and a better quality of life for them and their families.
Legislation is essential, but it must be accompanied by effective and
efficient monitoring, evaluation and corrective-action processes. An
ombudsman must be appointed nationally, provincially and particularly in
rural areas to ensure that our policies are benefiting all South Africans
and also provide links between constituents and the Government.

Professional black bodies like Nafcoc, the BMF, the Black Accountants'
Forum and others must be involved in this process. These must range from
certifying genuine BEE companies or enterprises; ongoing monitoring of BEE
contracts; advising BEE companies and so on. Anomalies in drawing up BEE
points or criteria must be investigated and corrected.

We have the experience of certain parastatals - such as Telkom and Eskom -
who have taken the lead in implementing enlightened and effective BEE
policies. Telkom is a good working example. It has set aside contracts and
areas of activity exclusively to BEE companies with the installation of
quality systems and so on. Legislation has to be accompanied by major
publicity and public relations campaigns, because meaningful black
participation in the economy is vital to satisfying rising black
aspirations. It is also, rather ironically, essential for continued white
corporate prosperity.

It is, therefore, essential that corporate South Africa must be encouraged
and, if need be, coerced into this process. The recent mining initiatives
whereby mining companies have put up R100 billion to assist in transferring
ownership of the mining industry to 15% in five years and 26% in 10 years
are laudable. But it must not be forgotten that this would not have
happened or come about without Government intervention.

If there are amongst us here those who have illusions about our future, it
would do you good to know that real growth in our economy can only take
place if blacks have a worthwhile and vested stake in the economy. All else
is glibness, isolation, disregard, irrationality, exclusion, vacillation,
populism, stagnation and chaos, to use the Minister's words.

It would do you good to know that the ANC lives; it lives and leads all
South Africans from chaos, isolation, glibness, irrationality and exclusion
in the spirit of our common humanity to make South Africa liveable for all
who live in it, because South Africa belongs to all who live in it - black
and white.

Lastly, if it is not too much to ask yourselves as South Africans, what
have you done to make South Africa liveable for all who live in it? Examine
your lives and tell us what you do to engage or enhance the development
process. Since you do not do these things, it would do you good to shut up,
lest you leave only your arrogant glibness as a talisman for your children.
Remember the dictum that comes from the Judeo-Christian ethos, ``A life
unexamined is not worth living'', Ms Taljaard. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, the 2003-04
Budget was presented within the context that South Africa experienced
economic growth in the face of the global economic slowdown. The Budget,
like the Budget of 2003, provides for personal income relief to the lower-
and middle-income groups. A number of themes mentioned in the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement, like increased infrastructure, investment,
broadening the social security net, and an increase in spending on health
and education, are significant.

The term ``robust revenue collection'' was used to describe the broadening
of South Africa's tax base. An increase in the primary rebate to R5 400 has
pushed up the income threshold to R30 000. The tax threshold for taxpayers
aged 65 and over is up by 10,7% to R47 220.

The Budget Review states that of the total tax relief 56% accrues to
taxpayers earning less than R150 000; 23% to those earning between R150 000
and R250 000 a year, and 21% to those earning more than
R250 000. Another benefit is that the threshold for domestic interest, and
dividend income exemption is up from R6 000 to R10 000 for taxpayers under
65 years of age, and from R10 000 to R15 000 for taxpayers aged 65 and
over.

The transfer duty threshold is increased from R100 000 to R140 000. This
will enable thousands of South Africans at the lower end of the market to
purchase fixed property. The tax on retirement funds is reduced from 25% to
18%, and this is welcomed. The comprehensive review that relates to the tax
treatment of the retirement industry is expected to be made public in 2004,
and it is my considered opinion that there is a great need for reform
within our tax industry.

I appeal to all the interested parties, if possible, to further reduce the
taxes that relate to retirement funds. It is in the general interest that
our retirement industry remains viable. The announcement that the
accelerated depreciation allowance for urban development zones - 20%
straight-line depreciation over five years on refurbishment costs - is a
positive announcement.

An appeal is made that this depreciation allowance also be extended to some
of our towns with historical CBDs. Towns like Stellenbosch, Paarl,
Worcester, Graaff Reinet, Swellendam, Elim, McGregor, Arniston,
Waenhuiskrans, and a number of others, also qualify for this particular
form of tax refurbishment, and I think we should really investigate the
possibility of that particular form of grant. They have a unique
architectural history and Government support in this regard will enable
local authorities to develop the tourist potential of these selected towns
even further.
A number of economists and academics addressed the finance committee. A
number of issues were raised by Prof Matthew Lester of Rhodes University,
namely that corporate tax collection has increased in real terms by more
than a third since 2000. Major factors in this regard were the introduction
of capital gains tax and the residence-based tax system, as well as the
increase in Sars' efficiency.

Another issue worth noting is that a change in residential property rules
is occurring, which means that individual owners, as opposed to trust or
company membership, will from this year pay far less in tax duties when
selling property.

Belastingwetgewing is besonder kompleks. Dit is gebiedend noodsaaklik dat
alle belastings, of dit betrekking het op nasionale vlak, provinsiale vlak
of plaaslike owerhede vlak, streng gekoördineer word. 'n Beroep word veral
op plaaslike vlak en provinsiale owerhede gedoen om, waar moontlik, te
besin oor addisionele belastings. 'n Sleutelvereiste vir 'n gesonde,
aanvaarbare belastingstelsel is dat dit verbruikersvriendelik moet wees.
Dit moet regverdig wees, en versoenbaar wees met internasionaal aanvaarbare
belastingstandaarde en -norme.

Dit skyn vir my asof sommige plaaslike en provinsiale owerhede voortdurend
soek na addisionele inkomstebronne. Alvorens daar enige heffings of
belastings oorweeg word, moet dit, en dit is my versoek, baie deeglik met
die+ tesourie gekoördineer word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Tax legislation is particularly complex. It is essential that all tax,
whether it pertains to the national level, provincial level or local
authorities level, should be co-ordinated strictly. An appeal is made to
the local level and provincial authorities especially to, where possible,
reflect or consider additional taxes. A key requirement for a healthy,
acceptable tax system is that it should be consumer-friendly. It should be
fair and reconcilable with internationally accepted tax standards and
norms.
It seems to me as if some local and provincial authorities are continuously
seeking additional sources of income. Before any levy or tax is considered
it should, and this is my request, be very thoroughly co-ordinated with the
Treasury.]

The fact that VAT was not increased is significant. Currently VAT
contributes something like 24% to 25% of total revenue. Our VAT model of
14% contributes 6,5% of GDP. It is my opinion that an increase in VAT will
adversely affect the lower-income categories, because a larger proportion
of their total income is spent upon food and other essentials.

What is also significant is that during Budget hearings one of our
committee members enquired whether South Africa has reached a plateau
regarding possible revenue collection. The Commissioner of Revenue
responded that the tax gap is approximately R30 billion. This is not
acceptable. I think all responsible role-players should do everything
possible to reduce this tax gap. The reduction in the tax gap will be to
the benefit of all South Africans.

Ring-fencing of secondary trade losses was also discussed during the Budget
hearings. Sars argued that some taxpayers use tax write-offs unfairly to
compete with people who are not able to exploit the tax system.

Minister, in your Budget you stressed the importance of accountability for
service delivery. The quality of service that some Government departments
deliver is often not acceptable. Where I hail from pensioners often start
queuing at about six o'clock in the morning on pension day. The pension
offices close at three o'clock, no matter how many people are in the queue.
When I approach Government departments regarding the quality of service,
the standard answer is that they are understaffed or the relevant official
is in a meeting.

A key prerequisite for sustained economic growth is to create capacity
productivity at ground level. The Reserve Bank's monetary policy in
relation to interest rates, and the supply of money in the economy, is also
acceptable. The question remains whether the Reserve Bank will be able to
cut interest rates, because of the present value of the rand. The
possibility of war in the Middle East may result in a sharp increase in the
price of crude oil, which may result in a sharp rise in our consumer price
index.

Economists often cite three threats to the South African economy, namely
inflation, unemployment and the threat of HIV/Aids. The cost of crime to
the South African economy, in its various forms, cannot be underestimated.
Unemployment is often used as the justification for crime. My personal
opinion is that this is a gross simplification. This particular Budget will
provide an additional allocation of R2,7 billion to streamline the criminal
justice sector, and improve the protection of women and children.

Poverty plays a role within crime, but is not a driver. The poor are no
more likely to turn to crime than the rich, but poor people have less
social safety mechanisms to enable them to cope with family break-ups,
alcohol abuse, and in the case of South Africa, the ever-increasing number
of children orphaned by Aids-related deaths. The Financial Mail of 14
March, page 23, states that UN research has found that there are 660 000
Aids orphans in South Africa. This number is expected to grow to nearly 2
million by 2010.

What is further reason for concern is that the arrests of offenders under
21 have risen by 27%, from just under 115 000 to an estimated 146 000 last
year. In mid-2002 nearly 18 000 children under 18 years were serving
sentences; three in every 200 sentenced prisoners were juveniles. This is
according to official police figures.

It is of the utmost importance that crime be addressed by means of
partnerships between the state and other role-players. NGOs, especially the
small grass-roots organisations working for social upliftment, to enhance
skills and provide an alternative to crime, must be mobilised.
This particular Budget provides for more infrastructure spending by
municipalities: an extra R1 billion for labour-intensive community
development projects which will employ local people. The fact that people
at the local level will take responsibility is very important in this
regard. The fact that the money was allocated to municipalities, rather
than to the national Department of Public Works, indicates a shift away
from nationally driven to public-level development programmes, which I
think is a very positive factor.

The National Skills Fund will receive R720 million for the year ahead,
which will enable 50 000 individuals under the age of 30 to undergo a
structured training programme. The announcement that the Public Service
will initiate an internship programme is also a positive step.

Fiscal management must create an environment where domestic and foreign
investors invest in long-term viable projects that provide sound, good
returns. This Budget, and our present tax regime, will enable exporters to
remain competitive and profitable.

The Portfolio Committee on Finance had lengthy discussions on how demand
within the economy could be increased. Examples such as land distribution,
public works programmes, the establishment of more small to medium
enterprises, the creation of an entrepreneurial spirit and the broadening
of domestic demand were mentioned.

A particular challenge for the forthcoming financial year is that the
broadening of economic participation must occur.

Swart bemagtiging is van sleutel belang indien die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie
sy groei wil behou, veral as daar na geleenthede in al die sektore van ons
ekonomie gekyk word. Die feit dat R10 miljard oor die volgende vyf jaar
bewillig gaan word, is bemoedigend. Dit is gebiedend noodsaaklik dat die
proses van bemagtiging ordelik, deursigtig en op 'n verantwoordbare wyse
geskied, wat beleggingsvertroue sal versterk.
Die restitusie van grond is 'n sleutelveranderlike, en die begrote bedrag
wat vir die restitusie van grond bewillig is, styg van R1,1 miljard tot
R1,6 miljard. Grondsake meld dat 9 469 landelike en stedelike eise, wat na
400 000 hektaar verwys en 45 000 Suid-Afrikaners sal bevoordeel, teen 2004
afgehandel sal wees. Dit skyn asof die fokus verskuif word van
grondrestitusie en bestaansboerdery na kommersiële landbou, wat 'n
positiewe verwikkeling is. AgriSA bereken dat die koste van 'n gemiddelde
kommersiële landbou-eenheid vandag R1,25 miljoen beloop.

Wat egter belangrik is, is dat die Landbank en ander rolspelers ook moet
meehelp dat opkomende swart boere tot hulle volle potensiaal ontwikkel.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Black empowerment is of key importance if the South African economy wants
to maintain its growth, especially if we look at opportunities in all
sectors of our economy. The fact that R10 billion will be allocated over
the next five years is encouraging. It is essential that the process of
empowerment is done in an orderly, transparent and justifiable manner which
will strengthen investor confidence.

The restitution of land is a key variable, and the amount budgeted for the
restitution of land increases from R1,1 billion to R 1,6 billion. Land
Affairs reports that 9 469 rural and urban claims, which refer to 400 000
hectares and which would benefit 45 000 South Africans, will be finalised
by 2004. It seems as if the focus is being shifted from land restitution
and subsistence farming to commercial agriculture, which is a positive
development. AgriSA estimates that the cost of an average commercial
agricultural unit today will amount to R1,25 million.

What is, however, important is that the Land Bank and other role-players
should also help the emerging black farmers develop to their full
potential.]]

In my speech I referred to the effect of HIV/Aids. Over the next three
years R3,3 billion will be added to the provincial equitable share and
conditional grants to extend the preventative programmes and finance
medically appropriate treatment for HIV/Aids.

It is generally accepted that, besides health care, Aids needs to be
addressed on a wide range of fronts, such as the alleviation of poverty and
empowerment. Increased social spending and tax relief may enable lower-
income earners to have improved access to proper medical care and
information assimilation. It is widely accepted that a strategy of reducing
income inequality may reduce the burden of HIV/Aids and other diseases.

A comprehensive strategy combining prevention, care, voluntary counselling,
testing and national antiretroviral treatment is urgently needed. Activist
groups have warned that Government is seen as ``dragging its feet in
publishing a national strategy in this regard''.

Aids-related spending is bound to increase steadily over the next decade. I
therefore appeal to all role-players to develop and implement a
comprehensive national strategy to deal with one of the biggest threats to
the South African economy, namely HIV/Aids.

The New NP supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Freedom Charter declares
that ``The People Shall Share in the Country's Wealth!'' This Budget seeks
to meet the challenge posed by the Freedom Charter.

As we deal with the reallocation of resources, we must accept that those
who benefited to the exclusion of others will want to hold onto their
benefits and continue to exclude others. In his inauguration address in May
1994, former President Mandela declared, and I quote:


  We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation. We pledge
  ourselves to liberate all our people from the continuing bondage of
  poverty, deprivation, suffering, gender and other discrimination.
These words were a recognition that our political freedom will mean nothing
unless we distribute the economic resources of the country equally and
equitably amongst all South Africans. It is true, therefore, that the
biggest beneficiaries of our policies will be those who were denied access
and marginalised by the apartheid regime.

If we do not create conditions where people can reap the benefits of their
struggles, we would have failed our people and society, and we cannot
expect to live in peace thereafter.

In Long Walk To Freedom Madiba wrote:


  I have taken a moment here to rest, to steal a view of the glorious vista
  that surrounds me, to look back on the distance I have come. But I can
  rest only for a moment, for with freedom comes responsibilities, and I
  dare not linger, for my long walk is not yet ended.

If we want to remain relevant to the majority of our people, we must also
take the long walk and not linger, for the journey to a better life started
just nine years ago.

There are those sitting on my left who lack the credibility to be honest
and tell the truth that the ANC has made strides to move the country to a
better tomorrow. [Interjections.] They use megaphones to shout that we are
not doing what they tell us to do, for they are locked in the old paradigm
of being masters and having Africans as servants. [Interjections.]

The allocation of R38 billion to provinces will enhance our work and
response to HIV/Aids. We may argue about its adequacy, but this Government
has made a commitment to do everything in its power to fight and create a
better life for all. [Interjections.]

The fight against HIV/Aids must not be viewed as an isolated battle. It is
a fight linked to our effort to push back the frontiers of poverty and
eliminate social conditions that make our people vulnerable to curable
diseases that sometimes cause their untimely death.

We will continue to struggle against diseases that flourish as a result of
poverty and underdevelopment, because ``it is the right thing to do,'' as
the Minister of Finance said. Those who are used to issuing commands and
expecting us to do as instructed by our masters shout and lie when we do
not follow their instructions.

The allocation of R3,3 billion over this medium term via the national
department, as well as conditional grants to provinces, is the continuation
of the mandate of the ANC's national conference to strengthen and
accelerate the implementation of the National Aids Strategy as amplified in
the Cabinet statements of 17 April and 28 October 2002, respectively.

ANC MPs and Sanco must be at the forefront of community mobilisation and
leadership around HIV/Aids struggles, especially on issues of awareness,
prevention, voluntary testing, counselling, treatment and care, so as to
expose the self-appointed leaders who masquerade and pretend to be
concerned about our people whilst propelling their self-interest.

During our struggle against apartheid there were people who emerged at
different epochs and presented themselves as alternative moderate leaders
against the radical ANC leadership. We exposed them for what they were
through our mass work, and today we are called upon to go back to the
streets to mobilise our people to fight against HIV.

We should continue to mobilise resources to improve our clinical protocols
and training programmes, as well as support the health workers, who are at
the cold front of the fight. As the ANC and the SA National Civics
Organisation, we must insist on the building of an efficient infrastructure
for the monitoring and following up of patients, the treatment of
opportunistic infections, and the use of antiretroviral drugs, where
appropriate.

Those who accuse us of not caring are not mentioning the fact that we
placed the fight against poverty and HIV/Aids at the highest authority of
this country. [Interjections.] It's true! It is headed by the Deputy
President. They do not mention the fact that it is the Government that has
fought the battle with the powerful pharmaceutical companies and won.

They are also not mentioning that it is this Government that has made
available R98 million in an effort to change the lifestyles of South
Africans. They do not tell the people that it is this Government that has
worked to break the stigma against the use of condoms. Let me just mention
that last year the Government budgeted for the distribution of 350 million
condoms for both males and females.

They are not saying that it is this Government that has made available
child grants to all South African children. They say nothing about the old
age grant that was used to bolster whites and starve our people. They do
not say anything about the extension of social grants to those people
living with HIV/Aids who can no longer work due to illness.

They pretend not to know that it is the ANC Government that has increased
the allocation of home-based and community-based care from R25 million last
year to R138 million for the year 2004-05. [Interjections.] They pretend
not to know, Taljaard, that nearly 500 cadres in the provinces are
receiving home-based and community-based care kits to care for the sick.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: When the hon member at
the podium refers to another hon member in the House, he is expected to use
the term ``hon'' and I request that he does so. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Mr Sithole, will you please correct your comment
about Ms Taljaard?

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, hon Ms Taljaard ... [Laughter.] The hon Ms
Taljaard pretends that the ANC Government has not increased the allocations
mentioned above.

It is our movement that has long recognised that good health is a
fundamental requirement of a better quality of life. How then, can this
movement not be concerned about people who are HIV-positive and their
families?

It is now accepted that building and strengthening the immune system helps
to ward off infections. Therefore, good nutrition is critical for those who
are infected by the virus. It is the ANC view, hon Taljaard, that for us to
win the battle against HIV/Aids, we must adopt a comprehensive and balanced
approach to the challenge of providing health for all, based on a more
accurate understanding of the incidence of diseases in the country.
[Interjections.]

We mention this to demonstrate that the fight against HIV/Aids is not a one-
dimensional fight, as some people want us to believe, ie that the solution
is just drugs. I must pause here and remind everyone that to date there is
no known cure for HIV/Aids, though we know that, with timely intervention
using certain antiretroviral drugs, we can mitigate and improve the life of
a person infected with the disease. Hence we argue for a comprehensive
treatment plan, including the approach to antiretroviral therapy.

Allow me to warn those who use the issue of HIV/Aids as a vehicle to
present themselves as martyrs, pretending that this Government does not
care, that their efforts to present the ANC as an uncaring organisation
will fail in the same manner as apartheid failed to present the ANC as a
terrorist organisation to the masses. [Interjections.]

This Government will listen to what it needs to do to ensure that we create
a better life for all, including those who today see it prudent to showcase
their militancy. The ANC reaffirms its support for the constitutional right
of all South Africans to freedom of expression, hon Louis, and peaceful
protest. [Interjections.]

It is, therefore, difficult to sometime understand why people would embark
on wilful, unlawful actions which undermine the institutions of democracy
for which so many South Africans fought and made sacrifices. Such actions
would constitute a rejection of democratic values and disdain for the
wishes of our people. [Interjections.] In this battle there is a role for
you, hon Taljaard. The question is, what are you doing? What is your role?

This question is not only relevant to our struggle against HIV/Aids, it is
also related to our opposition to the unilateral declaration of war on Iraq
by the government of the US, supported by the government of the UK without
the benefit of an empowering resolution from the UN Security Council, which
constitutes a violation of international law.

While the regime led by Saddam Hussein and the Ba'athist Party of Iraq is
undemocratic, repressive and intolerant of opposition, the reprehensible
character of that government does not entitle any other government to
overthrow it by force of arms, let alone impose an unjustified war on other
countries and regions.

The US-led invasion of Iraq is setting an extremely dangerous precedent,
the consequence of which can be disastrous for world peace and security.
The unilateral declaration of war by the US, supported by the government of
the UK, will probably completely destroy the authority of the UN and all
the other multilateral institutions of world governance, so painfully built
since 1945.

The governments of the US and the UK will have to bear full responsibility
for the situation of international chaos and disorder that their actions
have precipitated. The timing of this declaration of war reinforces the
view expressed by a number of observers, not least among them the citizens
of the US, that the US and UK diplomacy over the past year was, in fact, a
well-orchestrated ploy to permit the US and its willing allies the time to
make the necessary logistical arrangements for a massive invasion of Iraq.
[Interjections.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Rubbish!

Mr D J SITHOLE: If that is rubbish, what happened then, Ms Taljaard?

Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker and hon members, the most crucial challenges
facing South Africa at the start of the 21st century - and, therefore,
within the medium-term Budget cycle - are poverty and unemployment. The
Budget Review of 2003 acknowledges this problem, stating that ``poverty and
unemployment remain deeply embedded in the structure of our communities.''

The well-known international rating agency, Standard and Poors, is
forthright in their judgment of this phenomenon: ``Government policies have
failed in creating job opportunities and reducing poverty.'' This statement
is confirmed by the fact that since the 1990s there is a gap between the
Gross Domestic Product and employment growth, which translated into a
growth in joblessness in South Africa over the past 10 years. In addition,
it is estimated that at least 500 000 jobs have been lost just in the
formal sector of the economy since 1995.

With regard to poverty, there is a growing gap between the rich and the
poor in the country. A report issued by Statistics South Africa found that
this gap had increased considerably since 1995, with the richest 20% of our
people getting richer and the poor, substantially poorer.

Against this background, an argument can be made out for an increased role
for Government in the economy. The time has arrived for Government in South
Africa to invest more in the economy through investment programmes, to
assist the marginalised and impoverished people. In his book History of
inequality in South Africa, Prof Sampie Terreblanche similarly argues for
an interventionist approach by the state to address poverty, inequality and
unemployment. Let us explore this option.

General Government expenditure of R307 billion in 2001-02 represents 30,5%
of GDP. Average general Government expenditure in OECD countries during
this period amounts to 37% of GDP. An increase in general Government
expenditure in South Africa to higher levels should be characterised by an
increase in the new infrastructure development projects; the eradication of
large backlogs in economic infrastructure such as roads, bridges, dams,
etc; social infrastructure like schools, hospital, etc, and increased
socioeconomic spending among the poorest of the poor.

In a recent article, Prof Sadie from the University of Stellenbosch states
that the alleviation of poverty cannot be left to the private sector.
Government has an important role to play on behalf of the marginalised and
improverished people of the country. From the 1920s to 1940s the
governments of this country played an important role in addressing the so-
called ``poor white'' problem in South Africa by intervening in the economy
to assist poor white people. It is, therefore, not a question of whether
Government should invest in the economy, but the extent to which general
Government expenditure as a percentage of GDP should focus on the poorest
people in the community.

In the post-apartheid period, looking at the extent of chronic unemployment
and poverty in South Africa, Government cannot shy away from the fact that
it should do more through the implementation of Government-led development
programmes which are sustainable. Such an increased investment in the
economy should be comprehensive and labour intensive. An increased role for
Government will have to include larger investments in public works
programmes and the initiation of infrastructure development projects in
which business opportunities are created for small businesses, and
employment opportunities are created for workers.

In addition to such an interventionist approach by the Government, it
should also spend more on the creation of skills, as well as on on-the-job
and professional training. In this regard the UDM has proposed that a half
percent of an anticipated decrease in personal income tax should rather be
put on hold and utilised for a large skills-creation programme in the
country, which should then be reported on separately to Parliament.

When Government embarks on an increased investment in the economy by
financing Government-led investment programmes, it should keep intact the
macroeconomic stability in South Africa. It should focus on rooting out
corruption, especially in the public sector. It also implies that it should
ensure that the capacity of the public sector to deliver services
effectively is dramatically improved. Unfortunately, the latter has been
neglected during the last eight years.

Recognising the chronic unemployment situation in the country and the
magnitude of poverty still being experienced by the majority of citizens,
the Government must accept its responsibility to invest in the economy. It
cannot rely on market forces or the private sector alone to solve these
problems.
It was the RDP which stated that reconstruction and development would be
achieved through the leading and enabling role of Government, a thriving
private sector and active involvement by all sectors of civil society,
which in combination would lead to sustainable growth. The time has arrived
for Government to assume this leading and enabling developmental role.

Internationally, investments by various governments in their owm economies
is an acceptable practice. In countries such as France, Germany and Sweden,
high government spending as a percentage of GDP, including higher social
spending, are acceptable norms. Government intervention in many sectors of
the economy in these countries is regarded as a legitimate activity to
improve the lives of their citizens. The challenge of our times is that
Government must do more. It must play an active developmental role in our
economy.

It will assist greatly if our future budgets were to indicate how many jobs
have been created by the increased investment of Government in the economy.
Such increased Government-led development programmes must be sustainable
and increase during the outer years of the budget cycle or until such time
when unemployment and poverty are substantially reduced.

We can regard the increased role of Government in the economy through
labour-intensive infrastructure development programmes as the first pillar
to create jobs and alleviate poverty. The second pillar is the advancement
of small business development. It is estimated that micro, small and medium
enterprises contribute 35% of the formal sector's GDP, and creates more
jobs than larger businesses.

A major obstacle for small businesses remains the unnecessary, outdated and
ineffective laws and regulations. If we are serious about enterprise
development and the promotion of small business development, Government
must remove the burden imposed on small business by onerous laws and
regulations. South African small businesses face too much red tape, which
hinders their establishment and growth. We should emulate the UK, Australia
and Japan, where the paperwork involved in setting up a company takes only
about a week to complete.

As a start, consideration should be given to simplifying tax laws and
regulations. Tax and the compliance costs imposed by the various tax laws
are a tremendous burden to small firms. Other obstacles for small
businesses include licensing laws, access to finance, access to and
restrictions on land use, inappropriate labour legislation for small
businesses, inadequate access to justice, inappropriate health laws, etc.

I hope that the two issues which I have addressed in this debate will be
considered seriously by Government, namely an increased role for Government
in the economy to address chronic unemployment and deep-rooted poverty in
our society, and removing laws and regulations hampering the operation of
small businesses.

The UDM supports the Appropriation Bill.
In conclusion, it is a sad moment to witness the war clouds gathering
around Iraq as we speak today. The outbreak of a war between the USA, its
allies and Iraq will have a negative impact on the global economy,
including that of South Africa. Developing countries, including South
Africa, cannot afford a war.

Mr L ZITA: Madam Speaker, one of the key characteristics of a modern
capitalist economy is the alienation of the majority of people from the
ownership and control of the means of production, as well as their
dependence on the system for their livelihood through the sale of their
labour power to capitalists.

Those whose labour power is not drawn by the system are subjected to a life
of misery and poverty. In the developed capitalist world this threat is
partially attenuated as a result of the central role that manufacturing has
played in their economies.

Due to the centrality of value adding to all the sectors of the economy,
there is a relatively more integrated society and economy, with most of the
workers drawn into employment. This is primarily a reflection of
autocentred development, a development that was driven and controlled by
the indigenous people at their own pace and on their own steam. Of course,
this autocentredness had something to do with the subjugation of the south,
but this is not the total explanation.

As a result of colonialism and neocolonialism, a disarticulated form of
capitalism took root in the south. This decentred capitalism is what we
share with the rest of the underdeveloped world. Underdeveloped economies
have a limited manufacturing base, with an export regime of a few primary
products.

South Africa is not as big as others, but the essential features are the
same. Such economies are characterised by high levels of unemployment and
poverty on the one hand, and a small elite whose lifestyle is consonant
with that of the most privileged in the north.

The Budget that we are debating today is an attempt by the ANC Government
to undo both the underdeveloping impact of the globalised capitalist
system, as well as the legacy of its domestic expression, apartheid.

In seeking to undo this legacy, we are informed by a humanism that is
tempered by an awareness of the challenge of managing a modern economy.
Expressing this humanism, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, in his opening address to
Parliament in June 1999, said, and I quote:


  What will guide us in everything we do will be the challenge to build a
  caring society. Caring as we are, we are not unsighted of the challenges
  of running a modern capitalist society.


  Caring should be underpinned by an awareness that the principal challenge
  should be to build a society whose citizens are effective subjects,
  capable of defining their own autonomous involvement in the economy,
  community and society at large.

Thus, informed by this insight, the President said in this year's state of
the nation address, and I quote:


  The Government must act to ensure that we reduce the number of people
  dependent on social welfare, increasing the numbers that rely on it for
  their livelihood on normal participation in the economy.


  This is also especially relevant to the accomplishment of the goal of
  enhancing the dignity of every South African.

With this Budget, we continue to express solidarity with the most
threatened and the most vulnerable sections of our society, whilst
simultaneously strengthening interventions that can promote wealth
creation. It is our view that caring for the majority of the people and
building the economy are not mutually exclusive, but actually would
reinforce each other.

In giving priority to poverty eradication and protection from
vulnerability, this Budget allocates a further R11,9 billion, designed to
extend the child support grant and to strengthen the Primary School
Nutrition Programme. This will have the effect of defeating malnutrition
and stunted growth in children of the working people, the principal
constituency of the ANC.

In the same vein, this Budget increases the pension and disability grant by
R60, to R700 a month. An amount of R38 billion is set aside for education
and health, specifically for textbooks, medicines, hospital buildings and
equipment, as well as an effective and comprehensive response to HIV and
Aids.

More importantly, the bulk of these funds are for capital expenditure. It
seeks to strengthen our public health system, which serves the majority of
the country's population. Of this amount, R280 million strengthens the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme. Though not perfect, this scheme has
the real effect of genuinely opening the doors of culture and learning at
the most advanced level to the children of the poorer sections of our
society.

An amount of R23,7 billion has been set aside to extend basic services by
local government to poor households over the next three years. Of this,
R6,5 billion municipalities are offered for additional resources for free
basic services, investment infrastructure and job creation.

As part of this package, the budget provides R1 billion for labour-
intensive community development. These interventions reflect the ANC's
understanding of the critical role that local government must play in
transforming the lives of the majority, and give concrete expression to the
local government elections manifesto of the ANC, namely to substantially
decomodify water and electricity.

An amount of R1,2 billion accelerates spending on land reform, land
restitution and agricultural support programmes. The solution of the land
and agricultural question is not only important for historical redress, but
is an important economic catalyst in its own right. The modern industrial
sector is always beset by problems in the underdeveloped world. It finds it
difficult to provide employment to the millions that leave rural areas in
search of jobs.

Clearly worked out and popular-based agricultural initiatives have a major
role to play, both to provide sustainable livelihoods and to eradicate
poverty. For the men in our country who find themselves in conditions of
absolute destitution, the Budget provides R1,2 billion for them for food
parcels. This is the first time that this is being done on this scale. It
indicates a serious attempt at comprehensiveness in addressing poverty, an
attempt to ensure that we touch the life of everyone who is threatened by
hunger.

Addressing the challenge of poverty, however, should not only be a welfare
matter, but a matter for popular involvement in the economy. To this
extent, a number of economic stimulating and catalysing measures have been
provided for in the Budget. As a reflection of the fact that we are in an
era of knowledge-based economics, R1,7 billion is set aside for higher
education and skills development. Together with the billions of rands in
the sectors, we will be able to match jobs and skills.

In the same vein, to modernise our technical base, R1 billion has been put
aside to supplement research and technology development. Together with the
four-year tax write-off for investment and research development in natural
and applied sciences, this is a major boost to the competitiveness of the
economy, and will provide more revenue and jobs.

More importantly, to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the
world economy, R105 billion has been allocated for physical and capital
transfers. Better roads and ports, and a more efficient government will
improve the economic life of the country.
A further indication of the productiveness of the Budget is the reduction
of income tax to the tune of R13,3 billion. The principal beneficiaries of
this move will be lower and middle-income households. The fact that this
compensates for inflation is a real relief to millions of South Africans.

Another R10 billion over the next five years has been put aside for black
economic empowerment. In line with this, there will be a new mandate for
the National Empowerment Fund. For us, black economic empowerment is broad
and must extend beyond a few individuals.

These measures, together with tax deductions that are proposed for the
first R20 000 incurred in the startup of new businesses, will be a major
stimulant for economic growth and will serve to integrate small businesses
into the formal economy.

As the ANC, we believe that this Budget is a correct response to the
challenge of building a modern economy that is not only relevant, but is at
the same time also meaningful to all South Africans, especially the poor.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and members, South Africa's
economy is growing steadily, despite a cloud of global insecurity. The
world is facing an almost certain war in Iraq and peace in the Middle East
remains a distant dream. It is regrettable that both the US and Britain are
now no longer willing to seek peaceful means to disarm Iraq in terms of
Resolution 1441.

The UN Security Council unanimously agreed to Resolution 1441, in order to
disarm Iraq by peaceful means. Although the threat of military action was
clearly envisaged in this resolution, I believe that the US and the UK
should have taken more time to exhaust all diplomatic channels to implement
Resolution 1441.

Military action against Iraq, if carried out without the backing of the UN
Security Council, would be a breach of the UN Charter and international
law. If the war takes place - which seems to be inevitable - the ACDP hopes
and prays that there would be minimal damage to Iraq's civilians,
especially women and children.

I shudder when I think of the amount of damage that can be done by 1 000
war planes all armed with highly destructive missiles; 265 000 highly
trained and fully armed troops, and 130 warships armed with state-of-the-
art, computer-guided missiles. If this war takes place - God forbid - and
if the US and the UK use all the weapons at their disposal, it would be a
massacre. That is why we must pray for a miracle.

Let me now turn to our Budget. The critical issues facing South Africa are
at the microeconomic level. Without growth to meet the basic human needs of
our people, our nation would be at risk if the Iraqi war is prolonged and
political instability amongst our neighbouring states does not end.

South Africans individually suffer from a national pessimism which may
impact on productivity and civic responsibility, due to many factors. It is
time we countered this negativity amongst our own people and found ways of
bringing all of them together, to build this nation.

The Appropriation Bill breaks down how money will be allocated to many
levels of government. The Budget for 2003 indicates the areas where
Government has to spend money, eg poverty relief and infrastructure. The
good news about this Budget is that provincial and local governments will
be major beneficiaries and the ACDP therefore agrees with this approach.

The increase of R6,5 billion to municipalities for free basic services and
employment opportunities alleviates certain poverty-related problems. The
cut of personal income tax by R13,3 billion - which we welcome - comes as a
welcome relief to many South Africans, since the pricing of basic
commodities remains high. The price of petrol, especially for those who
depend on their vehicles, has a major impact on the household expenditure
and quality of life of these persons.
In an uncertain market such as the oil market the state must invest more
money in developing a First World public transport system. This will
lighten the load of many people who have to commute to work. In the same
way we are able to invest billions of rands in new air buses for air
travellers, we need to seek ways to pour money into building a transport
system suitable for the needs of this nation.

Our train services are in desperate need of an overhaul, with new
management needed and better quality of services required. It must be free
of criminal activity on the one hand, and intimidation from Metrorail
management on the other. Metrorail has handed an appeal to the court to
extricate itself from the responsibility to ensure the safety of train
passengers. A rejuvenated transport system will reduce costs, create
generous employment and, most importantly, add hugely to economic growth
and prosperity in this nation.

South Africa does not lack the resources to maintain a steady growth of its
economy. We lack a professional approach to the delivery of services. The
Minister has correctly pinpointed that lack of accountability and
commitment in the Public Service are to be rooted out and we commend him
for this. We have succeeded admirably in attracting tourists to this
country - which, incidentally, is estimated to be 20% at the current growth
level over the last year.

There are also strong chances that South Africa's rating on the
international market will greatly improve this year. Standard and Poors has
placed South Africa on a positive rating scale, which should boost the
confidence of the nation even more. This improved international rating must
translate into more jobs for the many unemployed persons.

We all know that the task of keeping foreign investors happy is much harder
in South Africa even if we outperform the more established economies,
simply because of the connotation attached to African states. As such, we
need to especially invest more handsomely in upgrading the standard of
service delivery.

We have many capable and skilled South Africans overseas who should be
lured back to their homeland. There are so many other entrepreneurs of
foreign descent who wish to make a living in this country. It is the
pervasive perception that South Africa is a country riddled with crime,
corruption and poor infrastructural competence that impacts upon their
decision to stay for long.

The growth in the confidence rate amongst South Africans is the next
challenge that must be faced. The criminal justice system, for example,
will receive an extra R2,7 billion to assist with its operations. This we
welcome. When children die in the streets of the Cape Flats the people ask
for swift justice, and not just a short-term show of force by the police.

With these words and in conclusion, the ACDP supports this Appropriation
Bill.

Mr N M NENE: Madam Speaker, hon members, in its January 8 statement the ANC
NEC called on all of us in this august House to use the state's Budget to
improve the quality of life of our people, especially the poor, whilst
contributing to the expansion of the economy. Among other things, we are
called upon to ensure the functioning of our social welfare system and
effective use of poverty alleviation funds.

It is in this spirit that poverty alleviation is a prime priority as we
debate this Appropriation Bill today. Our main task is to ensure that the
state machinery functions properly and carries out its tasks effectively
and efficiently. We need to bring this machinery closer to the people and
improve its responsiveness to the needs of the people; therefore the role
of Parliament becomes very crucial in the Budget process.

In discussing the role of Parliament, maybe it is important that we look at
where we come from. The ANC has come a long way in democratising the Budget
process to bring about fiscal transparency, turning the Budget into an
important tool to address the ills of apartheid that have caused abject
poverty among the majority of our people.

The Budget process was a closed book and lacked legitimacy and
accountability, as it was not backed by a credible legal framework. Since
1994 new national legislation has strengthened fiscal transparency in South
Africa, built on the following legal foundations: the constitutional
framework; the Public Finance Management Act of 1999; the obligations that
are placed on departments under the new Public Service Act; the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, which is the multi-year budgeting process, and the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Review.

The establishment of the Joint Budget Committee is the latest development.
Its establishment was the culmination of a lot of work by the Budget Reform
Task Team, which concluded its work in June 2001. The Budget committee is
charged with the task of influencing the Budget and performing an oversight
function, which means that it must hold the executive to account for their
expenditure, and propose amendments as soon as the legislative framework is
in place.

The interventions mentioned above are envisaged to be aligned with three
focus areas, namely, at policy and allocation levels, as well as during the
actual spending and delivery. These interventions would also be aligned
with the stages of the process, so will influence the Budget in terms of
policy during its drafting, as well as hold the executive accountable
during implementation.

The Joint Budget Committee was established with clear terms of reference
and commenced its work in October 2002. After the tabling of the Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement, we held informative hearings with clusters,
as identified by Government priorities in the statement. A report was
tabled and adopted in this House with concrete recommendations.

Having outlined the role of Parliament in the form of the Budget committee,
let me also focus my attention on the broader Parliament, the
parliamentarians themselves. Members of Parliament have a very important
role to play, both in Parliament and in our constituencies. As elected
representatives, we need to ensure that once the allocations are made and
budgets are passed, the money is spent for the betterment of our peoples'
lives as outlined in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.

Departments are also required to prepare strategic plans where they set
objectives and later present us with estimates of national expenditure,
which is then tabled in this House, together with the Appropriation Bill,
on Budget Day. The latest feature on these estimates of national
expenditure is that of measurable objectives against which the performance
of departments can be measured. This innovation presents portfolio
committees with a valuable tool to exercise its oversight.

Members are again in a position to ensure the implementation of the
programmes at constituency level. Our people are ready to volunteer in the
spirit of Letsema, and all what they need is support and direction from
their elected representatives-ourselves. This is what we in the ANC mean by
a broad front for reconstruction and development. Let me take this
opportunity to call upon members of Parliament to open their constituency
offices for the benefit of communities in terms of information and
Government services.

An example of this is what we were able to achieve in the Kranskop area
during the week of 17 to 21 February this year. Working with the Department
of Home Affairs, the Department of Social Development and the Department of
Welfare, community-based organisations and dedicated volunteers, a total of
approximately 500 people were registered in the deep rural areas. These
people would not have been able to access their social grants had we not
entered into this partnership with the other stakeholders. I would like to
extend my appreciation to all those who made it happen, amongst them Home
Affairs staff; the Outreach Project managers; the Little Elephant Tree
Centre for Early Education; my administrator, and, more especially, the
volunteers from these areas.

Our role as members of Parliament extends far beyond these corridors, into
our areas of residence and deployment. There can be no better oversight
than being with the people and working with local structures to ensure
delivery of services. We need to work with the local government
councillors, community organisations, churches, traditional authorities and
NGOs to push back the frontiers of poverty.

The local structures need to be assisted in the preparation of integrated
development plans and the establishment of local economic development
forums. We need to ensure that the free basic services reach our people,
that they benefit from the social grants provided by Government, and that
the food parcels and the starter packs from the Department of Agriculture
are distributed, because it is our responsibility to do that and, as the
Minister of Finance put it, ``it is the right thing to do''.

The upcoming Growth and Development Summit must be supported by our actions
on the ground. Our people are ready to respond positively, because they
stand to benefit from these programmes. One of the successes of this ANC
Government is that we have transformed the Budget to speak to the needs of
the entire nation, black or white, rich or poor. For the first time, when
one meets the people on the streets they tell one that there was something
in this Budget for each one of them.

In line with the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, poverty alleviation
is at the top of Government priorities. This is supported by a significant
increase in social and infrastructure spending. Infrastructure projects and
the expansion of Public Works programmes are going to be the main drivers
of job creation in the poor communities, whilst also improving the lives of
the people and contributing in economic development.

Our mandate is clear: to bring a better life for all South Africans, black
and white, and, indeed, the tide is turning. [Applause.]
Dr P W A MULDER: Agb Mevrou die Speaker, die erns van die huidige
internasionale situasie in die Midde-Ooste moet nie onderskat word nie. Die
geskiedenis het geleer dat 'n oorlog altyd onvoorsiene gevolge tot gevolg
het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Madam Speaker, the seriousness of the current
international situation in the Middle East should not be underestimated.
History has taught us that a war always has unforeseen consequences.]

The big challenge for the United States will not so much be during the war,
but how to manage the turbulent Middle East and bring democracy and peace
to Iraq after the war. My prediction would be that this situation will
become a long-term problem for the United States, and they will not solve
the problem that way.

Mevrou, na die oorlog sal ons met 'n totale nuwe wêreld sit. Die feit dat
die Verenigde State die Verenigde Nasies ignoreer in hierdie konflik
beteken dat die belangrike rol wat multi-laterale organisasies soos die
Verenigde Nasies tydens die Koue Oorlog-tydperk gespeel het, nou drasties
en permanent verander het. Die outomatiese eenheid tussen Westerse en Navo-
lande tydens die Koue Oorlog is ook nie meer so outomaties nie, met
Frankryk en Wes-Duitsland se kritiek teenoor die VSA. Suid-Afrika sal
versigtig en korrek die regte besluite moet neem om tydens hierdie konflik
teenoor die nuwe wêreld hierna in die beste belang van Suid-Afrika op te
tree.

Saddam Hoesein is 'n diktator wat enkele jare gelede sonder rede Koeweit
binnegeval het. Saddam Hoesein het enkele jare gelede gewetenloos opgetree
teen die Koerde, wat 'n minderheid in Irak vorm. Duisende Koerde is deur
gifgas en chemiese wapens gedood. Vir Suid-Afrika om vir Saddam Hoesein
kant te kies sal 'n fout wees en is beslis teen ons nasionale belange.

Maar, Amerika se redes waarom hy tans oorlog teen Irak wil maak sonder die
Verenigde Nasie se toestemming, getuig van dubbele standaarde as die
posisie van Pakistan en Noord-Korea daarmee vergelyk word. Vir Suid-Afrika
om onvoorwaardelik vir die VSA kant te kies is ook nie in ons nasionale
belang nie. Dit is in Suid-Afrika se belang om nie kant te kies in hierdie
oorlog nie. Ons kan wel 'n betekenisvolle rol speel in die moeilike
internasionale omstandighede wat na die oorlog sal volg.

Ek kom by die begroting, en ek is jammer die Minister se begroting word
hierdeur beïnvloed, want ek het baie te sê gehad en daar is min tyd oor.
Die Vryheidsfront het in sy reaksie aan die media na die Minister se
begroting vir die Minister, sy departement wat hier agter sit en ook vir
mnr Gordhan spesifiek gelukgewens met die begroting in die breë en veral
met die groter as verwagte inkomste en geld wat beskikbaar is.

U weet, in die Bybel lees ons hoe Josef in Egipte aangestel is om tydens
die sewe vetjare te beplan vir die sewe maerjare. Dit gaan tans relatief
goed met die ekonomie, maar die geskiedenis het geleer dit kan oornag
verander, en die Josef sit daar wat nou die sewe maerjare moet beplan
tydens die sewe vetjare. Hierdie huidige geld moet dus só aangewend word
dat dit voorsiening maak vir die maerjare wat binnekort kan volg.

Nou wat presies is 'n begroting? 'n Begroting is die regering se beleid, sy
prioriteite vertaal en omgesit in syfers en in rand en sent. Die toets is
dus: Het ons daarin geslaag? Kom ons kyk na die probleme: Die kernprobleem
in Suid-Afrika is sonder twyfel armoede -   werkloosheid gaan daarmee saam
- dan kan ons sê misdaad, dan kan ons sê Vigs.

Hoe spreek jy armoede en werkloosheid aan? Baie eenvoudig, wat my betref,
twee maniere: Deur hulp te gee - staatshulp van die staat se kant af; of om
die geleentheid te skep waar jy kan werk skep dat mense 'n inkomste kan
kry. Die staatshulp is maklik as daar baie geld is, dus pensioene, meer
welsyndienste. Maar dit bring geen inkomste in vir die staat op die langer
termyn nie. In die sewe vetjare is dit maklik om so armoede aan te spreek,
maar in die sewe maerjare gaan jy beslis in 'n krisis ingaan. Dan bly
werkskepping die beste manier om armoede aan te spreek; die beste manier
van voorsorg tref.

Ek wil 'n bewering maak dat ons nou in 'n unieke situasie is om dit te kan
doen. Die goudprys is op, die rand is sterker, daar is meer belastinggeld.
Dit gaan nou goed. As ons werkloosheid oplos, dan los ons 'n klomp ander
probleme ook op. Sosiale projekte soos behuising is goed. Dit koop
goedgesindheid by die kieser vir 'n kort rukkie, maar dit los nie die
probleem op die lang termyn op nie. Sonder werk kan hy nie water en ligte
vir sy nuwe huis betaal nie. Sonder werk kan hy nie die huis betaal nie, en
uiteindelik verloor hy dit en is ons terug waar ons begin het.

Hoe moet ons hierdie werk skep? Nommer een, ons moet buitelandse beleggers
oorweldigend trek. Hy wil wins maak, hy wil kapitaalgroei hê. Hy wil nie
Zimbabwe-styl hier vasgevang word nie en hy wil nie verplig word om
miljoene rande te spandeer aan allerlei sosiale projekte wat hy deur die
staat verplig word om te doen nie. Ek dink ons moet baie groot dink in
hierdie verband, anders gaan ons nie hiermee slaag nie groot planne maak,
geen belasting vir buitelandse beleggers nie.

Ons kan later die werkers belas wat dan nou 'n werk gekry het daarmee saam,
maar kom ons lok hulle met die maksimum moontlikhede. Die tweede
moontlikheid is om na die huidige werkgewers te kyk. Die huidige
entrepreneurs - en ek moet spesifiek hier die landbou noem die landbou en
die boere is u grootste vriend op hierdie stadium om werk te skep, en u
moet asseblief praat met u kollega, die Minister van Arbeid, wat nie begrip
het vir die situasie in die landbou tans waar minimum lone pragtig
idealisties gestel word, maar die implikasies nie deurdink is nie. Die
boere sukkel om 'n gesprek te kry. Hulle berekeninge sê 150 000 mense kan
hulle werk verloor, 130 seisoenwerkers kan hulle werk verloor, 50% van die
boere kan uiteindelik in sekere bedrywe tot niet gaan. Dit is belangrik.
Buitelandse beleggers is belangrik. Kom ons kyk na die huidige werkgewers
wat ons hier het. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Madam, after the war we will have a completely new world. The fact that
the United States is ignoring the United Nations in this conflict means
that the important role that multilateral organisations such as the United
Nations played during the Cold War period has now changed drastically and
permanently. The automatic unity between Western and Nato countries during
the Cold War is not as automatic as it used to be either, with France and
West Germany's criticism against the USA. South Africa will have to make
the the right decisions carefully and correctly to act in the best
interests of South Africa during this conflict against the new world after
this.

Saddam Hussein is a dictator who attacked Kuwait for no reason a number of
years ago. A number of years ago Saddam Hussein acted unscrupulously
towards the Kurds, who are a minority in Iraq. Thousands of Kurds were
killed by means of poisonous gas and chemical weapons. For South Africa to
side with Saddam Hussein will be a mistake and is definitely against our
national interest.
But America's reasons why it currently wants to wage war against Iraq
without the permission of the United Nations testify to double standards if
the position of Pakistan and North Korea is compared to it. For South
Africa unconditionally to side with the USA is not in our national interest
either. It is in South Africa's interest not to take sides in this war. We
can, however, play a meaningful role in the difficult international
circumstances that will follow after the war.

I am coming to the Budget, and I regret that the Minister's Budget is being
influenced by this, because I had a lot to say and there is very little
time left. In its reaction to the media after the Minister's Budget, the
Freedom Front congratulated the Minister, his department who are sitting
back here and also specifically Mr Gordhan on the Budget in the broader
sense, and especially on the bigger-than-expected income and money that is
available.

You know, in the Bible we read how Joseph was appointed in Egypt to plan
for the seven lean years during the seven fat years. Currently it is going
relatively well with the economy, but history has taught us that this can
change overnight and this Joseph sitting over there now has to plan for the
seven lean years during the seven fat years. This current money should
therefore be used in such a way that it provides for the lean years that
might follow shortly.

Now what exactly is a budget? A budget is where the government's policy,
its priorities, have to be translated and converted into figures and in
rands and cents. The test is therefore: Have we succeeded in that? Let us
look at the problems: The core problem in South Africa is without a doubt
poverty, concomitant unemployment, then crime and then we may say Aids.

How do you address poverty and unemployment? Very simply, as far as I am
concerned, in two ways: By lending assistance - state help on the part of
the state; or by creating opportunities in which you can create work so
that people can generate an income. State aid is easy if there is a lot of
money, thus pensions and more social services. But this does not bring in
any income for the state in the longer term. In the seven fat years it is
easy to address poverty in this manner, but in the seven lean years you are
definitely going to go into a crisis. Then job creation remains the best
way to address poverty, the best way of taking precautions.

I would like to contend that we are now in the unique position to be able
to do so. The gold price has gone up, the rand is stronger, there is more
tax money. Everything is going well now. If we solve unemployment, then we
would also be solving a number of other problems. Social projects such as
housing are good. They buy goodwill from the voter for a short while, but
do not solve the problem in the long term. Without work he cannot pay the
water and electricity of his new house. Without work he cannot pay for his
new house and eventually he loses it and we are back where we started.

How do we create this work? Number one, we have to draw overseas investors
overwhelmingly. They want to make a profit, they want capital growth. They
do not want to get trapped here Zimbabwe-style and they do not want to be
forced to spend millions of rands on all kinds of social projects that the
state compels them to. I think we have to think very big in this regard,
otherwise we are not going to succeed in this. We must make big plans, with
no tax for overseas investors.

We can tax the workers later who now get a job as a result, but let us lure
them in with maximum possibilities. The second possibility is: look at the
current employers. The current entrepreneurs - and here I must specifically
mention agriculture; agriculture and the farmers are your biggest friends
at this stage to create jobs and you should please speak to your colleague,
the Minister of Labour, who has no grasp of the situation in agriculture at
present, where minimum wages are set beautifully and idealistically, but
where the implications have not been well considered. The farmers struggle
to achieve discussion. Their calculations indicate that 150 000 people
could lose their jobs, 130 seasonal workers could lose their jobs, 50% of
the farmers could eventually come to nothing in certain industries. It is
important. Foreign investors are important. Let us look at the current
employers that we have here. I thank you.]

Mrs M N OLIPHANT: Madam Speaker, hon members, on 26 June 1955 the Freedom
Charter was adopted by the Congress of the People. In that congress a
declaration was made which says, and I quote:


  All people shall have the right to live where they choose; to be decently
  housed and to bring up their families in comfort and security. Peace and
  friendship among all our people shall be secured by upholding the equal
  rights, opportunities and status of all.

In 1994, when the ANC took power, housing the nation was one of the
foremost challenges facing the Government. Therefore, the legislative
framework for a housing policy was established. The Housing Act is now the
supreme housing law in the land and the housing policy is about ensuring
access to homes for all South Africans on a sustainable basis, at a price
they can afford.

As the ANC-led Government, we believe that of all our resources, nothing
compares with the talent and energy of our people. Our housing policy is
designed to unleash this energy not only to build houses, but also to a
policy of disseminating information and giving meaning to the notion of
people-centred development.

Today we can proudly speak of women developers and contractors who entered
the construction industry not only to build, but also to earn a living
through construction. The Housing department committed itself to ensuring
that provinces give at least 10% of their housing subsidies to women
developers and contractors. This shows that this ANC-led Government is
committed to the programme of women empowerment.

Happily, for the first time in their lives, our people have shelter. What
we can infer from the above is that this ANC-led Government continues to
have a caring attitude towards the poorest of the poor. In its 1999
manifesto, the ANC promised to speed up change and delivery.

The rate of housing delivery is now approximately 211 000 units per annum.
May I state that the rate at which we deliver these units has not been
challenged, even internationally. Allow me to illustrate my point.
Singapore built 55 000 units in five years, while South Africa built
750 000 units in five years. Sweden built 1 million units in 10 years,
while South Africa built 1,5 million units in nine years. To ask for more
than what these figures suggest is rather unfair and unrealistic for a
struggling country like South Africa.

As the ANC-led Government, we have embarked on townships' and hostels'
upgrading. It fills me with great joy to realise that at last we have a
Government that cares and sees to it that poor people do not live in filthy
and hardly bearable conditions. It is as a result of the humaneness of the
ANC-led Government that today we have a Budget that recognises the need to
have urban renewal strategies, and also transfers ownership of previously
Government-owned houses to the poor. Millions of families benefited from
our programme of providing housing with security of tenure. We as the ANC
have chosen this route, not only as a way of bringing dignity to our
people, but also because the right to security of tenure forms the most
indispensable core element.

Any increase in the housing budget has a positive impact on job creation in
the sense that, although some people built their own houses, others are
built by contractors who employ more people to do the job. When a person
has a structure or a house with clean water and electricity, which form
part of basic needs, the dignity of that person is restored. When the house
is finished there are other things that are needed, for example appliances
such as TVs, fridges, furniture, etc. Furthermore, where these appliances
and furniture are manufactured, employment is created for people, because
these are in demand.

By increasing the housing budget, the Government is in a position to create
more jobs and at the same time contribute to economic growth. As we speak,
Land Affairs has a strategy which accommodates a more proactive approach
through the acquisition of private land for settlement. Municipalities will
be drivers of a co-ordinated settlement strategy, as identified in the
integrated development plans.

The purpose of the Land Redistribution Programme, or LRP, is to provide
poor people with land for residential and productive purposes, in order to
improve their livelihoods. The programme not only assists subsistence
farmers, but is also aimed at settling black, emergent and commercial
farmers by providing the previously disadvantaged communities with access
land, specifically for agricultural purposes, as well as improving the
nutrition and incomes of the rural poor who want to farm on any scale.

Since 2001, 838 farms have been redistributed under the Land Redistribution
Programme. This involved 15 676 beneficiaries, of which 5 462 were women
and 3 437 the youth. During the apartheid era some farmers used to pay
their workers part of their salaries in alcohol, which they called the
``tot system.''

After 1994 the ANC-led Government called on businesspeople, including
farmers, to improve the lives of their workers. One farmer heard that call.
This farmer sat down with his workers and said:


  I need your help. Run the farm for me. Help me make a championship wine
  and I will reward you once that has happened. You will work under less
  supervision.

In May 1996 his wine was crowned South African champion. In May 1997 this
farmer called his workers and said:


  I will give you 9,5 hectares of vineyards. The land should be used for
  agricultural purposes. If you do not want it, I will buy it back from
  you. If you do grow grapes, you can use my farming equipment for three
  years. If you decide to make wine, you can do so in my cellar. You will
  continue to work for me and look after your new land in your own time.

This means that, working together, we can make a difference and also give
positive impact in a sense that contributes towards poverty alleviation,
black economic empowerment, nation-building and moral regeneration. This
confirms that this is a people's Budget allocated according to the needs of
the poor.

Through the Land Affairs department's budget the Government assisted these
workers to form their communal property association and start growing
grapes. As the Minister of Finance said, the freedom we have won enables us
to choose our own destiny and, in so doing, take our development into our
own hands. After their first harvest, their first bottling sold like a
dream. For these farmworkers it was a dream come true.

We, as the ANC-led Government, have proved our commitment to pushing back
the frontiers of poverty. In 1997 farmworkers shifted from poverty and
alcoholism to successful wine making. This means and also confirms that
this ANC-led Government is a Government of the people, by the people and
for the people. I thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, the UCDP is against the war, regardless of
who is the aggressor. It is regrettable that President Bush has decided to
substitute courts for carnage, dockets for rockets, briefs for bombs and
warrants for warheads. His decision - together with that of his cohorts in
Britain and Spain - shows the extent to which they are not prepared to take
advice from other nations.

The resignation of the British Cabinet Minister shows that in essence there
are no war-like people, only war-like leaders. The UCDP maintains that the
real test of power is not the capacity to make war, but the capacity to
prevent it. After all, peace is better than war. We believe in pointed
speeches, but not pointed bullets. There is no doubt that the USA will live
to rue the day they decided to declare war against Iraq.
Back to today's topic: The current Budget emphasises poverty reduction and
investment in infrastructure. An injection of R105 billion has been
identified for use in the next three years to boost social services and
infrastructure investment, and enhance local government programmes.

The big question, however, is whether social services will benefit, and how
much of the money will line the pockets of the officials without paying for
the child support grants. How much of that money is going to pay for
medicines which will end up in the consulting rooms of doctors with
connections in high offices of Government, instead of state hospitals? How
much of that money will be paid to municipal managers, instead of providing
infrastructure in municipal areas?

This is surely a friendly Budget, as personal income tax will be cut by
R13,3 billion. It gives relief to people who earn below R30 000 a year, as
they will not pay personal income tax. The consideration given to the low-
income earners has brought to light the fact that Government does not want
to price itself out of the market by taxing even those who earn next to
nothing by today's standards.

While it is appreciated that the child support grant will be made available
to children up to the age of 14, public statements made by Government
around this matter should not create the impression that such children
qualify with immediate effect, when in fact it will take three more years
before they qualify. The sentiment is good, the problem is with its
communication.

The R160 a month for each deserving child is welcome, as long as all those
involved - parents, guardians and officials - take this with the greatest
responsibility. In his call for accountability and service delivery in his
speech on Budget Day, the Minister said:


  Unless our policies are implemented efficiently, courteously, honestly
  and enthusiastically, we will achieve far less than we intend and they
  surely deserve.

The good fine points of the Budget are left in the hands of officials, who
have to execute all these noble intentions of the Minister. Much depends on
the efficiency of these officers, as well as their courtesy, honesty and
zeal in the performance of their duties.

The UCDP proposes that tax concessions be considered for investors and
industrialists who put up manufacturing plants in areas far-flung from the
metropolises. This will encourage them to invest in their numbers and
create more jobs, thus ensuring that people are not dependent on Government
handouts.

Social welfare is mainly a provincial competence - that we do not doubt.
But the national department deserves more than what has been allocated to
it, in order to cover the grant systems and issues around poverty
reduction, as well as strategies to mitigate against the impact of
HIV/Aids.
The UCDP welcomes the increases in the price of intoxicating beverages and
tobacco products. In fact, we feel they could be raised even higher. We
note the diligence of the National Treasury by having on hand the Division
of Revenue Bill four months before it will be needed. This shows commitment
and foresight, and only dedicated staff can do that.

Just like it is in life, Mr Minister, where the same object is viewed
differently by different people, this Budget will, with all good
intentions, not satisfy all people, but is by and large welcomed.

The UCDP supports this Appropriation Bill. I thank you. [Applause]

Ms I MUTSILA: Ndi a livhuwa Mulangadzulo wa Mufumakadzi. [Thank you, Madam
Speaker.]

One of the main objectives of this Appropriation Bill is to push back the
frontiers of poverty and injustice; to uphold and protect the Constitution
and the rule of law, and to promote access to a fair, speedy and cost-
effective administration of justice in the interests of a safer and secure
South Africa.

The Minister of Finance, in his February 2003 Budget Speech, indicated that
he gave priority to reducing poverty and vulnerability. This is our largest
and most effective redistribution programme. He further stated that justice
and constitutional development received resources to improve the protection
of women, children and the disabled in the court process, and to improve
the links between the criminal justice agencies through information.
Technology is critical in reducing the level of crime in the country.

This Bill also seeks to make the justice system more accessible and user-
friendly for the vulnerable groups, especially women, children and the
disabled. The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development is
continuing to increase access to the courts by building additional
facilities and upgrading what exists, especially in previously
disadvantaged areas.

About 26 justice centres have been established and an additional 23 are to
be established. By the end of 2004 the Legal Aid Board will have a national
network of about 60 justice centres throughout the country. The needs of
the vulnerable groups will remain a focus and the department will
strengthen measures relating to child maintenance, special sexual offences
courts, family court centres, domestic violence and extended family
advocates. These services are priority areas for the department.

Domestic violence is a social evil. It impacts negatively on the daily
lives of the victims. Everyone deserves the opportunity to grow as a human
being, and to be treated with dignity and respect. Government places strong
emphasis on the eradication of violence. The Domestic Violence Act has been
in operation since 15 December 1999. Various problems have already been
brought to the attention of the Government department responsible for
implementing the Act.

The magistrates' courts, be they rural or urban, are having enormous
problems with implementing the Act, due to the fact that they do not have
enough personnel to deal with the huge increase in domestic violence cases.
Some offices in the rural areas do not have enough personnel who are able
to help an applicant in his or her own language or another understandable
language, which results in community members setting up booths where they
charge a fee to fill in application forms for applicants. The situation
requires urgent and top-level intervention.

The key function of prosecutors is mainly to effectively prosecute the
perpetrators and ensure that proper sentences are imposed. However, the
National Directive on Domestic Violence extends the prosecution role by
assisting victims of domestic violence and advising them on the relief
available to them in terms of the Act.

It intends to ensure that there is a reduction in secondary victimisation
by empowering prosecutors with ongoing specialised training. This will
focus mainly on the level of training given; the relevant loss of policies
and the challenges facing all role-players in the justice system, as well
as on conducting public outreach programmes, including the role of the
prosecuting authority in this area.

The law requires every child to be supported or maintained by his or her
parents, whether married, separated or divorced, including parents who have
adopted a child. Maintenance is governed by the Maintenance Act, which came
into operation on 26 February 1999. Refusal of access may amount to a
criminal offence.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development does not have
sufficient prosecutors for this purpose. The core function of prosecutors
is to prosecute cases in our courts. Therefore, they are unable to do
administrative tasks on maintenance. Clerks of the court or even
interpreters have successfully been appointed as maintenance officers in a
number of districts in our country.

To further assist in this matter, the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development has further embarked on a national action plan
on developing the maintenance system, with a primary focus on improved
service delivery and the appointment of maintenance investigators.

In an attempt to make the justice system more accessible and user-friendly
for children, special courts have been established with the view to create
a relaxed and informal atmosphere. These have cheerful waiting rooms
equipped with playthings for children, as well as comfortable offices and
adequate childcare facilities.

These courts have been designed primarily to make them accessible and
sensitive to the needs of the community, operate according to simple,
appropriate procedures, offer counselling and mediation support services,
and provide quality service in a pleasant, user-friendly environment.
In the SA Police Service statistics for the year 2000 on rape cases,
specific emphasis is placed on the race and age of both victims and
perpetrators. The aim of this statistical analysis is to identify certain
risk categories pertaining to victims and perpetrators and, consequently,
guide us in our preventative initiatives.

Although every woman is a potential victim of rape, these statistics show
that coloured and black females are most at risk. The high incidence of
rape among coloured and black people could possibly be a result of
excessive alcohol consumption and drug usage. Boys are raised to be
dominant and to use physical power to illustrate their manliness. They are
entitled to use violence to get what they want. Girls are not considered
equals, nor are they seen as having equal rights. It has been suggested
that a solution may be to begin at home, looking at the way in which
children are raised.

Even though the statistical research findings contained in the above report
highlight certain risk categories pertaining to victims and perpetrators,
one should never lose sight of the fact that all women and girls remain
potential victims irrespective of age, colour, culture, creed or place of
residence. The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development gained
the most from the 2001-02 Budget. An expenditure is given over three years
to improve the effectiveness of the criminal justice system and bring a
better life for people from all walks of life.

The ANC-led Government is prepared to fight all forms of crime, in order to
protect its citizens. We call on and plead with all members of Parliament
to utilise their constituencies and portfolio committees to play an
oversight role, monitoring that the laws we pass are implemented in the
various Government departments, and that our masses are receiving adequate
services.

Let us unite in fighting to change the lives of our people for the better,
especially those who were previously disadvantaged. This Appropriation Bill
is designed to do exactly that.

Ndi a livhuwa. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Deputy Chair, I must apologise for my voice. Firstly, I
want to express the PAC's profound appreciation to France for using her
veto in the UN Security Council to block America's illegal and
irresponsible action of starting a war in Iraq. That war will affect this
very Budget and other budgets of the world, especially the budgets of the
developing countries.

The PAC supports the Appropriation Bill with some reservations. We are not
happy with the way the resources of this country continue to be used. A
government's budget is a statement of the nation's priorities. It
symbolises who is valued and who is not.

The PAC believes that Budget 2003 should have been used as an important
instrument to allocate funds liberally to social spending and give effect
to the socioeconomic rights of the people. Furthermore, this Budget fails
to deracialise the economic system. It continues to perpetuate economic
inequality.

This Budget has limited prospects for growth. It does not have the
necessary ingredients to generate jobs and address poverty, which is today
increasing in South Africa among the African majority population. The
Budget has limited prospects for providing the urgent social security net
that the people in this country are waiting for.

The PAC is concerned about the absorption of the unskilled, poor labour
force in our country. South Africa's economic problems are far more serious
in 2003 than they were in 1994. In 1995, 46% of Africans were unemployed.
It is estimated that today 55% of these people cannot find jobs. The strict
control of our Government's social spending has had a negative effect on
social service delivery and further impoverished the African majority.

The past eight years have produced policies that led to low economic
growth, on average 2,7% instead of 6%. This has intensified the social
crisis in our country. The PAC has risen to reject Gear and the premise on
which it is based. It maintains a dualistic environment of unequal power
relations, exploitative labour patterns and uneven socioeconomic
development. It is also underdeveloping the African labour sector.

This is perpetuating the two-nations syndrome of the haves and the have-
nots. One sector of the economy is efficient, modern and globally oriented,
while the other comprises neglected, messy, unskilled and downtrodden
people thriving on violence and crime. There are too many young people in
our prisons because of this. The Budget must create conditions that are
conducive to developing the youth of our country, preventing them from
wasting their talents in prisons.

We are certain that the people of this nation want a Budget that equitably
redistributes income and is complemented by employment creation, as well as
educational opportunities and entitlements for the African majority through
a just sharing of the land.

The National Treasury has not done enough for the poor. It is the
contention of the PAC that there was plenty of room in the Budget for the
Treasury to take a more aggressive approach to eradicating poverty. It is
atrocious that 50% of the people who qualify for social spending grants are
not receiving assistance at present. If the plan to supply every household
with free water and electricity is implemented, it would go a long way to
making a meaningful difference in the lives of the poor majority.

If this Government's intention is to raise the standard of living among the
poor, then extending the social security system and raising the amount of
the old age pension to R1 000 would have gone much further than the R60
increment, which appears large in nominal terms but amounts to only R19,70
cents in real terms.

The PAC believes that the people of this country deserve the scrapping of
VAT on food, water and electricity. This would go a long way in encouraging
saving and putting money back into the pockets of people who have suffered
months of high inflation rates on food.

With the high rate of unemployment in this country, we must consider an
unemployment allowance linked to acquisition of skills and education for
job creation.

However, we support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mme L L MABE: Motlatsa Modulasetilo, Motswana wa maloba o buile nnete fa a
re, ``Phiri e sola boa, mokgwa ga e o latlhe.'' O ne a raya Rre Tony Leon
le lekoko la gagwe gore ba sola boa, mme ga ba latlhe mokgwa wa gore ba
tseye batho ba ba sotlegileng ba bantsho e se sepe. Go ntse go le jalo ba
itumelela go tshegetsa Rre Bush fa a gatelela batho ba bangwe. Motswana o
ne a bua ka batho ba ba tshwanang le bona ba. (Translation of Tswana
paragraph follows.)
[Ms L L MABE: Deputy Chairperson, there is a proverb which says that a
leopard never changes its spots. It was referring to Mr Tony Leon and his
party who do not change their ways in regarding the destitute black people
as nothing. Again, they are happy to support Mr Bush in oppressing other
people. This proverb refers to such people.]

The Katz Commission reported in the early 1990s that over the past decade
the tax burden moved from corporations to individuals, primarily those in
the income group R20 000 to R80 000 per annum, who pay 70% of all the
income tax. Now, for your information, currently personal income tax forms
34% of the main Budget, and not the 70% that it used to be in the past.

Collins' economics dictionary defines taxation as government receipts from
the imposition of tax on personal and business income, spending, properties
and capital gains. Taxation is used by Government to, firstly, raise
revenue to spend on the provision of social goods; secondly, alter income
and wealth distribution; and, thirdly, control the volume of imports into
the country.

Mo nakong e e fetileng batho ba le bantsi ba ne ba kaya lekgetho jaaka
mokgwa wa go duelela tlhaolele, gore e kgone go gatelela batho ba rona.
Seno se ne se dira gore batho ba le bantsi ba tile go duela lekgetho. Kana
lekgetho leo e ne e le la poelomorago, ka lebaka la gore ba ba dikobo di
magetleng, bomme ba ba nyetsweng le batho bantsho ba ne ba duela lekgetho
go ya ka palo ya bana ba bona. Ka jalo e ne e le la poelomorago, le sa
lebelele kwa pele. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[In the past many people regarded paying tax as a means of paying for
apartheid to oppress our people. This made many people avoid paying tax.
That tax was a drawback, because the poor, married women and black people
were paying tax according to the number of children they had. As such it
was a drawback and had no foresight.]

The tax system was in a mess and could not raise sufficient revenue during
that period. Government depended on borrowing to fund its activities. This
situation led to a vast debt that became a yoke on the neck of the
democratic Government; a debt which the Government had to repay. What is
surprising is that the apartheid government had no clue at all as to what
its combined debt with Bantustans was.

Our tax system is progressive in the sense that low-income groups do not
pay tax or pay less tax than the high-income groups. Tax discrimination
based on gender, marital status or race has been eradicated by this
Government.

Aforika Borwa ke nngwe ya dinaga tseo di neng di na le pharologanyo e kgolo
mo letsenong la batho. Seo se raya gore bahumi ba ne ba thuma mo khumong,
mme ba ba dikobo di magetleng ba ne ba robala le lehuma. (Translation of
Tswana paragraph follows.)

[South Africa is one of the countries that had a huge disparity in the
people's income. This means that the rich were very rich whilst the poor
were very poor.]

With a Gini coefficient of 0,65, Government is faced with the serious
challenge of addressing poverty and income distribution. These are hard
choices that cannot be resolved overnight.

The RDP document states that Government must review personal income tax to
reduce the burden caused by the fiscal drag on the middle-income groups.
The ANC is committed to pushing back the frontiers of poverty in a united
action with South Africans. Consequently, this Government has not increased
VAT since 1993.

The Mafikeng Conference resolved, and I quote:


  Effective fiscal policy requires that Government raise maximum amount of
  resources possible and free the maximum resources for tangible
  transformation efforts towards the implementation of the RDP.

Since 1995 Government has consistently reduced the tax burden on the low-
income and middle-income groups from R2 billion in 1995 to R13,3 billion in
2003. Government gives tax relief to individuals to increase real
disposable income, stimulate demand in the economy for goods and services,
and increase savings. The R13,3 billion tax relief is targeted across the
spectrum of income earners. For example, individuals younger than 35 years
who earn R30 000 per annum will not pay income tax.

Go tlaleletsa seno, ba bangwe gape ba ba leng ka fa tlase ga dingwaga di le
65 ba ba golang R65 000 ka ngwana - ke bua ka batho ba ba golang R5 000 ka
kgwedi - ba tla duela lekgetho la R450, mme ba tla boelwa ke R161, gore ba
kgone go ka e boloka kgotsa go e dirisa mo go tseo ba di tlhokang.
(Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[To add to this, others who are below the age of 65 and earn R65 000 per
annum - I am talking of people who earn R5 000 per month - will pay income
tax of R450, and will get a return of R161 so that they can save it or use
it on those things that they need.]

Government is committed to making housing affordable to low-income and
middle-income groups. With effect from 1 March 2003 the threshold on
transfer duty to acquire residential property is increased from R100 000 to
R140 000.

Mongwe le mongwe yo o rekang ntlo go tloga ka 1 Mopitlwe 2003 ga a kitla a
duela madi a transfer duty, mme fa motho a batla go reka ntlo ya R200 000,
a itse gore o tlile go duela fela 5% mo godimo ga madi a a kwa godimo ga
R140 000. Go raya gore o tlile go duela fela R3 000 mo go R60 000. Ga a
duele sepe mo go R140 000. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[Anybody who buys a house as from 1 March 2003 will not pay transfer duty,
but when one wants to buy a house worth R200 000 one should know that one
will only pay 5% on the amount exceeding R140 000. This means that one will
only pay R3 000 on R60 000. One does not pay anything on R140 000.]
The objective of Government is to make more people participate in the
economy. We want to make people proud to earn a living and not be dependent
on Government grants. Government encourages individuals to make sustainable
life savings for retirement, therefore the stamp duty on retirement funds
is reduced from 25% to 18%. Government is appealing to consumers to ensure
that the tax relief is effected on their retirement savings and to protect
their own consumer rights.

Many South Africans have a long history of illegally shifting their funds
offshore since the 1980s. Individuals that were sceptical or pessimistic
and had unfounded fears about the new dispensation of the ANC led-
Government shifted their funds offshore on the eve of our democracy.

Many individuals and institutions now wish to repatriate their assets
voluntarily and regularise their affairs. Some of the reasons for
repatriating voluntarily are that Government taxes offshore earnings to
ensure that taxpayers do not have artificial incentives to invest offshore.
In 2002 Government introduced deemed income charges for failure to report
foreign earnings. The Financial Intelligence Centre Act has increased the
risk of holding illegal offshore earnings. Internationally, the legal and
economic environment has become less favourable for illegally held offshore
funds. The world community is now intolerant of tax haven countries. The
other reason is that onshore investments have performed far better and have
better growth prospects than offshore investments. Individuals and
institutions will have to abide by the principles of the foreign exchange
control and income tax amnesty to regularise their affairs.

The situation I have just outlined shows the increasing confidence that
individuals and institutions have in the ANC-led Government. The Government
inherited a tax system that was in a shambles, could not raise enough
revenue, was ineffective and inefficient, and was disliked by many South
Africans who believed that it was an engine to drive their repression.

Government has made a turnabout and has made Sars a resilient, effective
and efficient system that raises sufficient revenue and is succeeding in
reinstating many taxpayers back into the tax system. I want to thank the
team of Sars for their dedication, hard work and passion to serve this
Government and help us make a better life for all a reality.

Before I close, I want to indicate that parties like the PAC will always
remain crying babies. They would never be satisfied even if all South
Africans were happy about this Budget. Unfortunately, because the PAC is
naive, it is still crying. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, no matter how sufficient the Appropriation
Bill may appear, the pending war on Iraq appears set to be a major
catastrophe for our rand. Global stock markets rebounded dramatically
yesterday as the uncertainty about whether or not Iraq would be attacked
drew to a close. It is predicted that this war will weaken our rand and set
us back in our attempts to bridge the gap in society and attain the ends
our Budget was master-planned to fulfil.

However, economists predict that South Africa is quite safe, even though
the rallying behind the dollar and the drop in the gold price might cause
the rand to slide. Well, it's always good to keep our chins up, but the
risk poses a greater threat - and the effects of this war should be taken
seriously - not only for South Africa, but for Africa as a whole.

The MF, though concerned about the effect that the attack on Iraq would
have on our economy, also extends its concern about the South African human
shields that have left for Iraq. This war is totally irrational and can be
dealt with in a more civilised and rational manner. The loss of innocent
lives, especially of women and children, is the price.

We need to do something, not just for our people, but also for all
humanity. The MF believes in: ``No war, no loss of life; love ever, hurt
never!''
Coming back to the Appropriation Bill, poverty, unemployment, HIV/Aids,
illiteracy and so many other factors are eating away at the South African
population. Since the first democratic elections in 1994, the new South
African Government has been planning, juggling and working hard to correct
the injustices of the past; to attain equity in our community in all
spheres and sectors, and to work towards a better South Africa in the
global economy.

Bridging the gap has not been easy, and although a great deal of success
has been attained, many shortfalls still exist. Our achievements serve as
encouragement to continue reaching for our goals. Our failures serve as
encouragement to succeed, and we shall not give up until we do.

Looking at the Appropriation Bill, it is encouraging to note that 16,38% of
the total Budget of R133,6 billion has been allocated to Safety and
Security. With escalating crime and the effect it holds on other branches
and spheres, it is logical that this budget is allocated for containing
crime, thus making South Africa safe and secure.

How many newspapers throughout South Africa report daily about crimes? It
is a harsh reality that South Africa is crime-infested, for which many
factors - including poverty - lie at the root cause.

The MF hopes that the department shall utilise the funds appropriately, so
that ends may be met successfully. Noting that tourism is one of our state
revenue's greatest assets, a safer South Africa would be a bonus to ensure
that. It's a sure way of strengthening our fight against crime.

The allocation of funds to social services, namely Education, Housing,
Health and Water Affairs and Forestry will hopefully meet societal needs,
noting the strains and shortages that each is challenged with.
It is questionable as to whether the 11,34% allocated to Education is
sufficient, noting that the Education department had already spent 95,72%
of its budget by December 2002. That means that the Vote was left with only
4,28% of its budget for expenditure over three months.

The allocation of funds to Votes 1, 2, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20 and 23,
totalling an appropriation of less than 0,5% of the total Budget, is
adequate, noting that such reasoning previously constituted major roll-
overs such as the Public Enterprises one, which constituted the highest
decrease at 75,83%. More emphasis must be placed on the black empowerment
enterprises.

The MF supports the Appropriation Bill. [Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Chairperson, colleagues, in a recent paper, Estian Calitz
argues as follows with reference to Government's Gear policy:


  The post-apartheid Government's choice of economic measures of
  macroeconomic stability and structural economic reform show meaningful
  similarities with the Washington consensus, and received foreseeable
  praise and critique. With disappearing socialist thought after the fall
  of the Berlin wall and the bad track record of macroeconomic populism in
  Latin America, there were few other options which could be taken with
  confidence.


  An outward development strategy was the flavour of the day and the
  alternatives had little reliability. The nonpopulist choice was not made
  on grounds of conditionalities of structural adjustment programmes of the
  IMF or World Bank. In this sense it represents a freedom of choice.

Gear was a politically brave exercise. It has resulted in an important
structural reform of the South African economy. We have lauded and always
will laud Gear as a bold and brave political step in the right, though
difficult, macroeconomic direction.

But we will always contest the degree to which it has been achieved. We
will always question what remains to be done where Gear targets on growth
and employment have not been reached. We will always, obviously, disagree
on matters such as labour market reform and privatisation with regulation,
where we believe that foot-dragging is harming and has harmed our growth.

Within the governing alliance, the macroeconomic debate has sometimes been
a dialogue of the deaf and a deflection on the left - some of which we have
witnessed here today. Government's Gear strategy was unequivocally and
undoubtedly the right thing to do, Minister. If we had opted for the
``left'' thing to do, there would literally be nothing left. There would be
no growing economic cake to share through tax cuts, but mere crumbs to
dispose of in a brittle, garbage-bag economy.

Minister Manuel, you are justifiably starting to reap rewards for sticking
to your guns on Gear. If only your Cabinet colleagues had followed suit
with a vision and clear policies, South Africa would be further along the
development path, with socioeconomic development that could underpin a
sustainable push for even higher growth of the 6% calibre our country needs
to alleviate poverty.
These other policy areas, mainly the social ones, are crucial to our
ability to attract long-term foreign direct investment, but not all
Ministers play the game. In considering an upgrade of South Africa's credit
rating, Standard and Poors said they would have to -


  ... balance the good track record built up so far in fiscal policy and
  economic restructuring with the challenges out there, ie social problems,
  the wealth gap, unemployment and HIV/Aids.

These are areas where your Cabinet colleagues fail to deliver. Had you not
stuck to your guns, there would certainly not have been the prospect of
balancing sound fiscal management with a renewed focus on social delivery -
a balance which the Budget before the House seeks to strike by rolling out
poverty relief in the form of food programmes, increased grants, child
nutrition programmes and public works programmes.

A successful social safety net and effective Government expenditure
programmes to reduce poverty and income inequality are crucial elements of
successful structural economic reform, provided - and this is where the
emphasis lies - the Government delivers.

As Standard and Poors' Mr Preuss said in a measured response, ``it was a
sensible Budget that put emphasis on social services and poverty
alleviation.''

For Gear to deliver further rewards, South Africa needs to act now to
continue structural reform, increase savings, reduce crime, speed up
privatisation - yes, with regulation - improve education and fight
HIV/Aids.

While the Budget, in the context of a relatively resilient growth, projects
growth of 3,3% in 2003 and 4% by 2005, curveballs could, indeed, still hit
the South African economy. The world is on high alert, with a possible
imminent war. The consequences in terms of currency volatility and
inflationary expectations could jeopardise our projections.
In the context of such global uncertainty and possible further dampening of
demand for exports, South Africa has to look at measures to stimulate
domestic demand. In this respect, while maintaining a small and responsible
expansionary fiscal stance, the Budget should have done more to spur
demand.

The Budget before us delivered more of the same treasured commodity, ie
fiscal discipline. It delivered tax relief across all income groups. It
delivered a normalisation of tax and exchange control affairs via an
amnesty that will not only bring a degree of normalisation, but will also
pave the way for more liberalisation.

It also delivered a near-elimination of Government dissaving, a further
significant exchange control liberalisation, some tax stimuli for saving,
targeted tax incentives for business and SMMEs, and the first smatterings
of a social security net.

But this Budget failed to deliver in some material respects. It did not
deliver the 6% growth rate we need. It did not deliver substantive
corporate tax reform across the board, such as the abolition of secondary
tax on companies and capital gains tax or a cut in the corporate rate. It
did not deliver jobs or a game plan to generate the skills we need and the
growth, primarily in the skills-absorbing tertiary sector, which has 500
000 vacancies in the skills-intensive sectors. Perhaps you do listen to
this, Mr Minister, but we haven't seen it.

It did not deliver affordability planning and expenditure projections
across departments to deal with the HIV/Aids pandemic. It did not deliver
privatisation proceeds or, indeed, a timetable to be used to attract
foreign direct investment or introduce clearer competition and
liberalisation in crucial sectors such as telecommunications, transport and
energy. It did not deliver a basic income grant, whilst it delivered four
more maritime helicopters, more foreign debt to finance their acquisition,
paying more for the SAS Amatola and padding the salaries of those who will
operate and maintain the Hawks and Grippens by means of salary increases
and an incentive scheme in air defence.
Given the further roll-out for the arms deal, we have to ask what the
priorities of this Government are. In Brazil, President Lula has opted for
a zero-hunger campaign and cancelled his arms deal. President Lula has his
priorities right; we clearly do not. Perhaps the arms dealers forgot to
point out to Government that these conventional arms cannot fight hunger,
disease, poverty or unemployment - South Africa's real, not imaginary wars.

South Africa has been on the path of structural reform for nine years. Some
of our key competitors for foreign direct investment, China and India, have
been reforming for 24 and 12 years respectively, with China raking in over
70% of foreign direct investment in the developing country marketplace. At
US$50 billion per annum, foreign direct investment in China is impressive.
South Africa lags far behind. Whilst lauding our structural reforms, we
have to ask why we lag behind in this regard.

Part of the reason is unresolved structural reform. Gear was never fully
implemented as an integrated package, with all the structural reform it
promised. In addition, risk-shy investors see a ``bad neighbour'' factor in
South Africa's risk profile. Those who minimise the importance of this
political risk factor need only look at foreign direct investment in South
Korea this year and the fate it had after North Korea re-embarked on its
nuclear development prospects.

Structural economic reform is always politically difficult. One can point
to clear examples in the developed world where this remains a feature,
Germany and France being key examples under the Growth and Stability Pact
that accompanied monetary union. Structural reform in a country in
transition, with high inequality and poverty to arrest, is even more
difficult.

But there is no alternative to structural reform. The salient lesson from
the Chinese and Indian examples is that growth-enhancing sustainable
structural reform is the road of the long haul, not the road of the short
cut. This is the message that Government, business and labour have to take
to the Growth and Development Summit. This summit must craft a consensus on
where South Africa is moving in terms of its growth rate and how it plans
to invest in its human capital, be it in terms of skills or HIV/Aids, and
what we need to get there.

Some of our needs are abundantly clear. We need consensus at the summit to
continue structural reform. We need responsible black economic empowerment
and clear rules of the game to limit uncertainty. We need job creation, as
well as accelerated and targeted social delivery to alleviate poverty. We
need to win the war against crime decisively to attract foreign direct
investment. We need a clear and unwavering focus on HIV/Aids, with specific
targets to cut back the epidemic by 2005, 2010, 2015 and so forth.

Our economy literally cannot afford not to set targets for treatment.
Business, labour and Government need to make it a serious area of economic
focus at the Growth and Development Summit in May. If affordability of a
treatment roll-out is such a key constraint and R3,3 billion is all
Government can spare to comply with the Constitutional Court ruling, the
time has come for a public-private partnership to fight HIV/Aids as not
only a national emergency, but as an economic emergency.

Part of the success rate of the Indian economy is not only its focus on the
IT sector, which South Africa cannot merely mimic and replicate, but its
social investments, primarily its investment in combating HIV/Aids with
targets, a social factor recognised as crucial to continued economic
progress.

On the employment front the challenge is stark. Quick-fix solutions to
South Africa's employment challenges are not available. This is partly due
to structural elements in our economy, and partly due to the historical and
global context in which we find ourselves.

In respect of job creation, the Budget is disappointing. While tax
incentives for small, medium and micro enterprises, skills development
drives, municipal infrastructure projects with public works potential and
rural development will do no harm, they are no substitute for long-term job
creation through sustainable economic growth.

Important as short-term remedies, such as the ones in the Budget are, there
is in the end no substitute for addressing structural impediments to
employment growth in South Africa. It is difficult to imagine this
happening without a clear agreement between role-players at the Growth and
Development Summit. The minimal labour market reform we have seen has not
gone far enough.

The structure of South African exports is much more human-capital intensive
than in countries like China, Indonesia and Korea, which all deliver a much
higher percentage of unskilled intensive exports than South Africa. The
real competition is not between labour, Government and business, though
they all vie to protect their respective vested interests: it is between
labour in South Africa and labour in Malaysia, Vietnam, India, China,
Brazil and others. We need to stop fighting each other and take on the
global competition. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members! Proceed, hon
member.

Ms R TALJAARD: We further need the development of a lower-skills-intensive
factory production, which undoubtedly requires a more flexible labour
market, as well as a policy and price environment that is more favourable
for labour-absorbing, rather than labour-saving technology. If this implies
further structural reform, it must simply be done in a pragmatic way with
consensus, without dogma or ideological fixation.

We clearly need an increase in the supply of skilled workers. This must be
buttressed by better utilisation of the existing corps of skilled South
Africans both here and overseas, as well as the expansion of opportunities
for life-long learning and an immigration policy that promotes the
acquisition of scarce skills.

In this year's Budget, Minister, you have shown a vision of where we could
be going to move onto a path of accelerated economic growth. You have been
bold. Many of your colleagues have been timid, and have failed to deliver.
Your achievements have to pave the way for their achievements. But if their
achievements do not follow suit, we will not move on to a higher growth
path.

They have delivered policy snarl-ups in too many departments, and
crucially, we can think of Telecommunications in the IDC cluster. We must
tackle the remaining structural reforms with vigour, despite their
political holy-cow status, and the social challenges that confront this
country, with dedication. That is the right thing to do. It will deliver
more results; it will take South Africa forward.

The summit must move us in this direction. If it fails to reach consensus
on what we need for an accelerated growth path, we will not reach the
fulfilment of the second decade of development and we will not move South
Africa onto a path to a decade of accelerated economic growth and
substantial social economic development. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J MALAHLELA: Deputy Chairperson, the general parlance of society today
- an issue which is becoming habitual in debates of this nature - is that
managers must manage, and the flipside of the coin will become clearer in
the next 10 minutes.

However, it is also important to indicate that there is a loose rhetorical
cannon which is becoming sterile, and that is that South Africa is much
worse that it was in 1994. We need to examine this. Ukuthi singabo obani,
sibuya phi, siya phi. [Who we are, where we come from and where we are
going.]

As the last scene of apartheid darkness was interred to spell an end to the
tragic episode of 34 years of colonial terrorism and capitalist
exploitation in the form of apartheid colonialism, so ascended to the stage
in 1994 actors in a new episode, affirming the pronouncements of the
congress of the people in Kliptown in 1955, ``There shall be houses,
security and comfort''.

When the curtain of the new and struggling-to-be-born episode was raised,
it was noticed by the proletariat viewers of national and international
origin that the fleeing actors of the dying episode left on the scene
ticking time bombs which were ready to explode. The powder keg was a
racially polarised and morally decadent defence force, a moribund justice
system and an intelligence service whose immune system was ready to give
in. It was left to these actors of our people, the ANC, to defuse these
ticking time bombs.

The debris of the explosions that these exuberant actors started clearing
and cleansing ushered in a new parlance - reconstruction and development -
which was and still is the theme of our new scene. In barely a decade we,
the actors in the new scene, were able - to the amusement of all and sundry
- to unravel the complexities of the dying episode, an episode of ferocious
atrocities and dreadful activities that were ruthlessly unleashed against
the innocent masses of our people by those who were responsible for their
security.

In clearing this debris and unravelling the aforesaid complexities, the
creation of constitutional supremacy was at the apex, with the
Constitutional Court being the custodian of our rights, so that
constitutionally contentious issues could be entertained, as against the
inclination to coups d'état. Let us steal this leaflet from the UDM of Gen
Bantu Holomisa.

Not only were we concerned in this episode about that which could be seen
by the naked eye, but so also were we concerned about the debris of the
last episode located within the hearts and minds of our people. As such, we
created a new broom, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. It flushed
out the moral and spiritual debris located in the hearts and minds of our
people and in unison they sang, ``Alex Borain, kha ubabize, kha ubabuze,
batheth' inyani.'' [``Alex Borain, call them, ask them to tell the truth".]

For the first time in our lives, after 34 years of colonial terrorism and
capitalist exploitation, we knew what happened to Sparrow Mkonto, Matthew
Goniwe, Fort Calata - the list goes on and on. When the morality of our
times dismisses the immorality of the past through the Scorpions of our own
creation, the Asset Forfeiture Unit of our times, the pleas of the immoral
souls perish under the ever-echoing ululations of the moral souls.

Basking in the outskirts of the extravagant suburb of Jacaranda City on the
road to Delmas, our industrious and ever-vigilant intelligence service
uncovered and outsmarted the vile activities of vigilante groups in the
form of Bontle Magolego's Mapogo a Mathamaga and People Against Gangsterism
and Drugs. We made further strides to expose, in our peaceful Limpopo and
North West provinces, clandestine operations of a lunatic fringe of
disgruntled and verkrampte [Conservative] Boeremag ...
... 'n skorriemorrie-Boeremag, 'n niksbeduidende Boeremag.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [a rabble Boeremag, an insignificant Boeremag.
[Interjections.]]

This sting and waves of the Scorpions of our creation swept through
Bronkhorstspruit to confiscate counterfeit goods crippling our economy. We
cannot tolerate, in the new episode of our people, economic treasoners who
devalue our reserves with a piece of aluminium, our coat of arms printed, a
mathematical figure ``5'' and the respectful letter ``R'' all in the name
of the production of fake R5s in Randburg. We arrested them.

It dawned on those KPNG directors who thought that transfer pricing could
be used as a leeway to starve our economy of its deserved surplus that they
were wrong. We arrested them. Those who faked their way to the top in the
SA National Defence Force realised upon our arrival in Sandton that they
had overestimated their luck; they had overestimated their hegemony. We
arrested them.

At the foot of the mountains of South Africa ululate those who have been
condemned by the last episode as drawers of water and hewers of wood. In
the distance rejuvenated voices warn, however, that prisons should not be
used as places of condemnation that condemn people to the dungeons. In
doing so they welcome the provision of funding to provide skills and
personal development programmes, as well as processes for reintegrating
prisoners into the community upon their release.

Now recently those who felt the impact of our cleansing wave, not in their
minds, not in their hearts and not on their skill, but in their pockets,
sprinted to Wits University and declared that the judiciary was taking a
sharp curve. They attacked the Director of Public Prosecutions, for Harksen
is negotiating his way to oblivion.

We, the proud Africans of the South, pride ourselves on the heroism of our
soldiers who bravely waded through the floods of Mozambique to save the
lives of millions of our people East of our fairest South. As we speak in
this secure House of Parliament, the free birds of Cape Town and South
Africa are leading the chorus, so joined by the birds of the once-fearful
forest of Rwanda and Burundi as guns stutter no more.

In appreciating the R1,3 billion to support peacekeeping missions and the
New Partnership for Africa's Development, they sang:


  Hail to you, South Africa; hail to thee, ANC, for no man of the
  conception of your womb should interrupt this, at its thinnest to the
  100th generation, the episode of consolidating your power in pushing to
  the doldrums, the frontiers of our poverty, our insecurity.

[Interjections.]

From Senegal of Abdoulaye Wade in the West to Somalia of Abdikassim Salad
Hassan in the South, the swallows of Algeria of Abdelaziz Bouteflika and of
Nigeria of Olusegun Obasanjo, freely in their flight conveyed the message
of ours that ``one swallow cannot make a summer.'' The whole of Africa was
united and in unison they sang the song of Nepad: ``Nepad, Nepad'', we
sing, and to the last lyrics, ``ourselves, our Africa, our only hope.''
[Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, with regard to the imminent war in Iraq, I
would like to give the Government some good advice from the Good Book.
Proverbs 26: 17 reads:


  He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to him, is
  like one that taketh a dog by the ears.

Die wêreld is verdeeld oor hierdie oorlog. Indien Saddam Hoesein wesenlik
in gebreke gebly het om te voldoen aan Resolusie 1441 van die Verenigde
Nasies, is hy gewoon die outeur van sy eie ondergang. Ons eie
``wapeninspekteur,'' die agb mnr Aziz Pahad, het die hele span van Hans
Blix in die skadu gestel en sommer ná drie dae die gewigtige uitspraak
gelewer dat Saddam saamwerk met ontwapening. So maklik is dit nie. Wat
werklik in die skuilplekke en opslagplekke van Bagdad aangaan, weet ons
nie. Kom ons neem dus maar die woorde van Salomo ter harte en, in Suid-
Afrika se eie belang, gryp nie die verbylopende hond aan die ore nie, want
dit kan ons duur te staan kom.

Wat die Begroting betref, het die agb Hogan in haar toespraak die huidige
Begroting in langtermynperspektief geplaas. Sy het dit vergelyk met die
laat tagtigerjare toe die ekonomie op die rand van ineenstorting gewankel
het. Sy, en talle ander kommentators, het ook gewys op die feit dat die
Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie groei te midde van 'n wêreldwye resessie en
ekonomiese afplatting. 'n Mens kan nie teen hierdie syfers stry nie. Die
jongste Begroting is ook bewys daarvan. Dit sit R13 miljard terug in die
belastingbetaler se sak en bewillig tegelyk genoeg geld vir sowel
noodsaaklike maatskaplike besteding as vir infrastruktuurontwikkeling.

Dit is inderdaad ook so dat die Regering krediet moet kry vir sy makro-
ekonomiese beleid en fiskale dissipline. Die beweegruimte wat die Minister
op die balanseerbalk gehad het en doeltreffend benut het, illustreer dit
duidelik. By uitstek moet krediet gegee word vir die feit dat die Regering
nie soos talle ander Afrikalande ná uhuru geval het voor die populistiese
druk om vinnige kitspasellas uit te deel met geleende geld uit die
buiteland nie, maar om maatskaplike besteding te koppel aan groei en
ontwikkeling. Dit het die skuldlas binne perke gehou en 'n gesonde
Begroting en volhoubare ontwikkeling moontlik gemaak. Die AEB erken hierdie
gesonde dissipline en gee graag daarvoor krediet.

Dit is egter net die een kant van die munt. Hierdie Begroting toon vir ons
twee dinge. Eerstens toon dit vir ons die geweldige potensiaal wat hierdie
land het. Ons is in wese nie 'n Derdewêreldland nie. Ons natuurlike en
menslike hulpbronne plaas Suid-Afrika eenvoudig in die Eerstewêreldliga en
as hy nie daar speel nie, is daar fout.

Tweedens - hier verwys ek weer na die agb Hogan se positiewe vergelyking
met die era voor '94 - spreek die ekonomiese opbloei, die ekonomiese
aktiwiteit en die gunstige betaling aan die keiser wat hom toekom ook
daarvan dat die Suid-Afrikaanse bevolking, en by uitstek die ekonomies
aktiewe deel daarvan, nie die speelgoed uit die wieg gegooi het ná 1994
nie, maar positief, patrioties en met toewyding verder gebou het aan
hierdie land; nie gehoop het op die groot katastrofe of die een of ander
ontvlugting nie, maar gewoon skouer aan die wiel gesit het.

Dit spreek daarvan dat diegene wat voorheen eksklusief die mag gehad het,
die nuwe werklikheid aanvaar het, Suid-Afrika as tuiste aanvaar het en
gedoen het soos die profeet Jeremia die Israeliete self onder 'n vreemde
juk in ballingskap in Babel beveel het toe hy geskryf het dat hulle moet
huise bou, wingerde plant, trou en kinders verwek en kleinkinders, die
vrede en voorspoed van die stad soek, want sy belang is ook hulle belang.

Dit is wat die meeste Suid-Afrikaners gedoen het. Dit sluit in die
sakesektor, die media, die burgerlike samelewing, ja, selfs die opposisie,
wie se kritiese ingesteldheid te maklik as onpatriotisme afgemaak word.
Hierdie Begroting is soos 'n veer in die hoed, nie net vir die Regering en
die Minister nie, maar vir Suid-Afrika en al sy mense. Ons kon net sowel
die Savimbi-opsie gehad het.

Hierdie positiewe bydrae en deelname is egter nie vanselfsprekend nie. Dit
sal slegs volhoubaar wees indien groter erns gemaak word met die belange
van elke gemeenskap; indien deur duidelike distansiëring die Zim-spook in
Suid-Afrika besweer word; indien dienslewering, veiligheid en nie-
diskriminasie van so 'n aard is dat al hoe meer Suid-Afrikaners uit alle
bevolkingsgroepe sal sê hulle toekoms is hier. Die AEB steun die
Begrotingswetsontwerp. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The world stands divided on this war. If Saddam Hussein did indeed fail to
comply with Resolution 1441 of the United Nations, he is simply the author
of his own downfall. Our own ``weapons inspector'', the hon Mr Aziz Pahad,
overshadowed the whole team of Hans Blix, and within only three days issued
the important statement that Saddam is co-operating with the disarmament.
It is not that simple. What is truly occurring in the hiding places and
depositories of Baghdad, we do not know. Let us therefore take the words of
Solomon to heart and, in South Africa's own interests, let us not take the
passing dog by the ears, because this could cost us dearly.

As regards the Budget, the hon Hogan, in her speech, placed the current
Budget in a long-term perspective. She compared it to the late eighties
when the economy was on the verge of collapse. She, and many other
commentators, referred to the fact that the South African economy is
growing amidst the worldwide recession and economic levelling off. One
cannot argue against these numbers. The latest Budget is also proof of
this. It places R13 billion back into the taxpayer's pocket and, at the
same time, votes enough money for the necessary social expenditure, as well
as for infrastructural development.

It is indeed also true that the Government should be given credit for its
macroeconomic policy and fiscal discipline. The room to manoeuvre that the
Minister had and effectively used on the balancing beam clearly illustrates
this. In particular, credit must be given for the fact that the Government
did not, as several other African countries did after uhuru, fall for the
populist pressure to hand out instant freebies with borrowed foreign money,
but linked social expenditure to growth and development. This kept the
burden of debt within limits and made possible a sound Budget and
sustainable development. The AEB recognises this sound discipline and
gladly gives credit for it.

However, this is only one side of the coin. This Budget demonstrates two
things to us. Firstly, it demonstrates to us the enormous potential that
this country has. We are, in essence, not a Third World country. Our
natural and human resources simply place South Africa in the First World
league, and if it is not playing in that league, there is a problem.

Secondly - here I again refer to the hon Hogan's positive comparison to the
era before 1994 - the economic revival, the economic activity and the
favourable rendering unto Caesar of the things which are Caesar's also
attest to the fact that the South African population, and particularly the
economically active part of it, did not throw its toys out of the cot after
1994, but positively, patriotically and with dedication further built this
country; did not hope for the great catastrophe or one or other way of
escape, but simply put its shoulder to the wheel.

This says that those who previously had the power exclusively, accepted the
new reality, accepted South Africa as home and did as the prophet Jeremiah
commanded the Israelites themselves while under a strange yoke in exile in
Babylon, when he wrote that they must build homes, plant gardens, marry and
have children and grandchildren, seek the peace and prosperity of the city,
for what is in its interests is also in theirs.

This is what most South Africans did. This includes the business sector,
the media, civil society, yes, even the opposition, whose critical approach
is all too easily slated as being unpatriotic. This Budget is like a
feather in the cap, not only for the Government and the Minister, but for
South Africa and all its people. We could just as well have had the Savimbi
option.

This positive contribution and participation is, however, not self-evident.
This will only be sustainable if the interests of each community are
treated more seriously; if, through clear distancing, the Zim ghost is
exorcised in South Africa; if service delivery, safety and
nondiscrimination are of such a nature that more and more South Africans
from all population groups will say that their future lies here. The AEB
supports the Appropriation Bill. I thank you.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to open this debate by quoting
the President at the ANC Policy Conference on 27 September 2002, where he
said:


  The progress we have made with regard to our economy has made it possible
  for us to be confident that we can stand up to the challenges posed by
  the global economy, without any fear that we will collapse at the face of
  these challenges. Instead, we have transformed an economy that owed its
  vibrancy to the apartheid incentives, protection and super-exploitation,
  to one that has the competitive strength and initiative to take its place
  within the global market.

The solid foundation for a change from protectionism to competitiveness has
been laid by the blood, sweat and tears of old and young revolutionaries,
many of whom never lived long enough to taste the sweet fruits of their
toil and turmoil. Thousands of others, with determination and deep
conviction to build and bring about a better society, are putting their
shoulders to the wheel to see this economy prosper and not falter, even
though they themselves suffer from the legacies of the previous economic
policies, which are as persistent as dew or frost on the grass in the
morning sunlight.

The change from a bleak to a resilient economy has been confirmed by
organised business like the SA Chamber of Business, Afrikaanse
Handelinstituut, the Black Business Council and two or more others who
attended the public hearings to air their view on this Budget. Irrespective
of their sectorial differences and socioeconomic persuasions, organised
business and labour's testimony corroborates the fact that Government's
economic policies are addressing the needs of the country, creating
suitable conditions for investments.

Despite signs of recession in Europe's robust economies like Germany and
France, and the fall by 50% of the stock markets in the US, the South
African economic growth increased by 3% in 2002. This growth and
development, like cumulus clouds gathering under the gale-force westerly
winds over the blue highveld skies, is expected to gather momentum in the
medium-term expenditure period ahead, due to initiatives taken to encourage
investments by the Government.

Rightly so, organised business has pointed out that more attention should
be given to the domestic environment if we want to maintain our sacred
position on this tidal wave of economic growth and development. One cannot
but agree. However, this Budget and the MTEF ahead pose many challenges and
opportunities for big and small, as well as organised and disorganised
business to complement Government in the reduction of unemployment, hunger
and poverty.

This Budget provides a number of concessions in creating an enabling
environment for domestic investors. These concessions range from a primary
to a secondary sector. They range from accelerated depression for bio-
diesel plants and machinery, to an accelerated four-year period for capital
expenditure relating to research and development in the field of natural
and applied science. Small entrepreneurs will no doubt benefit by claiming
losses from ordinary revenue on the sale of devalued depreciable business
assets with short economic lives.

The fertile, but uncultivated soil in the property development sector and
financial services has been turned over for sowing by increasing the exempt
duty level from R100 000 to R140 000, and abolishing stamp duty on
insurance policies and fixed-deposit receipts.

The increase of the turnover limit from R3 million to R5 million for small
business qualifying for a lower company tax rate will probably go a long
way in encouraging savings and investment in the sector. A further boost to
encourage savings and investment is provided by the relief given to
business assets sale proceeds if these are invested within 18 months.

Just as the westerly winds and dust from the red soils or the highveld
create atmospherically suitable conditions for a heavy downpour over the
dry, grey, grassy hills, Government creates suitable conditions for
business to generate as many job opportunities as possible for the flood of
new job-seekers from schools and tertiary institutions, as well as the
unemployable victims of corporate restructuring in the quest for better
profit margins.

Job losses did not start in 1995: they started two-and-a half decades ago.
South Africa is a developing country and most of the jobs are in the
primary sector. As we transform from the primary sector to a service
sector, we are bound to lose jobs. This is not because of the Government's
policies.

I do not disagree that any entity that is a going concern has to make a
profit. Like a farmer who ploughs after a good rainy season, the harvest
will be plentiful. I think it is high time that the corporate sector took a
bold step and started investing in the domestic market.

Room has been created, through exchange control relaxation, for South
African companies to raise their offshore investment to R1 billion, thus
enhancing diversification of their investments and minimising market risk.
Testimony was presented at the hearings that cash surpluses in the
corporate sector were not only due to the lack of domestic investment
opportunities, but also the lack of investment opportunities
internationally as well.

Organised business have expressed their concern about the burdensome tax
compliance legislation and regulations, of which costs are said to be
driving away potential international and local investors from the country.
Put in Sacob's own words:


  A business environment must be created that makes it easy for
  businesspeople to comply with the law. Laws that put the majority of
  businesspeople outside its ambit are bad laws.

Capital gains tax was cited as one of the administrative hurdles to tax
compliance. The argument over capital gains tax is long over. However, I am
confident that the Minister is aware of all the hot spots, and knows when
and how to tackle them. No matter how hard a farmer can work with the
anticipation to have a good harvest at the end of a season, he cannot
protect his crops from a devastating hailstorm on a hot summer afternoon.
It is as a result of Government's deliberate effort to implement sound and
prudent economic policies that we find ourselves enjoying one of the most
robust and resilient economies in the world. The Afrikaanse
Handelsinstituut said in its own words, and I quote:


  The stability of the balance of payments depends on the investors'
  confidence and consequently, on sound economic policies and a stable
  political and macroeconomic environment, not only in South Africa, but
  also in the subregion. International competitiveness is the norm for
  success in the world economy. In this regard, the Budget presents a
  friendlier package for investors, internationally and locally, big and
  small.

I would like to conclude by quoting the President again at the policy
conference, where he was referring to the 1997-98 East Asian financial
crisis and the post-September 11 global economic slowdowns. He said:


  Obviously, this is not to suggest that we are immune from negative
  developments in the world economy or adverse consequences emanating from
  the processes of globalisation.

The crisis facing the world today of America attacking Iraq is one of those
exogenous factors that will see us failing in the implementation of this
Budget. It's not because the Government is endorsing bad economic policies,
but because of exogenous factors from which we cannot run away. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Deputy Chairperson, Azapo has always held the view
that the war in Iraq is not about the weapons of mass destruction, but
about the control of Iraq's oil resources and other material benefits. This
truth is now beginning to be evident, and it will become clearer as the
events unfold. We as Azapo will not be surprised if the Americans drop
weapons of mass destruction during this war, and then turn around to claim
that those belong to Iraq. [Applause.]

With regard to today's debate, Azapo supports this Appropriation Bill.
However, whilst we support this Appropriation Bill and agree with the
statement that we should push the frontiers of poverty, we would like to
make certain suggestions to accelerate this push for tax cuts. Budget
allocations to the most vulnerable citizens of our country are, indeed, an
important step towards the eradication of poverty and other ills of our
society.

The Budget before us does indicate a willingness on the part of Government
to move in this direction. But for those who are not working and the aged,
as well as those who were retrenched in 2002 and earlier, these tax cuts
will not be meaningful. Therefore, our suggestion is that, as we push back
the frontiers of poverty, we should not forget the rural communities, who
presently do not enjoy the other benefits that the urban communities enjoy.

Azapo believes that for as long as we cannot create jobs, we will always be
in a situation where some of our citizens are not able to enjoy what has
been placed before us by this Budget. Those of you who stay in rural areas
and those who make it their concern to interact with rural communities will
have come across the following factors: the absence of sanitary facilities;
lack of adequate educational facilities; the prevalence of gravel roads
that are not properly maintained; lack of clean drinking water; a long
distance from one Government facility to the other; no electricity, and
poor medical facilities, if any.

Again, in order to raise the standard of life for the rural citizens, the
Budget should have been biased in their favour, since, as I said, they do
not presently enjoy some of the benefits that are enjoyed by urban people.
Azapo believes that in order to liberate rural women in particular, the
Government must pay particular attention to making water and electricity
accessible to rural communities, thereby freeing women from having to fetch
water from rivers and wood from the mountains and valleys.

Land must also be made available to women, again in order to free them from
their dependence on men and develop their actual potential. The urban and
rural divide should be attended to with speed. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Deputy Chairperson and hon members, the liberation movement
of our people, the ANC, has remained faithful to its commitment to
eradicating poverty and creating a society that cares for all its citizens,
especially the most vulnerable.

It is this unwavering commitment to fight for a better life for all our
people that has inspired many in our ranks to cast away their fears in the
face of danger, to the point of laying down their lives. It is also this
total commitment to our people that truly defines the character of this
great liberation movement. It will continue to occupy a special place in
the hearts of our people.

Therefore, it is an honour and a great privilege to rise and speak on
behalf of this organisation of ordinary people. The critical question that
confronts us today is whether conditions among our people have changed
since 1994, with particular reference to the aged, the disabled and
children. This is a very important question which can only be answered
through a penetrating analysis of our history and current social
expenditure trends.

The social security system during the apartheid era was designed to provide
a safety net for poor whites. It was accompanied by a massive investment in
education of whites; thus white workers were empowered with skills that
ensured that they enjoyed higher incomes in the labour market. This removed
their dependence on social security grants. The question still remains:
Have our people's conditions of existence changed since 1994?

How do local experts pronounce themselves on this matter? Profs Serfus van
der Berg and Careen Brendenkamp of the University of Stellenbosch indicate
that spending on the aged, children and the disabled in South Africa is
large for a developing country. The two distinguished academics also say
that social assistance as a proportion of GDP in western European states in
1980 - during the height of the welfare state - indicates, when contrasted
with the 1999 social assistance in South Africa, that our country spends
proportionately more than many developed welfare states on social
assistance.

It would be fair to indicate that France, Sudan and Denmark spend more on
social assistance as a percentage of GDP than South Africa when using the
same data for those periods. It is estimated that by March 2003
beneficiaries of social assistance will be more than 5 million. By 2005 the
total number of social assistance beneficiaries will be more than 8
million. Therefore, it is totally incorrect to claim that the ANC is not
sensitive and caring towards the most vulnerable in society.

These distinguished academics indicate that about two thirds of households
receiving old age pensions are in the rural areas. They also indicate that
social assistance programmes in South Africa are well targeted towards the
poor, with small linkages to the non-poor. The social security grants have
a profound impact on the quality of the lives of our people.

The extension of the child support grant from seven to 14 years and the
extension of the school feeding scheme from Grade R are critical to the
wellbeing of our children. Research conducted on the school feeding
programme reveal that it is having a positive impact in terms of improved
school attendance and better learner attentiveness during lessons. It also
contributed to the food security of the households from which those
children were drawn.

Good nutrition is essential for the growth and development of children. It
reduces their vulnerability to opportunistic infections. It is a well-known
fact that poor individuals make up a disproportionately large share of the
disabled population. Poverty increases vulnerability to disability, mainly
due, among others, to poor nutrition and inadequate basic health care.
Therefore, it is important to reduce our people's dependence on welfare.
It is also important to ensure that our people are empowered to participate
in normal economic activities, instead of depending on welfare. Spending on
education and training, health and land reform plays a critical role in
empowering fellow South Africans to engage in productive work. A good
foundation has already been laid for the achievement of these objectives.

We are also encouraged to realise that Government is developing a
comprehensive social security system for South Africa. There are no quick-
fix solutions to some of these challenges. The ANC-led Government has
followed a correct approach in the financing of the social security grants.
It is compatible with our progressive tax policy.

However, there are some disturbing calls from certain quarters advocating
an increase in VAT to finance other types of social security grants. It is
important to indicate that none of these advocates of a VAT increase could
convince the Finance portfolio committee during the Budget debate. The poor
will be adversely affected by such an increase. It is very disturbing to
hear business sector representatives calling for a VAT increase. It is also
quite disturbing to realise that there are certain political parties in
this House who are advocating an increase in VAT.

Re a leboga Mmušo wa ANC maitapišong a wona a go lwantšha bodiidi le go
ntšha tlala motseng. Mokgatlo wo o lwetše ditokelo tša MaAfrika Borwa ka
moka. Bao ba nnetšego go goelela ba re ANC ga e hlokomele dinyakwa tša
batho, ba bolela ditaba tšeo di sa kopanego. A re ba tlogeleng ba bolele
tšeo di sa yego ka tsela, bana ga nke ba swana, bangwe o kare o ba rutile
ditaba tše dibotse wa bona ba fapoga mo tseleng. Rena re tšwela pele ka go
aga Afrika Borwa ye mpsha. Re leboga Mmušo ge o okeleditše batšofe, bana le
digole godimo ga tšhelete yeo ba e humanago kgwedi ka kgwedi. (Translation
of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[I thank the ANC Government for its tireless support in fighting poverty
and pushing back the frontiers of poverty. This party fought for the rights
of all South Africans. Those who keep on complaining that the ANC is not
attending to the needs of the people do not know what they are talking
about. Let us leave them to talk about weird things; children are never the
same. You can teach your children, then all of a sudden others may go out
of the way. We are continuing to build our new South Africa. We thank the
Government for adding an increase for senior citizens, children and the
disabled to the amount they received before.]

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, Mr Minister, there is a lot of good news in the
Budget. The hon Taljaard has identified and welcomed much of it, and
challenged you to be bold and make further structural adjustments where
necessary. The DA believes it's the right thing to do.

But, just as crucially, we believe that it is also necessary to focus
Government's attention on the weaknesses, the shortcomings and the issues
not spelt out in the Minister's Budget Speech, but buried away in the
Budget Review, a 279-page document that only the truly intrepid, the brave
or the foolhardy might plough through.

This Budget also marks the start of an election year, with the ANC losing
traction on a range of key issues and failing to deliver on important areas
of need ... [Interjections.] Please listen, Minister, you'll have your
chance later! There is deep unhappiness resonating across the people whom
they claim, somewhat ironically, to still represent - ironically because,
with ANC representatives such as fraudster, liar and Gucci-socialist, Tony
Yengeni, and serial absentee, the hon Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, for too
many South Africans the promised better life has simply not translated into
a better life. [Interjections.]

As the election battle commences, the Minister and, this afternoon, the hon
Davies, thumped a populous message, avoiding the pitfalls of the President,
who, in his speech, kicked Zimbabwe into touch with reality and scored an
own goal by completely ignoring the HIV/Aids pandemic and the genocide that
it has fuelled. A populous message on tax cuts was, however, masked in
reality by the huge VAT overruns on the back of horrendous price increases
for consumers, poverty relief and infrastructure spending.

But a word of advice to the Minister about populism appears aptly in
today's Business Day, directed at his coalition comrade, Mr Marthinus
``Hang 'em High'' van Schalkwyk: ``If patriotism is the last refuge of a
scoundrel, then populism is a place to rest on the road to oblivion.''
[Interjections.]

South Africa is not working and Government has failed to grasp job creation
as our most urgent national priority. Since 1994 over a million jobs have
been lost and black unemployment has risen to 55%. While this Budget does
do something about tax and poverty relief - lessened, of course, by
inflation readjustments - it is cruelly reduced by an all-pervasive
national pastime of fraud, corruption and theft inside and outside
Parliament and the Public Service. Perhaps it's because so many people do
take their lead from ANC leaders like Tony Yengeni. It avoids or evades the
key question: ``Where are the jobs?'' [Interjections.]

One out of every three South Africans is unemployed. Seven million people
are out of work, and in the entire Budget Review only one paragraph deals
with the conundrum of job creation. [Interjections.] Those ANC posters
promising jobs are as fraudulent as Tony Yengeni's claims in this House
that he received no special discount from Daimler on his 4x4.

Black economic empowerment also threatens to be a nonstarter, except, of
course, at the very highest levels of ANC cronyism, jobs for pals and
further self-enrichment of the already fabulously wealthy. Ten billion rand
is allocated for new empowerment ventures, but the asset transfer targets
in the mining industry alone require R100 billion over the next five years.
Where will the money come from?
With the ANC closing ranks around the lying Yengeni; unable or unwilling to
deal with the hon Mandela; actively propping up the Mugabe regime in the
face of horrendous human rights abuses in that country; appearing oblivious
to the Aids pandemic, and, incredibly, supporting Libya for the chair of
human rights at the United Nations, this money is hardly likely to come
from confident international investors.

Government's promised black economic empowerment strategy, the nuts and
bolts of how it'll all be done, scheduled for 5 March, has failed to
materialise. The DTI, without formal notice to the committee, cancelled the
day before. Two weeks later, I've been unable to establish why this
important milestone that was announced by the President was missed, why the
report had to go back to the Cabinet, or when we can expect Government to
unveil the prized document. Does it actually exist?

Under the circumstances, Thursday night's Idasa debate on black economic
empowerment entitled -``Empowerment of the people or the creation of a new
elite'' should be most instructive. I notice that one of our colleagues,
Jeremy Cronin, will be speaking. Let's hope he tells it like it really it,
and won't have to apologise afterwards for saying so.

If Government were really serious about black economic empowerment, then
instead of setting targets for the transfer of existing equity that simply
further grossly enrich the same few elite while leaving the majority of
black South Africans as excluded as ever, the Minister would boldly make
the interventions and adjustments that my colleague has proposed. It's the
right thing to do.

Now to Saambou Bank, where, buried away on Page 13 of the Budget Review,
Government has raised a contingent liability of R4 billion to cover its
obligation to repay Saambou deposits in full - R4 billion, equal to the
entire national budgetary allocation to local government, to allow them to
provide free services!

The amount is in itself hugely optimistic, and with the annual interest
payment to FirstRand likely to exceed R800 million, the remaining asset
value of the bank would probably end up closer to R6 billion. Saambou's
former employees and customers, as well as the entire South African public,
have a right to know what happened at Saambou Bank.

Why did the Financial Services Board not confirm that they had handed a
docket over to the Scorpions, when the story of the report first broke in
November last year? Why didn't the bank's regulators pick up serious
breaches of the licence conditions under the Banks Act and possible
criminal conduct at Saambou, including, as we now know, systematic
overcharging of interest on loans in terms of the Usury Act, and act
accordingly to avert the subsequent curatorship crisis?

Did the bank regulators act correctly in putting Saambou under curatorship?
Did they have all the facts about alleged insider trading and money
laundering? Who initiated the probe? Was the Minister aware of it and what
role, if any, did National Treasury play?

The DA has tabled these questions and applied for access to all three
Saambou reports in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act. We
have yet to receive a response. Apart from a press statement on the
curatorship decision and a statement of Parliament on the collapse of the
bank, the Minister has yet to make a public statement on the allegations of
criminal conduct against former directors and on the section 6
investigation of a subsequent launching problem.

Questions about the apparent conflicts between the regulators, the Reserve
Bank, the National Treasury and the curator remain unanswered, as does the
fact that correspondence between the curator and Deputy Reserve Bank
Governor, Gill Marcus, reveals that a potentially more lucrative bid by
Nedcor for Saambou's microlending division was rejected in favour of a less
attractive bid by African Bank Investments, one that was not focused on
maximising the bank's assets.

Then, most telling of all, why, in the middle of the Saambou debacle, did
the Registrar of Banks suddenly announce the need for a review of corporate
governance in the banking sector? Did it have anything to do with the
problems picked up at Saambou, and if so, who picked them up, when, and why
were those findings not released?

Despite the shame of Tony Yengeni still hanging heavily over this Chamber,
we can and must still speak the truth here. It's time for the truth about
Saambou Bank, Mr Minister. The public has the right to know; Parliament has
the right to know.

This afternoon the ANC here has made much of the need to empower South
Africans. Well, let's empower them with the truth this afternoon. Mr
Minister, it's time to speak up about Saambou Bank. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson and hon Minister, if only we could get the
hon Lowe to come to our Trade and Industry committee meetings, where this
morning we dealt with how the CSIR is dealing with technology in South
Africa and how the Industrial Development Corporation is now moving into
disadvantaged areas, spending the kind of moneys that we want them to
spend, focused on these areas. If only we could beg his party to send him
to these meetings, so that he does not have to rely on the newspapers when
responding to the Minister here. Nevertheless, I'm sure he'll grow up.

From the early days of the democratic Government, there was a recognition
that the massive backlog and disparities in the provision of social
services required special funding, over and above that provided for in
routine budgeting. The RDP fund was meant to provide for this funding, but
some administrative problems arose which led to it being relocated to the
Treasury.

However, the need for additional special funds remained evident. Section 6
of the RDP, which deals with funding, correctly pointed out that in order
to implement the RDP, a thorough, ongoing reform would be necessary to
address some major structural weaknesses, amongst these excessive
departmentalism, leading to unco-ordinated and sometimes contradictory
decision-making by various state agencies. It also pointed out that the
potential contribution of NGOs to reconstruction and development was
reduced by the lack of an overall framework and integrative programme. This
always resulted in fragmented and isolated projects.

Therefore, the RDP recognised that access to planning procedures and
information was unequally weighted in favour of an already privileged
group, and that we must ensure that historically oppressed communities get
the resources they need to participate meaningfully in planning, processing
and decision-making, with particular emphasis placed on the role of women
in urban and rural areas, as well as in micro enterprises.

Between 10 and 12 March this year we in the Portfolio Committee on Trade
and Industry were fortunate, together with the economic cluster, to hold
public hearings on development funding or what is referred to as special
funds. The intention of the hearings was to provide a conceptual base for
assessing the impact of spending as a tool for Government and civil society
to use, as well as how these funds can be more effectively used to achieve
the objectives of poverty alleviation and development, amongst others.

Special funds are understood to be additional to routine departmental
allocations provided by the fiscus. They may be off-budget allocations and
include allocations for civil society organisations like poverty relief
funds, as well as foreign donor grants and various other funds.

The overall conclusion flowing out of the presentations made by, amongst
others, organisations and agencies that attended - including the RDP Fund,
the Isibaya Fund, the International Development Co-operation Office, the
National Empowerment Fund, the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, the Umsobomvu Fund, the NDA and some NGOs - is that substantial
funds for development work are, indeed, available from Government and
foreign donors. Indeed, there was a decisive recognition of the tremendous
need for poverty alleviation and job creation, as well as the commitment of
the ANC and the Government to civil society participation.
The public hearings have, indeed, enabled us to reflect on the need to
build the capability of Government to spend more effectively, particularly
through the special funds, so that the centrality of eradicating poverty
can be enhanced. Allocating funds to expand programmes has indeed begun, as
we have seen in these hearings. What is important now is to see how the
strategic utilisation and realisation of developmental goals is incumbent
upon us.

It was revealed at the hearings that in some cases the provision of funding
has been very ad hoc, and some of them have spawned the creation of a
substantial amount of new spending agencies. In most cases some of them
took three years to get established, and their policies are not focused.
They are deficient and their outcomes are not necessarily monitored.

Further, access - particularly among previously disadvantaged people - to
these funds remains unsatisfactory and there is a need for management
skills for project development. Some of them claim that the rigidness of
the Budget does not seem to allow support towards long-term project
planning, whilst ensuring, of course, that we prevent the corrupt misuse of
funds.

A comprehensive report on the outcome of the hearings and some of the
suggestions that we are putting forward will be tabled in this House in the
near future. However, it is our considered view that we should maybe take
the opportunity to draw some attention to some of the following areas.

The first one would be to realise our commitment to development in relation
to what the RDP and our programmes have called us to do. Secondly, maybe we
should give some attention to accelerating work on promoting greater co-
ordination. Indeed, most of the agencies have called for a big effort in co-
ordination amongst them in the allocation of funds and, of course, the
implementation of programmes. Indeed, this applies to the NGOs and the
agencies.

Also, if Government has any further funds to be allocated, perhaps some
consideration should rather be given to the lessons that we have learned in
the past years to use existing agencies such as the IDT in the hearings.
They are not necessarily being used.

We also think that there is ample opportunity here to use the development
approach, through community development workers, for our people in rural
areas and the townships, including, of course, women and the youth, so that
they can all be trained to gain and assist our people to access funding in
a very developmental process. Donor funds, we discovered, are off-budget,
which may present tracking, monitoring and accounting difficulties, and
sometimes inhibit the oversight for Parliament.

The democratic Government will reduce the burden of implementation which
falls upon its shoulders through appropriate allocations and
responsibilities. If we can considerably pull together our collective
effort behind further development, we can ensure that it meets the
practical requirements of design programmes in different areas.
We have discovered that, yes indeed, moneys have been set aside, and it is
our view that it is going in the correct direction. The only other thing
that we can perhaps say, Mr Minister, is: ``Let's make the money work''. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, hon members, Minister Manuel delivered what
many South Africans would consider the near-perfect Budget Speech, proving
once again what the leader of the IFP has continuously been saying, ie that
Minister Manuel is the best Minister of Finance that this country has ever
had.

I liken this Budget not to the plum, but to the rose. Like the beautiful
rose, the Budget brightens the lives of many. However, as with the rose, as
beautiful and splendid as it may be, and just as there are thorns attached
to its stem, so too are there thorns attached to the Budget.

What are the thorns of this Budget, you may ask, considering that in the
main it has been praised worldwide as an excellent, well-rounded Budget
that gives priority to reducing poverty and extending the child support
grant; a Budget that increases spending on social grants and textbooks; a
Budget that expands the Integrated Nutrition Programme; a Budget that
increases spending on medicines, hospital buildings and equipment; a Budget
that goes some way in dealing with HIV/Aids; a Budget that is aimed at
strengthening the fight against crime, and a Budget that offers tax relief.

In dealing with some of these issues and taking cognisance of what Minister
Manuel himself said when he spoke of prioritising the reduction of poverty,
``eradicating poverty is complex and takes time''. The thorns are the many
folk who sadly cannot wait for the time that it will take. People are
jobless today. There are those who are homeless right now; they are hungry
today. And to those who are jobless, homeless and hungry, the Budget does
little for them. They just can't wait!

The child support grant extended to children up to the age of 14, to be
introduced over the next three years, is great in the longer term, but does
not assist those who need it now; to them this is a thorn. Textbooks and
the expansion of the Integrated Nutrition Programme are all very well, but
then we need electricity, water and toilet facilities in all our schools,
including the rural communities, if the youth are to really benefit.

One would hope that the additional money allocated for medicines, hospital
buildings and equipment will ensure that our hospitals that are at present
not fully staffed and don't have the equipment will become fully staffed,
adequately equipped and have medication available to treat all patients in
this country. If not, the thorn begins to fester.

Has adequate provision been made to provide treatment for those who are
ailing because of HIV/Aids, more especially the women and innocent
children? Or is the provision insufficient to prevent people from dying in
their hundreds and thousands? Many of our people are not receiving
treatment to which they are entitled under our Constitution. People are
suffering and dying and we should - and can - do something to stop it.
Although to some extent the Budget strengthens the fight against crime, one
must ask: How far does it go? Does it go far enough? We are at war! We are
not only at war against HIV/Aids, but the war is also on our streets. Every
day thousands of our people are victims of crime. Is there sufficient money
allocated to placing more policemen and policewomen on the streets; and to
keep those already on the streets there by providing increased and better
salaries, more vehicles, adequate equipment and improved resources and
infrastructure? Our men and women in the Police Service are seriously
stretched and stressed. This is a big thorn.

This Budget makes provision for improving court performances. One can only
hope that this will bring about urgent and complete alleviation of a crisis
which could compound the present problem of crime beyond anyone's worst
nightmare. Our judiciary is just not coping at present. No amount of
policing will redress the rising scourge of crime for as long as criminals
bear the legitimate expectation of never being sentenced even if caught,
because of a judicial system that just cannot process them. This is a
thorn.

The thorns hurt and will continue to hurt until our people can feel that
they are not alone; that behind them is a state that really and effectively
cares for the suffering people of this country. Our problems will not come
to an end and, indeed, are bound to multiply until, and unless, we deal
with the problem of unemployment.

Levels of unemployment have substantially risen in the past 10 years.
Unemployment lies behind all social evils we debate in this House, ranging
from crime to moral degeneration and poverty. If we are to do everything we
can to assist the pain caused by the thorns, we have to provide adequate
food security, adequate treatment to those who suffer from HIV/Aids,
protection for all of us from crime, and the generation of employment for
the jobless and homes for the homeless.

Minister Manuel, the Budget is good, but to many just not good enough to
prevent the festering prick of the thorn. The Budget remains a rose, and
the thorns continue to hurt. Let's ensure that the hurt does not fester.
Thank you.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Voorsitter, ek het net een versoek vir die agb Minister
van Finansies. Skaf asseblief alle inkomstebelasting af. [Chairperson, I
have only one request for the hon Minister of Finance. Please abolish all
income tax.]

The New NP still believes that the United States of America should not
attack Iraq unilaterally. The New NP still believes that war is not an
appropriate mechanism to resolve international disputes. But unfortunately,
our beliefs are no longer relevant at this point in time. The United States
of America is going to attack Iraq unilaterally. The failure of the United
Nations to take effective punitive measures against Iraq for having thus
far transgressed 12 UN resolutions is partly to blame for this sorry state
of affairs.

Only one man can stop an attack on Iraq within the next 48 hours: Saddam
Hussein. If he went into exile as proposed not only by George Bush, but
also by prominent leaders of the Gulf states, the attack would be called
off. The fate of Iraq and all its people is therefore entirely in the hands
of Saddam Hussein. It is unthinkable that a head of state could be prepared
to sacrifice a whole nation merely to hang on to power. Saddam Hussein is a
phone call away. On behalf of the people of Iraq, President Mbeki should
pick up the phone and encourage him to go.

We support the Budget.

Mr B NAIR: Mr Chairperson, I hope hon members can hear me. I am using a hi-
tech communication system here.

Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members and friends, in the first place let
me congratulate the Minister, the Director-General of Finance Ms Maria
Ramos and her team and Pravin Gordhan and the SARS team for a formidable
Budget, widely hailed except by a few in this House.

From the Budget presented by the Minister and the Budget Review it is clear
that the macroeconomic fundamentals are in place. The budget deficit is
manageable, the rate of debt to GDP has been consistently reduced over the
past nine years and economic growth, which was negative over 20 years, has
grown steadily and is now at over 3%.

Unemployment is the bugbear that has been dogging our economy. Officially
it stands at about 30% or 5 million, but researchers put it at about 10
million. This has meant that the state had to provide welfare, housing,
pensions, education, school feeding, child grants, food, water and
electricity to the needy as the people were unable to provide for
themselves. Our detractors, who will scream their heads off that the
Government is neglecting poverty, should have their heads examined. Each
year over the past nine years about 45% to 60% of the budget has been used
for social services.

When in the past 350-year history of South Africa has this happened? Under
apartheid scarce resources were invested in war and terror. Did not some of
you on the other side of the House support this campaign of terror and help
to reduce our people to poverty and degradation? Now you shout: Reduce
poverty!

Minister Manuel is meeting the unemployment challenge by outlining the
skills development programme, stepped-up infrastructure investment and tax
incentives to push growth and unemployment, and tax breaks to small
businesses. Infrastructure spending of R70 billion a year over three years
and capital projects of R105 billion will involve all spheres of
government, the parastatals and private-public partnerships to provide
roads, housing, clinics, water, sanitation etc. It is crucial that the
extended public works programmes use labour-intensive techniques and
promote nontraditional income-generating activities in the townships and
rural areas through infrastructural programmes and other means to leverage
new investments.

The Governor of the Reserve Bank recently observed that if the unemployed
became productive and each contributed R650 per month, their combined
output would be R40 billion per year. He said that disillusionment and
desperation accompanied unemployment.

At our 51st ANC conference in Stellenbosch we set ourselves the target of
halving the level of unemployment by the year 2014. There is no quick fix
to deliver this. What is required is a comprehensive, multifaceted
programme embracing Government leadership and hard work by our communities
in a spirit of Vukuzenzele.

Big business is increasingly going hi-tech, as evidenced by the aluminium
smelter in Richards Bay involving billions of rand in investment, but
employing only a small number of highly qualified and technologically
competent workers. Similarly, the motor industry exported R40 billion's
worth of vehicles, but is increasingly using robotics and hi-tech
machinery. Mining is also going the same way. Recently Telkom listed on the
stock exchange and simultaneously announced their shedding of 10 000 jobs.
This is simply because it is going to use the more sophisticated
telecommunications machinery. This will, perhaps, enhance profits. Modern
technology no doubt increases production and ensures efficiency and
improved quality, but it also fuels unemployment.

This brings me to the excellent work done by the National Development
Agency, or NDA, funded by the Government and the EU. In partnership with
the National Land Claims Commission and the Land Bank, the NDA is actively
engaged in land reform programmes, addressing the needs of those who have
been given access to land. These include capacity-building, technical
support, business planning, skills development and provision of financial
support. Since its inception two years ago, the NDA had provided funding
for 2 500 development projects and has in the process created jobs. The
projects in Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Free State,
Western Cape and Northern Cape range from cattle ranches, mixed farming,
dairy, etc. The people set up structures, adopt constitutions, elect
officials and run the organisation. They market jointly, but farm
independently.

A good example is that of Oom Jas Barendse, who runs the 906-hectare
Rockwood Farm on behalf of the New Life Communal Property Association.
[Interjections.]

Hey, suka [go away]! Shut up, man! What are you talking about?
[Interjections.] All right. If you don't want to hear, go outside.

Let me read that again. [Interjections.] I was disturbed here. There is a
big racket going on here, Chair.

A good example is that of Oom Jas Barendse, who runs the 906-hectare
Rockwood farm on behalf of the New Life Communal Property Association, the
only black-owned commercial dairy in Humansdorp. Barendse is also a member
of Sefa, the Stormberg Emerging Farmers' Association in the Chris Hani
district at Cradock. Sefa, led by anti-apartheid activists and ably
assisted by white farmers, is engaged in commercial farming. Twenty-five
farm projects support 420 families and the projects are growing all the
time. They work collectively and hard. The white farmers are being paid by
the Department of Agriculture to train their black counterparts.
Essentially, subsistence farming is being transformed into mainstream
commercial agriculture.

In another case 15 people bought a 216-hectare farm and named it Isidingo.
The Government granted each farmer R16 000 in subsidies and they then
borrowed R230 000 from the Land Bank. The R470 000 purchase price included
implements. Wheat, lucern, mealies and cotton are grown. Some cattle are
also reared.

Another white farmer, Louis van den Bergh, is mentoring the emergent
farmers. They have heaped high praise on Van den Bergh for his commitment.
The object of these farmers is to establish a dairy to produce milk,
cheese, yoghurt, etc. Already the younger people are being trained. Their
problem remains the scarcity of water and they thus employ windmills and
boreholes. They are saddled with faulty pumps and a lack of pipelines.

Again, at Eksteenkuil, an island on the Orange River, 113 farmers, funded
by the NDA, established ÿ.ÿ.ÿ. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson, may I start by indicating to the Minister that
we think, as a party, he's doing a pretty good job as Minister of Finance
and he's got a pretty good Budget. Indeed, I would concur with my colleague
who said that, of all the Ministers of Finance, you are indeed the best,
but I think, having said that, given the quality of some of your
predecessors, perhaps that might be construed as damning you with faint
praise, so let me say it's a sincere compliment. [Interjections.]

But, having said that, I think members on this side of the House have
alluded to a number of problems which indicate that, good as the Budget is,
there are nonetheless some serious problems with it, and more particularly
with Government's policy in respect of key matters. I want to refer to just
two of those right now.

The first, which is a common theme among many of us, is that of
unemployment. We, frankly, believe that Government is not doing and has not
done enough to address job creation. Since 1994, year in and year out, the
problem has got worse and there is little to suggest, despite Mr Nair's
listing some of the programmes that Government is in fact undertaking, that
this is adequate to address what is really a crisis.

In our view the haemorrhaging since 1994 of the formal job structure and
the vast increase in survivalist work is actually a disaster, and it is a
terrible indictment of this country since 1994. It is of course at the
centre, also, of increasing poverty in South Africa, and this issue of
increasing poverty, I think, we'll be discussing next week on the 27th. The
point to be made is that freedom cannot be eaten by a hungry person and,
likewise, liberation doesn't keep your bed warm on a cold winter's night.
So a consequence of these levels of unemployment is, of course, that we're
having to address poverty alleviation and instead of eradicating poverty,
we're having to expend vast resources on alleviating poverty precisely
because we're not doing sufficient to address job creation. I do want to
say that if you look at our unemployment rate in this country now, it is
considerably worse than that that obtained in the USA during the Great
Depression. The question we want to ask is, where is our Roosevelt, where
is our New Deal?

I think it is true to say that the Government is in fact trying to do
certain things, but it, frankly, is not doing enough, and we think the ANC
lacks the leadership and lacks the vision to adequately address the matter
of job creation and that the Budget therefore fails in this regard.
[Interjections.] You show me the million jobs that this Budget is creating,
then you're a half-wit, because they do not exist!

The second crucial thing I'd like to point to is the Government's lack of
response to the Aids pandemic and in particular its refusal to roll out
antiretroviral drugs to the persons infected with HIV/Aids. If you had to
identify what is perhaps the most critical issue in the country, I would
say this is it. Nothing can be more important than the fact that millions
of people are being doomed to die because of the inactivity from that side
of the House. I think you should all be ashamed of yourselves.
[Interjections.]

It's true to say that the Health budget does indeed allocate fairly
significant sums of money to HIV/Aids programmes, but I want to stress that
since it fails to address this particular issue, the roll-out of ARVs to
the general population, it is in fact failing to address the total health
needs of the population.

And it must be said that Government's response to this issue is really
shocking. There are also other adjectives one could use. Let me give you a
few: It's bizarre, absurd, criminal, calamitous, idiotic, shameful, etc.
There are lots of adjectives to describe your Aids policy, but frankly, the
key point is that one suspects that amongst the ranks of those on that side
of the House there's an ANC leadership that's been infected with a disease
or perhaps a syndrome of its own which is presenting itself in slavish
adherence to irrational beliefs.

You hear these idiots running around the corridors saying it's the food,
stupid! Feed the people and they'll be fine, but we can't afford it.
Really, this is totally inadequate.

The key facts of the matter are that the infection of HIV/Aids is not
caused by poverty - I repeat, not caused by poverty - and secondly, that we
can afford to treat it. [Interjections.] In fact, we cannot afford not to
treat it. Study after study has shown conclusively that the cost to the
fiscus of not supplying drugs to treat people with HIV/Aids is in fact
greater than continuing with the present course of action. So I should
think even simple logic should determine a change of course.

In this connection I do want to congratulate - I hope this whole House and
members here might wish to join me - the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, Dr L P H
Mtshali, who is doing what you're not doing; he's convening a provincial
conference whose brief it is to explore the modalities of rolling out the
provision of ARVs to the entire population of the province infected with
HIV/Aids, which you're not doing. It's also to link up with international
agencies and donors and anyone else who can assist, including the local
people who are concerned with this process. [Interjections.]

One hopes that this process would get the support of this Government,
rather than its objection, but somehow I doubt it very much. Thank you.
[Interjections.]

Mr I VADI: Comrade Trevor, it's been a long afternoon, you've heard about
28 speeches and I think on behalf of the House I want to thank you for
sitting through all of them, and even listening to some of the nonsense the
opposition parties have spoken, with courtesy and respect. [Interjections.]
I know you are always heckling, but this time you've been more than kind to
them. Let me say that I want to raise few things because of the long day.

The first is that there've been many responses by business groups, the rich
and powerful in society and media groups about this Budget, but I want to
bring to you a report from my own constituency, from people on the ground,
ordinary men and women, who have responded to the Budget.

There's a friend of mine, called Farouk Cassim, who lives in my
neighbourhood in Lenasia. He says he's never listened to a Budget before,
but when he switched on the TV that day, he listened to the whole speech,
and he thoroughly enjoyed it. The women, the ordinary pensioners who come
to our parliamentary constituency office, say thank you for their
additional grant that they are going to be receiving soon. That is the R700
pension grant. [Applause.]

Whatever the opposition parties might say about the basic income grant and
the politics around that, the children from the Tembalihle informal
settlement, the eight-year-olds, the seven-year-olds and the single mothers
there and in other informal settlements say thank you very much for the
R160 that you are going to be giving them this year. [Applause.] They wait
in anticipation for the roll-out of this thing over the next two years.

This is the grass-roots feeling. Forget about the rich and powerful in
society; these are the voices of ordinary men and women on the street - the
poor, the dispossessed and the weak - who are saying thank you for the
wonderful Budget that you have presented this year.

The second point I want to make, Comrade Trevor, is that you have quoted
extensively from the Freedom Charter in your introduction. You said that
the charter reflected the aspirations of political freedom, freedom from
poverty, freedom to transform our society's culture and values, freedom to
choose a future for our children. We fought for that freedom because it was
the right thing to do. These words sound like music to my ears.
This is the first time that I have heard a Budget Speech which has drawn so
extensively on the values and the principles of the Freedom Charter. I
don't think any other Minister of Finance has embedded his Budget Speech on
the principles of the Freedom Charter. I think you were making an important
political statement.

It reflects a reassertion of political issues over economic and budgetary
questions. You have restored the centrality of politics over this Budget,
and this is a vital thing for a society that is emerging from apartheid
capitalism, internal colonialism and race discrimination. The rich and
powerful, the former oppressors, will not understand the importance of
politics over economic questions. [Applause.] I want to thank you for
restoring the balance between politics and economics in this Budget, for
bringing back to the fore a concept of political economy rather than naked
capitalism.

This morning I had the opportunity of looking at the Freedom Charter again.
I was struck by its amazing far-sightedness and the remarkable concept of
peace and security displayed by those delegates who met there on the 25th
and 26th of June 1955. Those words ring true today when the heavy guns of
war and destruction are about to boom over Iraq. The Freedom Charter
declared 48 years ago for all our country and the world to know that South
Africa respects the rights and sovereignty of all nations, that South
Africa shall strive to maintain world peace and the settlement of
international disputes by negotiation, not war, and that South Africa will
develop an education system that shall teach our youth to love their
people, to honour human brotherhood, liberty and peace.

Today our Government is giving full expression to these basic fundamental
principles that were enshrined in the Freedom Charter. This is the
important thing: the continuity and the centrality of the Freedom Charter
in our politics. We are proud that our Government and its security forces
have chosen not to be a partner in war. We are proud that they have chosen
to be a force for peace in Africa and in the world. South Africa can be
proud today that it is not a warmonger on the world stage, that its
security services are contributors to peace in Africa in Burundi and the
DRC, and in Palestine and the Middle East at large.

This is in sharp contrast to the position taken by the Leader of the
Opposition, hon Tony Leon. Today he has endorsed the principle of
unilateral militarism in international politics. [Interjections.] He has
opened the way for chaos in international politics. He has given vent to
the principle of the law of the jungle in his speech. I think that the DP
and Tony Leon will live to regret his endorsement of this principle.
[Interjections.] Let me tell you why.

Israel is the only state in the world that has violated and refuted almost
50 resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and Security Council.
Israel possesses weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons.
The state of Israel continues to terrorise the people of Palestine, using
heavy machinery against defenceless civilians. The state of Israel
continues to threaten world peace and the Middle East. The state of Israel
is a violator of human rights and the Geneva Convention. With the hypocrisy
of the United States and, in fact, even of the United Kingdom, and the
hypocrisy of that party, they will begin to expose themselves.

If we follow the logic of Tony Leon and his principle of unilateral
military action against a rogue regime, then we are opening the door for
any country in the world to attack another country without going through
multilateral institutions. [Interjections.] I think a time might come when
some states will take unilateral action to dislodge the dictatorial regime
of Ariel Sharon. On that day the hon Tony Leon will be shouting till he is
blue in the face. [Interjections.]

The United States ... [Interjections.] The United States ...
[Interjections.] Who's talking? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr I VADI: Did you avoid military conscription? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr I VADI: Did you condemn South Africa's incursions into Angola?
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member ...

Mr I VADI: You are socialised into a military society. [Interjections.]
Rework your mind! [Interjections.] Rework your mind, please!
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr I VADI: The United States and the United Kingdom are ready to attack
Iraq for defying UN resolutions, but the irony of it is that the United
States and the UK today are themselves defying the United Nations. Two
wrongs don't make a right in international politics.

A number of people have raised the issue of the HIV/Aids pandemic. Let us
state for the record what is the ANC's position. It's simple and
straightforward: HIV causes Aids. [Interjections.] Poor socioeconomic
conditions exacerbate the virus and the pandemic. [Interjections.] It is
critical to have public education and to raise awareness and public
consciousness on this issue - the ANC agrees with that. It is critical for
people to change their lifestyles and sexual preferences - the ANC agrees
with that. It is critical to distribute condoms on a massive scale - the
ANC is doing that. It is vital to have home-based care and support
mechanisms - the ANC supports that. It is critical to improve nutrition and
to have a healthy diet for patients - the ANC supports that. The ANC also
supports the handing-out of antiretrovirals to rape victims and to mothers
who are pregnant. The ANC supports ongoing research around Aids.

The only issue of difference, for the moment, between the ANC and the
HIV/Aids lobby outside is on the question of the roll-out plan. We know the
TAC, for example, has done its costing on the antiretrovirals. The
Government has appointed its own task team. Give it time to complete its
own research and study. [Applause.] It will be reporting quite soon, and I
think we will be able to resolve this matter very, very shortly.
[Interjections.] What is important for the ANC and the Government is to
talk to the TAC to avoid the social disobedience campaign. I think ...
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, let me firstly express appreciation
for the broad support for the Budget. I'd like to keep it that broad by
being brief here this evening.

Of course the issues we are dealing with in the context of the discussion
today are about the risk of war. I want to state unequivocally that the
position of this Government is not a position in support of Saddam Hussein.
It's a position against unilateralism. It's a position premised on the
Freedom Charter. It's a position that recognises that in a world that is
increasingly integrated, you need systems of collective decision-making.
If they fail, you fail the world, you fail future generations. And if you
then within that failed environment take the position that the hon Boy
Geldenhuys takes, then you open the door very widely to this notion of
regime change in which the big and the ugly can march in anywhere and
determine who should rule a country. That has to be fundamentally wrong in
terms of the tenets of democracy anywhere, everywhere and for all time.
That's the position that we have to take, that's the position that we as a
nation have to rally around, because that is the only correct position in
the present time. [Applause.]

We also have to look at the duplicity of the United States in particular.
The Secretary for Defence, Donald Rumsfeld, had personally handled Saddam
Hussein. He's no angel. He'd been personally handled. He'd been empowered
in the fight against Iran by none other than the same Donald Rumsfeld. And
if you look at North Korea, the nuclear reactors that they have were
purchased from ABB where the same Donald Rumsfeld was serving on the board.
So let's recognise the duplicity and let us unite as a nation against
unilateralism. Let us take forward a battle for multilateralism, because
that is in the interests of the developing world. It's not about dogs and
their ears. It's about a set of principles that shape the world, Cassie, a
set of principles that we must all unite around to ensure that we can hold
a position for sustainable peace.

Let us deal with some of the issues raised in the debate. The hon Mulder is
not here; he did apologise to me before he left. The notion that you can
have foreign investors in this country operate tax-free is just wrong. It's
illegal in terms of rules agreed to. It has been the kind of situation that
you've seen in the Channel Islands and so on. It can't work. So let's not
go there.

In respect of the position on farm labourers, I don't know how the hon
Mulder lives with his conscience. When you say, as the Minister of Labour
does, pay farmworkers R600 or R650 a month - and this country can pay the
aged R800 a month - and you say that that R600 or R650 is too much to pay,
how do you live with your conscience? [Applause.] There has to be something
wrong with people who approach life from the premise that it doesn't
matter, you can exploit the vulnerable because they don't count for much.

I'm hoping that in the House and as we take forward the debate on the
Budget to the Second Reading, Chairperson, we will be able to deal with
some of those issues as well.

With regard to the hon Pheko, I think he just fails a fundamental factual
test. That test is about the position of Government in relation to
dependence syndromes. There can't be glory in 40 million people depending
on a welfare system. The President said that; that was the mainstay of our
argument in the Budget. And, yes, we must have a social security net that
deals with the vulnerable, but it should be when you have run out of other
alternatives.

I'd like to turn to the hon Taljaard. Of course, Dr Estian Calitz has a
history. He was Director-General of the Department of Finance in that
period when the apartheid regime was spending like drunken sailors, when
the deficit was built up. I don't know what, from his own past, gives him
this moral authority to comment on the policy direction of this Government.
I think he's lost it. [Applause.]

The second point I'd like to make in relation to the Minister of Finance
and Cabinet is that the Budget is the strongest statement of collective
Cabinet responsibility. In the same way as Robin Cook resigned from Cabinet
in the United Kingdom about collective responsibility, the Budget is a
statement of collective Cabinet responsibility, not of an individual. It
can't ever be that. [Interjections.] I think the hon Davies had pre-empted
what you said, because the schizophrenia about trying to protect the rich
and the powerful is there. It's certainly there in the way in which you
argued the tax points.

Regarding the issue of a basic income grant, BIG, I'm sorry that I have to
use the words of Professor Pieter le Roux who now has become the one
arguing this position of a BIG plus increasing VAT to 21%, which has been
so readily grabbed by the DP.

  In his presentation to the Portfolio Committee on Finance he said:
  ``South Africans often ask why we should opt for a universal income grant
  when no other country, except for the state of Alaska and then for
  reasons unrelated to poverty issues (See Goldsmith 20020), has opted for
  such a programme. Even one of the major proponents of a BIG, ...

The Belgian philosopher - ...


  Philip van Parijs (1995), has argued that developing countries cannot
  effectively implement a universal grant, and should rather opt for a
  limited means tested targeting.

That's the main proponent here. I think he does a pretty good job of
arguing against himself.

In respect of the rest of what you said, hon Taljaard, I only plead that
God spare us from such policy immaturity.

I would like, however, to come back to two other issues. The one issue is
this issue of jobs, and perhaps we should hear in this House what people
are saying, because I don't think Smith knows what he is talking about.
[Interjections.] I'd like to hear from these parties, who have all these
wonderful ideas, what on earth they would do about them; why they fail to
appreciate that what's happening in the global economy and, indeed, in this
economy is as big a change as in the industrial revolution, that the
heritage that we have from the past is a bifurcation between those who have
skills and who are insiders, and those who don't. Our economy is growing
where the skills work better.

We have skills development programmes. We have R3,5 billion in the National
Skills Fund. But ... [Interjections.] You know nothing about skills,
clearly; that is why you are talking. You don't take somebody and put them
through a three-week course and say, ``Now you're skilled. You are now part
of a hi-tech economy.'' Life simply does not work like that. To try to
suggest that it does, you've got to be lying. [Interjections.] You've got
to be lying.

I would like to just amplify what the hon Vadi said about the issue of
HIV/Aids, because here, too, I think there is a lot of voodoo being spoken
by the likes of Smith. [Interjections.] The ``hon'' Smith. [Interjections.]
I can say ``Mr Smith'' without saying ``hon'' as well.

This notion that it's antiretrovirals or bust is bunkum. It's a position
that can only be taken by pharmaceutical companies. It's not supported by
fact. And the more people who sprout this kind of nonsense, the more we'll
end up in difficulty. There is no need to polarise society on this issue.

We need to recognise that the term we use: ``medically appropriate
treatment'' will cover a range of issues. But the bulk of our investment
has to be in the prevention regime, because you can put people on
antiretrovirals but they are not going to cure them. They might at times
and in circumstances arrest the growth of the disease, but they don't cure
it. So stop polarising ourselves. Go back to your premier and say to him,
``Spend money on poverty relief. Build schools. Do all of the other things
that are necessary. Don't waste these very limited resources in an
exceedingly poor province.'' Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

The House adjourned at 18:47.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 14 MARCH 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Finance:


         (i)     Bophuthatswana National Provident Fund Act Repeal Bill [B
               13 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior
               notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
               No 25032 of 11 March 2003.]


         (ii)    Sefalana Employee Benefits Organisation Act Repeal Bill [B
               14 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior
               notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette
               No 25032 of 11 March 2003.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         14 March 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

National Assembly:

1.    Membership of Portfolio and House Committees:


     The following members have been appointed to serve on the Committees
     mentioned, viz:
         Joint Budget Committee:


         Appointed: Baloyi, R M (Alt).

2.    Referrals of Bills to committees:


     (1)    The Anti-Terrorism Bill [B 12 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec
         75), introduced on 10 March 2003, is referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Safety and Security, the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development, the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance, the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and the
         Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs. The Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security to report after having conferred with the
         other committees mentioned above.

3.    Referrals to committees of tabled papers:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Resolutions of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
              for 2002 and replies thereto obtained by the National Treasury
              - Twenty-fourth and Twenty-fifth reports, 2002.


         (b)     Government Notice No 104 published in Government Gazette
              No 24257 dated 14 January 2003: Designation of an institution
              of which the activities do not fall within the meaning of "The
              Business of a Bank" ("Ithala Development Finance Corporation
              Limited" formerly known as "KwaZulu Finance & Investment
              Corporation Limited"), made in terms of the Banks Act, 1990
              (Act No 94 of 1990).


         (c)     Government Notice No 33 published in Government Gazette No
              24264 dated 24 January 2003: Proposed amendment of Pension
              Fund Regulations, made in terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956
              (Act No 24 of 1956).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration:


         Report of the Public Service Commission on the State of the Public
         Service for November 2002 [RP 6 - 2003].
     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises:


         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
         Company Limited (SAFCOL) for the year ended 30 June 2002.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works. The Reports of the Auditor-General is referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction
              Industry Development Board for 2001-2002, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-
              2002.


         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
              Development Trust for 2001-2002, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002.
     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Finance for information:


         Report of the Office of the Auditor-General on the Budget of
         Income and Expenditure for 2003-2004 [RP 11-2003].


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs:


         A list of approved early naturalisation applications in terms of
         section 5(9) of the South African Citizenship Act, 1995 (Act No 88
         of 1995).


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport:


         Report of the Regulating Committee for Airports Company of South
         Africa and the Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company Ltd for
         2001-2002, established in terms of section 11 of the Airports
         Company Act, 1993 (Act No 44 of 1993).


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development:


         Proclamation No R 6 published in Government Gazette No 24351 dated
         7 February 2003: Commencement of sections 8 to 13, 15 to 22 and 24
         to 28 of the Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).

TABLINGS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Strategic Plan for the Department of Agriculture for 2003-2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology on the Natural Scientific Professions Bill [B 56 - 2002]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 11 March 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology,
         having considered the subject of the Natural Scientific
         Professions Bill [B 56 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75),
         referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
         section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 56A - 2002].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2003]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 11 March 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the subject of the Judicial Matters Amendment
         Bill [B 2 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         endorses the classification of the Bill and reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 2A - 2003].

                            MONDAY, 17 MARCH 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Finance:


         (i)     Banks Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2003] (National Assembly -
              sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 25020 of 7 March 2003.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         18 March 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Social Development:
     Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for 2003-2006
     [RP 28-2003].

2.    The Minister of Housing:


     Report and Financial Statements of the People's Housing Partnership
     Trust for 2000-2001.

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Government Notice No 193 published in Government Gazette No 24363 dated
     7 February 2003: Extension of time for general authorisation in terms
     of section 36 of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Appropriation
     Bill [B 8 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 14 March 2003:


     The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the Appropriation
     Bill [B 8 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 77), referred to it and
     classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports as
     follows:


     A.     INTRODUCTION


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Joint Budget Committee
         together held hearings on the 2003/04 Budget between 27 February
         2003 and 6 March 2003. The Committees wishes to express
         appreciation to all participants for their contributions. Written
         presentations submitted form part of the records of the Committee
         Section. The Committee would also like to express its appreciation
         to the Minister of Finance, the Deputy Minister of Finance, the
         Director-General of Finance, the Commissioner of the South African
         Revenue Service, the Chairperson of the Financial and Fiscal
         Commission and their staff for their presence and contributions
         during the hearings. A list containing the names of all those who
         made oral submissions is included in part D of this Report.


     B.     OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET


         The 2003/04 Budget was presented in the context of South Africa's
         relative economic resilience and growth in the face of global
         slowdown and uncertainty. The expansionary fiscal policy stance
         begun in 2001 is continued. In line with the 2002/03 Budget, the
         2003/04 Budget offers considerable personal income tax relief to
         lower and middle income groups, and shows strong growth in
         expenditure which focuses on the themes set out in the Medium Term
         Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS). Continuing on from last year's
         Budget, the focus areas of this Budget include poverty reduction,
         increased infrastructure investment, broadening the social
         security net, strengthening access to health and education while
         focusing on the quality of service delivery and the expansion of
         municipal and provincial services. Real non-interest expenditure
         growth of 4,5 per cent is expected over the MTEF.


         1. ECONOMIC POLICY AND OUTLOOK


              (a) International context and forecast


                  Internationally, global economic conditions are
                  unfavourable, with falling stock markets, weak consumer
                  and business confidence, and sluggish output and activity
                  indicators.


                  Despite this global slowdown, and hardship within
                  Southern Africa due to drought, shortfalls in regional
                  grain production and rising food prices, South Africa's
                  economy is growing steadily. Growth and development is
                  expected to gather momentum in the years ahead due to
                  initiatives to encourage investment, raise skills levels
                  and reduce constraints on business formation. Further
                  gradual liberalisation of exchange control is proposed to
                  support the further integration of South Africa with the
                  global economy.


              (b) GDP Growth


                  South Africa's growth proved resilient in 2002,
                  increasing to 3 per cent. Projected growth for 2003 is
                  3,3 per cent, rising to 4 per cent by 2005. A number of
                  factors underpin Treasury's optimism: strong consumer
                  demand and investment spending (investment grew by 6,6
                  per cent in 2002 and is expected to continue to grow
                  around 6 per cent a year over the medium term); declining
                  household debt; formal sector employment is turning
                  around; the current account balance is healthy; and
                  inflation is expected to decline in 2003 and 2004.


              (c) Interest rates


                  Following the sharp depreciation of the currency, rising
                  food prices and the increase in money demand in the early
                  part of 2002, the Reserve Bank increased interest rates
                  by 400 basis points in the first nine months of last year
                  in an effort to stem second round inflationary pressures.
                  This has assisted in moderating the inflation trend.


              (d) Inflation


                  Inflation increased sharply in 2002, with CPIX inflation
                  peaking at 12,7 per cent in November 2002, with headline
                  CPI inflation rising to 14,5 per cent in the same month.
                  Towards the end of 2001 the depreciation of the Rand put
                  upward pressure on inflation. Consumer price inflation as
                  measured by CPIX averaged 10 per cent in 2002 and peaked
                  at 12,7 per cent for the year to November. Much of the
                  increase was due to rising food prices, housing and
                  medical costs.


                  Following the Rand's subsequent recovery, CPIX inflation
                  started to decline, and is set to fall within the target
                  range in 2004. The Treasury remains committed to
                  inflation targeting and stated that the inflation target
                  of 3 to 6 per cent will be retained for 2005.


              (e) Output and investment trends


                  Investment growth was strong across the economy in 2002,
                  increasing by 6,3 per cent. Treasury believes it is set
                  to grow by around 6 per cent over the medium term, buoyed
                  by robust public infrastructure spending, several major
                  mining projects and diversified manufacturing growth.


                  Net foreign direct investment reached R12,8 billion in
                  the first three quarters of 2002. Gradual liberalisation
                  of exchange controls continues this year, supporting
                  global expansion by South African companies and unwinding
                  of blocked assets.


              (f) The Balance of Payments and the Current Account


                  The balance of payments remains healthy. A surplus on the
                  current account of the balance of payments was recorded
                  in 2002, despite sluggish global demand for South
                  Africa's exports. Manufactured exports continued to grow
                  strongly, tourism is booming and trade performance is
                  expected to benefit from the global recovery. With strong
                  investment growth and increased import demand, it is
                  expected that the current account will move into a
                  moderate deficit of 0,5 per cent of GDP in 2003.


                  The latest data indicates net capital inflows of R21,4
                  billion for the year to September.


              (g) The Net Open Forward Position


                  Treasury has made significant progress in reducing the
                  net open forward position (NOFP) from US$4,8 billion at
                  the end of December 2001 to US$1,5 billion at the end of
                  January 2003.


              (h) Employment and productivity


                  Formal sector employment increased in 2002 for the first
                  time since 1996, and labour productivity continues to
                  improve steadily, increasing the competitiveness of the
                  economy and helping to stabilise prices. Treasury
                  announced that black economic empowerment must take
                  priority over the next decade. Alongside sectoral
                  initiatives to deepen participation in the ownership and
                  management of South African companies, government will
                  support the funding of new ventures and business
                  expansions that meet agreed empowerment criteria.


              (i) Accountability for service delivery


                  Treasury hopes that the Estimates of National
                  Expenditure, together with the publication of the 2003
                  Intergovernmental Fiscal Review in April, will provide
                  all 10 legislatures with comprehensive and quantifiable
                  information to exercise their oversight responsibilities.


         2. FISCAL POLICY AND BUDGET FRAMEWORK


              (a) Fiscal policy trends and targets
                  Beginning with the 2001 Budget, a more expansionary
                  stance was enabled by the earlier period of
                  consolidation. Strong real spending growth is now
                  projected within a sustainable fiscal framework, with
                  social spending and infrastructure investment increasing
                  strongly. At the same time, tax relief again benefits
                  lower income households and encourages targeted
                  industrial investment. Over the next three years, a
                  budget deficit of between 2 and 2,5 per cent is
                  accommodated within a sustainable framework and a
                  declining debt-GDP ratio, after an estimated 1,4 per cent
                  in the current year.


                  General government capital formation is targeted to grow
                  by at least 5 per cent a year, while government
                  consumption expenditure will stabilise at about 19 per
                  cent of GDP. General government tax revenue will remain
                  at between 27 and 28 per cent of GDP, and interest on
                  public debt is expected to decline from 4,9 per cent of
                  GDP in 2002 to 4,2 per cent in 2005. A public sector
                  borrowing requirement of 2,6 per cent of GDP is
                  projected.


              (b) Revised budget framework


                  The main budget provides for expenditure of R334 billion
                  in 2003/04, rising to R395,6 billion in 2005/06. Revenue
                  increases from R304,5 billion to R361,2 billion over the
                  same period. Higher GDP growth and inflation contribute
                  to substantial upward revisions in revenue estimates for
                  2002/03 and the following three years. Main budget
                  revenue is expected to be 26,6 per cent of GDP in the
                  budget year, and to remain at that level over the next
                  three years, which again allows for substantial tax
                  relief in 2003/04.


                  The budget deficit for 2002/03 is expected to be 1,4 per
                  cent of GDP, mainly due to robust revenue growth.
                  Expansion in spending planned for the MTEF period will
                  however raise the deficit to a projected 2,4 per cent of
                  GDP in 2003/04.


                  Debt service costs, however, are expected to fall from
                  4,2 per cent of GDP in 2002/03 to 3,8 per cent by
                  2005/06. National government debt will decline to a
                  projected 36,8 per cent by the end of the MTEF period, in
                  contrast to its level of 48,1 per cent of GDP at the end
                  of 1997/98.


              (c) Fiscal policy as tool for growth and development


                  This budget framework reinforces growth and development
                  partly through strong expenditure growth and tax relief,
                  but also through the emphasis on investment and transfers
                  to households.


                  The Minister emphasised that growth in spending has to be
                  accompanied by improved management and service delivery
                  at all levels, with measurable objectives in the
                  Estimates of National Expenditure aimed at improving
                  accountability and oversight. Additional allocations
                  signal a marked shift in favour of provinces and local
                  government, whose role in driving successful development
                  is recognised.


         3. REVENUE


              Revenue collections remain buoyant, reflecting both
              improvements in administration and longer term benefits of tax
              policy reforms. This provides scope for further tax relief,
              increased incentives for domestic investment and savings, and
              tax reforms designed to stimulate business growth and
              development. All of these trends are in line with this
              budget's expansionary stance concentrating on employment and
              enhanced economic development.


              (a) 2003/04 tax relief proposals


                  (i)  Direct tax measures affecting individuals


                       *     The tax threshold is raised by 11,1 per cent to
                           R30 000, so those earning less than this amount
                           will not pay personal income tax next year.
                           Income tax brackets have been adjusted across
                           the income spectrum to provide relief for all
                           income earners and to compensate for bracket
                           creep.


                       *     Interest income exemption is raised from R6 000
                           to R10 000 for individuals below 65 years, and
                           from R10 000 to 15 000 for individuals 65 years
                           and older.


                       *     The transfer duty threshold is increased from
                           R100 000 to R140 000, reducing the cost of
                           buying property at the lower end of the market.


                       *     The tax on retirement funds is reduced from 25
                           per cent to 18 per cent once again. However, tax
                           treatment of retirement vehicles is under
                           comprehensive review, with legislative changes
                           expected in 2004.


                  (ii) Business tax stimulus measures


                       *     Accelerated depreciation for investment in
                           designated urban areas.


                       *     Conversion of the accelerated depreciation
                           window period for manufacturing assets into a
                           permanent feature.


                       *     Comprehensive business asset reinvestment
                           relief.


                       *     Losses on sale of depreciable business assets.


                       *     Accelerated depreciation for research and
                           development.


                       *     Accelerated depreciation for biodiesel plant
                           and machinery.


                           Small businesses are given tax relief and
                           incentives in the form of lower tax rates, an
                           increased turnover limit and extra deductions on
                           start-up expenses. Tax rules will be clarified
                           in the case of start-up expenses.


                           The tax on foreign dividends is removed where a
                           South African taxpayer has a meaningful interest
                           in the foreign subsidiary paying the dividend. A
                           number of collateral changes accompany this.


                           The list of public benefit organisations
                           eligible for tax-deductible donations is
                           expanded, and government grants are exempted
                           from income tax.


              (b) Indirect taxes


                  Excise duties on alcohol and tobacco products see a
                  general increase on all alcoholic beverages of between 10
                  and 11 per cent. Sorghum beer and sorghum flour are the
                  only exceptions; these products will see no change in
                  excise duty. Taxes on tobacco products will also rise
                  from 11 per cent (cigarettes and pipe tobacco) to 39 per
                  cent (cigars).


                  The fuel levy increases an average of some 4 cents per
                  litre.


                  Other excises and charges: Ad valorem excise duty on
                  computers is abolished, and duties on lower cost motor
                  vehicles are adjusted for inflation. A levy on plastic
                  bags will be introduced and some of the revenues
                  collected will be earmarked for the recycling of plastic
                  bags. Air passenger departure tax will be adjusted by 10
                  per cent.


              (c) Foreign exchange amnesty


                  Government has moved to introduce a tax and foreign
                  exchange amnesty in order to facilitate repatriation of
                  assets illegally moved offshore. Government's view is
                  that individuals with illegally held offshore assets
                  increasingly want to repatriate these assets, both
                  because domestic and international enforcement targeting
                  illicit funds has increased, and because of disappointing
                  yields of foreign markets.


                  The amnesty will run for six months. A 5 per cent
                  Exchange Control one-time levy will be enforced for the
                  repatriation of any foreign assets, and a 10 per cent
                  Exchange Control one-time levy will be enforced to the
                  extent that any foreign assets remain offshore. All
                  individuals filing for amnesty relief are released from
                  all civil penalties and criminal liabilities, except
                  those currently under investigation, who may not file.


              (d) Measures to enhance tax administration


                  Tax administration is being enhanced by reforming
                  collection mechanisms, increasing the penalties for non-
                  compliance and introducing an advance rulings process.
                  Reforming collection mechanisms include outsourcing
                  undisputed tax debts to private collection agencies and
                  making those responsible for collecting VAT directly
                  liable for failure to pay.


         4. ASSET AND LIABILITY MANAGEMENT


              (a) Debt management strategy


                  Since 1999, debt management's primary aim has been to
                  reduce debt costs within risk limits. The debt
                  consolidation programme is now complete, and total
                  nominal value of outstanding illiquid government bonds is
                  now some R2 billion, down from R50 billion three years
                  ago.


                  Government has steadily increased the share of foreign
                  debt in the overall debt portfolio. The proceeds of these
                  issues have contributed to reducing the net open forward
                  position (NOFP) held by the Reserve Bank from US$23,3
                  billion in 1998 to US$1,5 billion at the end of January
                  2003.


                  South African debt has performed well on international
                  and local markets.


              (b) Borrowing requirements, debt costs and total debt trends


                  In addition to financing the budget deficit, the budget
                  provides for extraordinary payments of R28 billion
                  between 2002/03 and 2005/06 to compensate for forward
                  cover losses.


                  R10,2 billion is expected to be paid into the fiscus in
                  2003/04 from Transnet's disposal of its M-Cell interest,
                  sale of Telkom shares, and restructuring dividends from
                  the Central Energy Fund.


              (c) Contingent liability


                  Contingent liability is provided for, to deal with
                  unexpected eventualities such as natural and human
                  disasters, and to provide stability to the financial
                  sector.


                  In 2002/03 a total of R10,5 billion in guarantees were
                  provided. The Saambou liquidation includes an outstanding
                  claim against the State for R4 billion.


              (d) Public enterprise restructuring and corporate governance


                  The Telkom listing in March 2003 is viewed as broadening
                  equity participation in the SA economy, while a 20 per
                  cent stake in M-Cell has been bought by its management
                  and staff.


                  Forthcoming projects include concessioning of the Durban
                  port container terminal; sale of 30 per cent of Denel to
                  British Aerospace; sale of 30 per cent of Eskom's
                  generation business; transformation of electricity
                  distribution under management of an Electricity
                  Distribution Holding Company; sale of 51% of Western Cape
                  Safcol forests; and completion of sale of Aventura
                  resorts.


                  Cabinet has approved a revised Protocol on Corporate
                  Governance for public entities.


         5. MEDIUM-TERM EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES


              (a) Policy priorities and the MTEF


                  Priorities include deepening infrastructure expenditure
                  by all levels of government; with increased emphasis on
                  investing in skills; public-private partnerships;
                  targeting poverty through extending the child support
                  grant, skills investment, access to education and health,
                  land redistribution and small business development.
                  Provision for increased local government funding,
                  utilities user support and capacity building initiatives
                  stress local upliftment, while strengthening of the
                  social protection services (police, justice and prisons),
                  increased foreign representation, peace-keeping
                  activities and support for NEPAD are envisaged.
                  Additions to the MTEF spending plans include:


                  *    R11,0 billion more for extension of the child
                       support grant to children up to 14 by 2005/06, and
                       primary school nutrition.


                  *    R38 billion more for hospital and road improvement,
                       medicines and school books, as well as increased pay
                       for health care and welfare workers.


                  *    R6,5 billion more to extend free basic services,
                       municipal infrastructure and community services.


                  *    Significant additions for courts and police, higher
                       education and further skills development, and land
                       restitution and land reform.


                  *    Increased support for services to citizens, SARS,
                       research and technology development.


                  *    More for a growing international role, peace-keeping
                       and NEPAD.


              (b) Consolidated expenditure by function


                  Social services account for 58,3 per cent of spending,
                  and will grow rapidly in the years ahead, mainly because
                  of the extension of child support. Growth in the criminal
                  justice sector is mainly service-orientated.


         6. PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE


              (a) Provincial grants and spending trends


                  The division of revenue in the 2003 Budget shows strong
                  increases at provincial and local level, reflecting their
                  responsibilities for delivery.


                  The provincial share of nationally raised revenue is
                  projected to rise from 56 per cent in 2002/03 to 57,6 per
                  cent in 2005/6. The provincial equitable share is
                  increased to improve education and health materials as
                  well as personnel pay, social assistance grants, road
                  construction and maintenance and economic development
                  services.


              (b) Local government


                  The financing framework for local government is under
                  review, with both revenue and spending issues under
                  scrutiny. A new division of powers and functions between
                  local and district municipalities will be part of a
                  transformation of municipal finances this year.


                  National budget transfers to municipalities will increase
                  by 18,4 per cent over the MTEF period. Free basic
                  electricity, water and sanitation services for poor
                  households are an important factor in this.
                  Infrastructure grants to municipalities and district
                  management areas are a key instrument in urban renewal
                  and rural development, and their rationalisation is
                  proposed.


         7. ISSUES RAISED BY THE COMMITTEE


              Poverty alleviation: The Committee approved of the measures
              taken in the Budget to alleviate poverty, as they felt that
              this would support economic stability and raise standards of
              living. The question of how to ensure that the vision of
              policy makers is shared by policy implementers was posed. The
              Minister replied that standards of delivery would be improved
              by holding management accountable, and emphasised that local-
              level accountability was important. National office bearers
              should not be involved in implementing policy on a local
              level.


              Privatisation: In reply to a committee enquiry about the drop
              in projected returns from privatisation, the Minister pointed
              out that the current situation was quite different from the
              heady dot.com period when privatisation was first mooted. This
              is not a uniquely South African problem: there have been
              worldwide shifts in both market sentiment and business
              thinking, which are reflected in the modest anticipated
              proceeds. Further, headlong privatisation can create
              additional problems, as this is not an easy time for
              privatising large industries.


              Growth and skills: Asked about the limits placed on tertiary
              sector growth by skills shortages, the Minister said that the
              tertiary sector is indeed the main growth sector and will
              remain so. It will run into absorption ceilings because of the
              skills supply constraint. In this budget, the skills
              development fund is up to R3,5 billion from R3,3 billion, but
              there is little suggesting that SETAS focus on output. They
              have few measurable objectives for training, and it is wrong
              that SETAS' required outputs are as vague as at present.


              Consumer activism: In relation to the food price monitoring
              programme, the Minister raised the issue of consumer activism,
              which is still weak in SA. Media comparisons of prices are
              useful. Government is not looking at price controls, but will
              closely scrutinise retailers' behaviour.


              TRC Reparations: Asked why there was no provision for TRC
              reparations in this budget, the Minister pointed out that in
              the 2001/02 Budget, R800 million was allocated to the
              Department of Justice for reparations. Now that the litigation
              threat has passed, discussion can go forward with the
              Department of Justice, since the R800 million is still
              available, plus interest.


              Black Economic Empowerment: Asked how BEE would be delivered,
              the Minister responded that BEE was not a budgetary issue, but
              part of the economic plan. The details are being worked on,
              and within three weeks the DTI should announce these. The
              Minister said that the National Empowerment Fund must be
              revamped with substantially amended legislation and Treasury
              representatives on the board, to be used as a vehicle for BEE,
              quite different than hitherto.


              He added that he was not saying that the R10 billion allocated
              for BEE would be financed via the foreign exchange amnesty,
              but that it would be good if the levy from the amnesty
              facilitates expansion of the economy. It cannot be the only
              source, as the amnesty lasts six months, and BEE is planned
              for at least the next five years.


              Management and delivery: The Committee was concerned that the
              value-for-money and performance measures mentioned in the
              Budget would not be realised. When questioned as to how this
              would be done, the Minister said that greater emphasis would
              be placed on management training, specifically management in
              the accounting for and planning of expenditures. If management
              were trained and skilled, they would be better able to
              implement public programmes.


     C.     RESPONSES TO THE BUDGET


         1. MACROECONOMIC PERSPECTIVES ON THE BUDGET


              Three economists made submissions to the Committee, focusing
              on the macroeconomic implications of the Budget. All strongly
              endorsed the Budget and the expansionary policies it embodied,
              and stressed that there was higher private sector confidence
              in government's will to deliver on policy than ever before.


              (a) Sandra Gordon: Independent economist


                  Ms Gordon noted that this is the boldest pro-growth
                  Budget to date, and called for still more stimulatory
                  measures aimed at domestic demand, as the export-led
                  growth strategy comes under pressure in the present
                  global context. She sees an increased role for the State.


                  Local growth is set to slow in 2003, due to the effects
                  of high inflation and high interest rates, and domestic
                  demand has declined. Although the tax cuts tabled in the
                  2003 Budget have addressed this to some extent, further
                  oil price increases are likely to act as a tax on
                  consumers and negate some of the benefits of tax relief.


                  Additional factors slowing growth in 2003:


                  *    Export-led growth, so successful during 2002, is
                       beginning to falter, due in part to the stronger
                       Rand.


                  *    The global economic slowdown is also cutting into
                       export performance, with war fears and uncertainty,
                       and consequent higher fuel prices exacerbating this.


                  *    In the medium term, US economic recovery will see a
                       lower growth norm of around 2 to 2,5 per cent; it
                       will cease to be the global growth engine.


                  *    Positive pro-growth government policies include:


                       -     Inflation targeting, if wage and price
                           increases can be kept within target levels.


                       -     Tax relief, which reinforces stability, with
                           consumer spending less volatile, and household
                           debt dropping to its lowest since 1991.


                  She noted that there is a tendency by government to
                  underestimate revenue, which affects GDP deficit
                  projections and results ultimately in a less stimulatory
                  Budget. Government should develop additional methods to
                  manage inflation, supplementing the Reserve Bank's
                  interest rate interventions.


                  During the period of jobless growth in the 1990s, South
                  Africa experienced a steady shedding of employment. There
                  needed to be a strong focus on the capacity to deliver on
                  expenditure.


                  Economic reforms in the 1990s have created a much more
                  resilient economy. However, they also saw the steady
                  shedding of employment. She acknowledged the success of
                  policies in generating growth, and setting the stage for
                  further growth, but stressed global trends suggest a
                  shift of focus to fostering domestic demand. There is
                  scope for an increased role for government. New
                  stimulatory measures, notably capital expenditure, should
                  be accelerated as capacity for delivery improves.


              (b) Prof Charles C Okeahalam, Chair of Minerva Group and
                  Professor at WITS


                  Prof Okeahalam's view was that the crux of this Budget
                  was the decline in sovereign debt and debt service costs,
                  which have brought down the overall cost of capital.


                  In general he reviewed the Budget positively, areas for
                  concern to be:


                  *    The household savings structure.


                  *    Uncertainty about the long-term effects of HIV/AIDS.


                  *    The ability of the supply-side to deliver.
                  The last was his major concern: he felt that policies to
                  stimulate the private sector must not be expected to
                  solve the problems of unemployment and poverty. However,
                  he noted increased spending on infrastructure, with
                  government capital expenditure projected to increase to
                  23,3 per cent over the 2003/04 period, and the increased
                  focus on service delivery. However, he felt that there
                  had been insufficient attention to HIV/AIDS and
                  competition issues.


              (c) Dr Iraj Abedian, Director and Group Economist, Standard
                  Bank


                  Dr Abedian's overview was strongly positive, seeing this
                  Budget as a leap forward in normalising macroeconomic
                  conditions. He pointed to three major developments:
                  *    The rising level of general confidence, in
                       particular of the business sector in government.


                  *    The nature of the global economy in which the Budget
                       is presented. For the first time in four decades
                       South Africa's growth rate of 3 per cent is above the
                       global average of 2,5 per cent.


                  *    Budget 2003 is a leap forward in normalising
                       macroeconomic conditions. He pointed to the fact that
                       disposable incomes have been rising since 1994.


                  The increasing resilience of South Africa's economy
                  stands on four pillars:


                  *    Reinforced by structural changes, South Africa's
                       economic efficiency is rising. South Africa's economy
                       is no longer dominated by the primary sector. In
                       combination, the secondary and tertiary sectors'
                       share of GDP is close to 90 per cent, with the
                       tertiary sector dominant at 66 per cent of GDP. These
                       structural changes have transformed the economy.


                  *    South Africa's export diversification is paying off.
                       In the World Economic Forum's competitiveness
                       rankings, South Africa is in now 32nd out of 84
                       industrial and emerging economies.


                  *    Macroeconomic stability and solid fiscal conditions
                       afford predictability, with steady real GDP and
                       rising fixed investment, and inflation trends
                       declining.


                  *    Deepening democracy and social stability also
                       strengthen confidence.


                  Dr Abedian stressed that in the now dominant tertiary
                  sector, confidence was far more important than in other
                  sectors. Availability of skills is also a key limiting
                  factor. He was also critical of SETAs as being poorly
                  designed and failing to deliver. Although continued
                  privatisation was important to maintain political
                  credibility, he said, the government should pay more
                  attention to ensuring that better competition policy and
                  regulations were in place in all sectors.


              (d) Major issues raised by the Committee


                  (i)  Concrete measures to improve demand


                       Ms Gordon responded that demand within the economy
                       could be increased through land redistribution,
                       public works programmes - though these are a
                       temporary measure - and supporting establishment of
                       more SMMEs by simplifying their regulatory
                       environment. Creating an entrepreneurial spirit and
                       effective learnerships in the workplace were also
                       important.


                       She stressed that she advocated broadening the growth
                       policy focus to include domestic demand, but not
                       abandoning export led growth. Some supply-side
                       measures are needed in the present global
                       uncertainties. To supplement these with domestic
                       demand stimulus, one should look towards the primary
                       and secondary sectors, which have greater capacity to
                       absorb less skilled labour. Dr Abedian, however,
                       noted that activity in the secondary sector is
                       different from 10 years ago, with greatly diminished
                       labour intensity.


                       Ms Gordon added that the business sector would be
                       happy with smaller tax cuts if government had the
                       capacity to spend more to alleviate poverty or
                       strengthen SA's growth rate - stability is
                       increasingly seen as a priority.


                 (ii)  Inflation


                       The Committee questioned whether there was a conflict
                       between trying to increase domestic demand and
                       containing inflation. Ms Gordon's opinion was that
                       there was no conflict at present. The Reserve Bank
                       should cut interest rates as soon as possible. She
                       noted that the position of the Reserve Bank was
                       severely complicated by the present value of the Rand
                       and the threat of war, with the possibility of oil
                       prices spiking at $40 per bbl.


                       Asked how inflation policy could be managed
                       differently, her view was that inflation targeting
                       should have been on hold until pre-privatisation
                       price increases introduced by rationalisations by
                       parastatals had been absorbed.


                       Asked about the effects of privatisation, Prof
                       Okeahalam replied that privatisation has value as an
                       effective efficiency policy, but called for a robust
                       regulatory framework.


                       Dr Abedian's view was that the main focus should not
                       be privatisation per se, but with promotion of
                       competition and an appropriate regulatory frameworks.
                       He stressed that government should not simply replace
                       a public monopoly with a private monopoly, which
                       improves neither pricing nor delivery.


               (iii)   Cash surpluses


                       The Committee enquired about cash surpluses in the
                       corporate sector due to a lack of domestic investment
                       opportunities. Ms Gordon agreed that they existed,
                       but stated that this was because of a lack of
                       investment opportunities internationally as well as
                       in SA. Such money used to be taken offshore, but
                       perception of the international environment has
                       changed.


                       Ms Gordon felt that if government took the initiative
                       in investing in capital expenditure and these
                       projects were perceived as raising SA's growth, then
                       the corporate sector was likely to become involved in
                       the form of public-private partnerships.


               (iv)    Growth and the need for skills


                       The Committee raised the issue of how government
                       could continue to drive tertiary sector expansion
                       since it is our main growth area, while at the same
                       time stimulating the primary and secondary sector
                       because those impact more strongly on the
                       unemployment problem. Dr Abedian commented that there
                       are no shortcuts in this regard. The national skills
                       shortfall is an intergenerational problem, requiring
                       retraining and commitment to growing existing skills
                       as much as possible, while taking care of those who
                       will never gain the skills.
                       There is a real challenge for SETAs to become
                       industry-led, providing usable skills, the kind of
                       training that is genuinely demanded. They must be
                       held accountable for delivery.


                       He criticised the new immigration legislation as
                       inappropriate for an economy with a shortage of
                       expertise, especially since much growth was in the
                       tertiary sector, which needs skilled professionals.
                       Saying xenophobia is costly, he estimated that each
                       skilled immigrant could generate four to eight jobs.


                  (v)  Black Economic Empowerment


                       Asked for views on the Budget's BEE measures, Prof
                       Okeahalam responded that a number of countries have a
                       history of adopting such policies. A common problem
                       is that only a small number of elites benefit from
                       BEE, with intended beneficiaries often not reached.


                       Dr Abedian's view is that BEE is part of the
                       normalisation of South Africa, and will take some
                       time. The present risk is one of maldistribution of
                       wealth and income, making BEE a dangerous, double-
                       edged sword. In general, where the tertiary sector is
                       dominant, the economy is increasingly knowledge-
                       based, with knowledge as the major wealth creator. In
                       efforts to broaden BEE, the focus must remain on
                       effectively increasing and dispersing knowledge and
                       thus wealth.


         2. BUDGET 2003/04: PERSPECTIVES ON TAX POLICY


              Representatives of the National Treasury and SARS presented
              the tax proposals set out in the Budget, outlining their
              projected impact and setting the strategic context of medium-
              term tax policy. SARS' compliance strategy, use of
              depreciation as incentive, exchange control amnesty and their
              effect on taxpayers were discussed at some length. Prof
              Matthew Lester and Prof Pieter le Roux gave their respective
              views on the effectiveness of tax policy to date and of
              potential policy developments.


              (a) National Treasury


                  A representative of Treasury outlined the background to
                  the present tax proposals, setting out their global
                  context and objectives. He noted that personal income tax
                  (PIT) relief has been a feature of Budget policy since
                  1995, with R49 billion given in relief over the past
                  eight years, and corporate tax having dropped 10 per
                  cent, to 30 per cent, since 1994. These rates compare
                  favourably to the rest of the world, notably the EU and
                  OECD economies.


                  He outlined the 2003/04 tax relief proposals and their
                  objectives (See Section B3 above). Direct tax provisions,
                  general business tax stimulus measures and indirect tax
                  provisions were presented and motivated. Notable elements
                  were exemption of foreign dividends from taxation and a
                  six-month amnesty period for repatriating or declaring
                  illegally exported assets.


              (b) The South African Revenue Service


                  The SARS presentation outlined the revenue position to
                  date, and the target for 2003/04:


                  *    The revised estimate is R11,6 billion above the
                       Budget estimate - R280,1 billion compared to R268,5
                       billion.


                  *    For the past six years SARS has had collections
                       above its targets, with total additional collections
                       at R46,8 billion.


                  *    Additional collections have assisted in the reform
                       of tax rates and increased expenditure programmes.


                  *    The revenue target for 2003/04 is R310 billion.


                  SARS unveiled its Compliance Strategy, as based on
                  education to create a culture of compliance; enforcement
                  through high visibility and targeted campaigns; and a
                  service culture, focusing on efficiency and
                  communication.


                  The foreign exchange amnesty was motivated as having low
                  penalties relative to international standards, and easy
                  accessibility.


              (c) Prof Matthew Lester


                  Professor Matthew Lester of Rhodes University presented a
                  review of the period between the 2000/01 and the 2003/04
                  Budgets. He argued that last year was a year of
                  consolidation, while the coming year is one in which
                  major legislation comes into force.


                  He reviewed in detail the following changes:


                  *    Individuals' tax position, showing that payers of
                       PIT are clear gainers over five years, despite the
                       fact that a number of loopholes have been closed over
                       the period.


                  *    Elderly and retired taxpayers he calculates to be
                       entitled to R62 222 free of tax, and obliged to pay
                       only 14,9 per cent on R155 000 under the current
                       proposals.


                  *    Corporate tax collections have increased in real
                       terms by more than a third since 2000. Major factors
                       are the introduction of capital gains tax (CGT), the
                       residence-based tax system (RBT), and the disallowing
                       of personal service companies, as well as the
                       increase in SARS' efficiency.


                  *    The change in residential property rules means that
                       individual ownership, as opposed to trust or company
                       membership, will from this year pay far less in tax
                       and duties when selling property.


              (d) Prof Pieter le Roux


                  Prof Pieter le Roux of UWC presented an argument in
                  favour of increasing VAT to 21 per cent in order to
                  finance a basic income grant of R100 per person.


                  He argued that the VAT increase would bite hardest on the
                  richest five per cent of the population, despite their
                  also receiving the BIG, allowing a net benefit to the
                  poorest 80 per cent of the populace. He felt this would
                  be an effective measure to alleviate poverty, while
                  acknowledging the practical problems in implementing it.


              (e) Issues interrogated by the Committee


                  (i)  Impact of tax cuts


                       The Committee enquired whether the Treasury is
                       realising the desired benefits of the tax cuts given
                       so far to taxpayers, for example in higher private
                       savings or increased consumption.


                       Individual savings behaviour over the last five years
                       has shown improvement, officials indicated, and
                       Treasury is working on a modelling exercise that may
                       provide hard data. Meanwhile, it is difficult to be
                       exact as to how many changes in economic activity are
                       direct effects of tax cuts.


                       However, over the past two years household
                       consumption expenditure in South Africa has been
                       robust, growing in excess of 3 per cent per annum.
                       Treasury believes that the tax cuts did underpin the
                       growth in household consumption expenditure, because
                       the household sector has not yet been saving.


                  (ii) Value-Added Tax (VAT)


                       The Committee expressed relief that VAT had not been
                       increased, and wanted to know if this was premised on
                       the assumption that no VAT increase compensated for
                       inflationary increases.


                       Treasury noted that it was loathe to tamper with VAT,
                       as this would open up a debate which might not be
                       productive. South Africa's VAT model is very much
                       designed to support the enforcement capacity of SARS.
                       Currently it contributes some 24-25 per cent to
                       overall revenue, which is the world average. South
                       Africa's relatively low VAT rate of 14 per cent still
                       contributes 6,5 per cent of GDP.


                  (iii)      The foreign exchange amnesty


                       Prof Lester sparked some discussion by suggesting
                       that the amnesty might not succeed if perceived as a
                       witch hunt. The Committee noted that all applications
                       for amnesty would be dealt with confidentially,
                       because this is how SARS is obliged to operate.


                       The Commissioner responded that the amnesty move was
                       about cleaning up SARS' history and its act, and
                       making sure that it broadens the tax base. It also
                       serves to create a new kind of compliance culture in
                       South Africa and to ensure that, as of the 2003
                       return, SARS gets a different set of figures that
                       appear on its books, which it can then take forward
                       from that point.


                 (iv)  Viability of BIG


                       The Committee asked whether any serious work had been
                       done on the macro-economic impact of a social income
                       grant versus tax relief, because this seems to be at
                       the heart of the current debate in South Africa.


                       This work, which is ongoing within Treasury, is more
                       comprehensive than the BIG concept because it
                       considers the entirety of social security provision
                       in South Africa. However, Treasury is also guided by
                       the need to give as many people as possible an
                       opportunity to participate meaningfully in economic
                       activity, guiding them away from dependence on
                       welfare.


                       Prof le Roux argued for raising a BIG by increasing
                       indirect taxes, notably VAT. There was some debate
                       about whether this would be harshly punitive to the
                       poor, a larger proportion of whose spending would be
                       in respect of VAT, even without calculating
                       distribution costs, before BIG benefits reached them.


                  (v)  Urban Development Zones
                       The Committee asked whether Treasury has focused on
                       depreciation because it is believed to be a more
                       effective stimulator than income tax adjustments.
                       With the urban zone depreciation provisions, Treasury
                       incentivises a specific behaviour, with the aim of
                       channelling investment towards declining urban
                       centres. It is a highly targeted approach. Treasury
                       has clearly limited it to some 13 areas major areas,
                       where the biggest impact can be made.


                       Prof Lester, however, noted that numerous examples of
                       targeted incentives have had unintended consequences,
                       been ineffective or even corrupting.


                 (vi)  The fuel levy
                       The Committee posed questions about the impact of an
                       increased fuel levy. Public sector transport would be
                       severely affected, and the Committee asked about the
                       impact on long-distance commuters.


                       The Treasury replied:


                       *     The taxi industry has the oldest stock of
                           vehicles, mainly using leaded fuel, and these
                           would need to be upgraded. There may be a time
                           lag, but taxi recapitalisation will happen this
                           year.


                       *     The contingency reserve of R8 billion over the
                           next three MTEF years is available for taxi
                           recapitalisation, after which taxis would most
                           probably be utilising diesel-powered engines.


                       *     Tax policy has taken into account incentives to
                           use larger vehicles using more efficient
                           (diesel) fuel.


               (vii)   Corporate tax rate


                       The Committee raised the issue of whether a reduction
                       in the corporate tax rate was desirable. Treasury
                       responded that numerous international instances show
                       a convergence of corporate tax rates at 30-32 per
                       cent.


                       Treasury is unconvinced by the argument that the rate
                       should be reduced:
                       *     Instead it favours creating a stable investment
                           environment with attractive accelerated
                           depreciation allowances. With the proposed
                           increased depreciation regime, effective tax
                           rates faced by companies in the first year could
                           effectively be zero, with subsequent tax rates
                           for South Africa companies being as low as 5-15
                           per cent.


                       *     Investors, whether domestic or international,
                           prefer predictability. Where some countries
                           dropped company tax to unsustainable levels,
                           only to increase it again, investors recoiled -
                           consistency is investor-friendly.
                       *     There is a also a premium willingly paid for
                           the business environment: South Africa has an
                           excellent banking regulatory environment and
                           profit opportunities relative to the developing
                           world.


                       Prof Lester also took the view that lower company tax
                       was not the biggest drawcard for investment. He felt
                       that investors are not scared away by taxes as much
                       as by the economic climate of a country.


                  (viii)     Revenue estimates and increased collections


                       The Committee enquired whether South Africa has
                       reached a plateau in the rising trend of its revenue
                       collections. SARS believes not, noting that some 48
                       hours after the amnesty provision was announced,
                       almost R3 billion was already on the table,
                       indicating a significant amount of unreported money
                       still extant.


                       The Tax Gap Project has given SARS a much better
                       understanding of where the revenue leaks are,
                       enabling a more targeted approach this year. The
                       Commissioner responded that SARS does hold a view on
                       the actual quantum of the tax gap, loosely estimating
                       it at R30 billion.


                       The Committee asked why SARS continued to have a
                       problem with overruns on its revenue estimates. The
                       Commissioner replied that it was due to the
                       unpredictability of economic endeavour, citing the
                       effects of unexpected inflation, fuel, the resources
                       sector and war on 2002's estimates.


                       While forecasting of corporate tax is most difficult
                       because of all the external factors impacting on it,
                       Treasury believes that South Africa has a good record
                       when it comes to indirect taxes, and in many cases
                       South Africa is out R30 million on a tax base of R16
                       billion.


                 (ix)  Ringfencing of secondary trade losses


                       The Committee raised a number of points and concerns
                       about the ringfencing of secondary trade losses, and
                       asked if this would not unfairly penalise certain
                       taxpayers who have a legitimate secondary trade,
                       notably in agriculture.


                       SARS emphasised that the proposed legislation would
                       not impact on someone who is in the business of
                       farming, but would impact on someone who is in the
                       secondary business of farming. In the second case,
                       SARS argues, they could use tax write-offs unfairly
                       to compete with people who not able to exploit the
                       tax system. The fiscus was being undermined by people
                       who used secondary trade tax for a tax write-off. It
                       was these people who were the target of the
                       ringfencing.


                  (x)  Complexity and coherence of the tax system
                       The Committee asked for comment on how coherent the
                       tax system is as a macroeconomic instrument. Prof
                       Lester's view was that SARS had never worked as
                       effectively as now, to the extent of generating
                       taxpayer paranoia and terror.


                       Asked whether the system was over-complex, Prof
                       Lester noted that he was not sure that the law could
                       be simplified. By international standards, it is
                       relatively simple. It had increased in complexity in
                       order to align itself with international standards.
                       The cost of compliance on the government side has
                       shown a positive return, but has become much harder
                       for businesses - an unfortunate effect of the use of
                       best practice.
         3. SUBMISSIONS BY ORGANISED BUSINESS AND LABOUR


              (a) The Black Business Council (BBC)


                  The BBC was represented by Ms Futhi Mtoba of Deloitte &
                  Touche, Mr Mandla Maleka, Chief Economist: Eskom
                  Treasury, and Mr Veli Ntombela, Director Taxation: Sizwe
                  Ntsaluba.


                  The BBC broadly endorsed the Budget, specifically
                  referring to the child support grant, government's
                  position on inflation targeting, relaxation of exchange
                  controls and the proposed amnesty and the 4% increase in
                  government consumption. A major element of their
                  presentation involved SMME-friendly proposals to be taken
                  into account in the 2004/05 budget.


                  (i)  Small business support measures


                       The BBC felt that the tax dispensation of SMMEs
                       requires review, specifically:


                       *     Redefinition of "small business" in the Income
                           Tax Act, as the BBC felt this was too narrow.


                       *     Further simplification of tax compliance
                           requirements.


                       *     Further extension of the turnover ceiling.


                       The accelerated depreciation provisions for urban
                       development areas would help small business in these
                       areas. It went on to call for extension of these
                       concessions to other sectors, such as tourism.


               (ii)    Black Economic Empowerment


                       The BBC believes that the proposed R10 billion BEE
                       support funding will foster economic participation
                       for the deprived sector of the economy. It awaits
                       details of the funding strategy, and requested that
                       it be consulted on the process of disbursement.


                       The moves to promote corporate reorganisation should
                       include BEE transactions, and the BBC proposed:


                       *     A shareholding test of at least 50% (and not
                           75%) for BEE companies.


                       *     That inclusion of community trusts should also
                           be considered.


               (iii)   Poverty relief and social support


                       The BBC appreciated the increase in transfers to
                       pensioners and disabled people. It put forward the
                       following proposals:


                       *     Reducing the pensionable age for women by 2-5
                           years (from 60).


                       *     Next year's tax bracket adjustment should
                           concentrate on lower earners, enabling savings
                           from this to support a lower pensionable age for
                           women.
                       *     Rather than considering increasing the eligible
                           age for child support grants above 14 years in a
                           future MTEF, equivalent funding should rather be
                           allocated to ensure that primary education is
                           genuinely free.


              (b) Die Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut (AHI)


                  Mr Jac Laubscher (Chief Economist: Sanlam) and Ms Anne-
                  Marie Wiehahn (Sasol Economist) presented Die Afrikaanse
                  Handelsinstituut's (AHI) submission to the Committee.


                  The AHI feels that the Budget enhances South Africa's
                  appeal to international investment through the proposed
                  urban areas depreciation allowances; exchange control
                  relaxation; the strong increase in infrastructure
                  expenditure; and increased spending on policing.


                  The AHI foresees that:


                  *    Inflationary pressure could come from an increase in
                       the government wage bill and a pickup in domestic
                       demand.


                  *    A short-term depreciation of the Rand will follow
                       exchange control relaxation, with medium-term
                       stabilisation. An IMF study suggested an optimal
                       value of the Rand at R8,80 to the US Dollar.


              (c) South African Chamber of Business (SACOB)


                  Karl Muller, Des Kruger, John Lewis and Adv Meiring
                  presented on behalf of SACOB.


                  SACOB called for simplification of the tax system and
                  reduction of the administrative burden on taxpayers. It
                  asked for a familiarisation period for business people to
                  implement tax regime changes, and clarify new
                  developments in foreign dividend taxation and capital
                  gains tax.


                  Some upward pressure on inflation is expected from this
                  Budget's tax relief measures, but SACOB emphasised the
                  negative impact on price stability of large public
                  enterprises' annual tariff increases.


                  Recommendations and representations by SACOB included:
                  *    The present depreciation allowance discriminates
                       between suppliers of goods on the one hand and
                       services on the other. SACOB proposes that this be
                       equalised.


                  *    Adjustments to personal income tax effectively
                       offset bracket creep, and this should become a
                       standard policy for the national budget.


                  *    SACOB called for further increase in the expenditure
                       on transport infrastructure, to promote international
                       competitiveness.


                  *    SACOB questioned SARS' decision to regulate "tax
                       practitioners" and to clamp down on tax avoidance, as
                       minimising one's tax burden was well within the law,
                       and taxpayers should be allowed to employ the
                       services of advisors not linked to the SARS in any
                       way.


                  *    On ringfencing of secondary trades, SACOB argued
                       that owners of a legitimate second business would be
                       penalised for the sins of a few. It added that the
                       distinction under tax law is usually between active
                       and passive incomes, and not the different sources of
                       income.


              (d) Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA)


                  Ms Gretchen Humphries (FEDUSA Parliamentary Officer)
                  presented the submission.


                  FEDUSA raised concerns about the trend of unemployment in
                  South Africa. It welcomed increased social spending by
                  the State, seeing this as a vehicle for increased
                  development, especially where it is labour-intensive.


                  FEDUSA feels that the Budget did not adequately address
                  HIV/AIDS, and feels that greater provision should be made
                  to fund the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS.


                  FEDUSA recommends:


                  *    That a detailed and specific budget be outlined for
                       HIV/AIDS treatment/prevention.


                  *    Intensification of HIV/AIDS awareness campaigns.


                  *    That Government should implement a treatment
                       strategy outlining the availability of anti-
                       retrovirals.


                  *    That funds should be specifically allocated for the
                       empowerment of Health Care Professionals, for the
                       training of lay counsellors and for community
                       upliftment programmes.


                  *    A legislative framework should be established by
                       Government to ensure all employers negotiate and
                       adopt workplace policies on HIV/AIDS.


              (e) Focus areas of discussion in Committee


                  (i)  Support for SMMEs and BEE


                       The Committee focused on the issue of SMME support,
                       endorsing the fact that the BBC put forward proposals
                       for future budgetary policy, and the extension of the
                       legal definition of SMMEs, and enquired about further
                       action to remove obstacles here.


                       The BBC is investigating a number of legal and other
                       changes that will increase SMMEs' success rate,
                       feeling the economic environment opens opportunities
                       for employment creation.


                       The BBC also said it was preparing submissions to
                       SARS on the problems that SMMEs have with paying VAT,
                       since the current lump sum affects their liquidity.
                 (ii)  Women's pensions


                       The Committee queried the constitutional implications
                       of reducing the pensionable age for women only. An
                       additional concern was whether it would have the
                       effect of shortening women's careers, which generally
                       start later than men's. The BBC responded that the
                       retirement age for men is 65 and for women is 60, an
                       existing differential. In South Africa's unique
                       circumstances it could be an effective addition to
                       social spending.


                       He added that to stimulate savings the government
                       would have to allow for more disposable income.


               (iii)   Skills levy
                       Responding to a request for feedback on the skills
                       levy, the BBC said it found that not very many people
                       are making use of it. Part of the problem was lack of
                       public awareness, due to a lack of information and
                       education on the levy.


                 (iv)  Targeted child benefits


                       On the BBC's proposal not to extend the child support
                       grant to children over 14, but instead use the money
                       for free primary education, the BBC said in response
                       to a question that their motivation was that intended
                       beneficiaries often are not the ones receiving the
                       benefits. Ensuring free schooling would be one method
                       of ensuring that the funding reaches those it was
                       intended for.


     D.     Oral submissions


         The following people made oral submissions before the Committee,
         some in their personal capacity.  These submissions are available
         on request from the Committee Section of Parliament.


         1. Mr J Josie, Deputy Chairperson: Finance and Fiscal Commission.
         2. Mr B Khumalo, Finance and Fiscal Commission.
         3. Dr H Fast, Manager: Parliamentary Office, Finance and Fiscal
              Commission.
         4. Mr C van Gass, Finance and Fiscal Commission.
         5. Mr I Momoniat, DDG: Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations.
         6. Mr V Khahle, Legal Services: Intergovernmental Fiscal
              Relations.
         7. Prof M Lester, Rhodes University, Tax Expert.
         8. Prof P Le Roux, University of the Western Cape, Tax Expert.
         9. Dr I Abedian, Macroeconomist: Standard Corporate Merchant Bank.
         10.     Prof C Okeahalam, Wits University, Macroeconomist.
         11.     Ms S Gordan, Macroeconomist.
         12.     Ms M Mtomba, Black Business Council.
         13.     Mr V Ntombela, Black Business Council.
         14.     Mr M Maleka, Black Business Council.
         15.     Mr J Laubscher, Die Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut.
         16.     Ms A Wiehahn, Die Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut.
         17.     Mr Karl Muller, Chairperson: SACOB Taxation Committee.
         18.     Mr Des Kruger, Member Taxation Committee.
         19.     Mr John Luss, Deputy Chairperson: SACOB Economic Affairs
              Committee.
         20.     Adv Abri Meiring, Chairperson: SACOB Parliamentary
              Committee.
         21.     Mrs Peggy Drotskie - SACOB Director: Policy.
         22.     Ms G Humphries, Parliament Officer: FEDUSA.

                           TUESDAY, 18 MARCH 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent:


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 18 March 2003:


         (i)     Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Fourth
              Amendment Bill [B 69B - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 74).


         NOTE: If the Bill is assented to by the President, the name of the
         Act will be Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment
         Act, 2003.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs:


     (a)    Southern African Development Community Protocol on Politics,
         Defence and Security Co-operation, tabled in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Protocol.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products Export
     Control Board for the year ended 31 December 2001.
COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests on the
     Breach of the Code of Conduct by the hon Mr Yengeni, MP, dated 14 March
     2003:


     Present


     Chairperson Mr L Landers


     Present


     National Assembly


     Chikane M M (ANC) Green L M (ACDP) Seaton S (IFP)
     Cronin J P (ANC)  Jassat E E (ANC) Solomon G(ANC)
     De Lille P (PAC)  Radebe B A (ANC)
     Ditshetelo P H (UCDP)   September R K(ANC)
     NCOP
     Kolweni Z S (ANC) Lubidla E N (ANC)      Mkhaliphi J (ANC)
     Nkuna C (ANC)     Ackermann C (NNP)


     The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests met at 10:00 on 14
     March 2003 in -Room V226, Parliament, to consider the complaint against
     Mr Yengeni.


     Background


     1.     On the 25 March 2001 the Sunday Times carried a detailed article
         on Mr Yengeni's purchase of the ML 320 Mercedes Benz, Registration
         CA 802333 chassis number WDC 16315424048577.


     Complaint


     2.     On 27 March 2001 Mr Gibson referred the matter to the Joint
         Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests for investigation. He
         requested that Mr Yengeni be asked to explain the following:
     2.1    Non-disclosure of benefits exceeding R350.00; this included the
         free use of a motor vehicle for a lengthy period and on the
         appropriateness of the Chairperson of the Defence Committee
         entering into a contractual arrangement with a company itself or
         whose affiliates were involved in tendering for arms.


     2.2    Mr Gibson also questioned the non-disclosure of Mr Yengeni's
         home erf number 18250 in Milnerton.


     Perusal of disclosure form


     3.     Mr Yengeni's disclosure form for 1998-2000 reveals that Mr
         Yengeni did not disclose the benefits as required in terms of
         section 8(f) which require that the nature and source of any other
         benefit of a material nature and the value of the benefit must be
         disclosed. Mr Yengeni's 1996 disclosure form contained details of
         his Milnerton home.
     Mr Yengeni's response to the allegations


     4.     On 18 April 2001 Mr Yengeni responded in a letter to the
         Committee to the allegations. He stated that the vehicle was
         legitimately purchased and that the acquisition did not in any way
         amount to a gift or a donation. Mr Yengeni further informed the
         Committee that he had disclosed his home in 1996.


     Interim Report of the Committee, tabled in the National Assembly on 5
     June 2001


     5.     In respect of non-disclosure of his home the Committee found:


         (a)     that Mr Yengeni did not comply with the Code


         (b)     however, it agreed that Mr Yengeni's non-compliance was
              not mala fides


     Accordingly the Committee recommended that Mr Yengeni submit details of
     erf 18250 Milnerton by 31 May 2001. [Mr Yengeni subsequently complied
     in this regard.]


     5.1    In response to non-disclosure of the benefit of the motor
         vehicle CA 80233 the Committee agreed:


         (a)     that the allegations were made in the context of the
              Strategic Defence Procurement Process; and


              i.  further noted on 2 November 2000, that the National
                  Assembly accepted the recommendation of the Standing
                  Committee on Public Accounts that a forensic
                  investigation be conducted into allegations of
                  impropriety in relation to this process.
              ii. further noted the Report of the Standing Committee on
                  Public Accounts tabled and adopted by the National
                  Assembly on 4 April 2001, that such an investigation was
                  being co-ordinated by the Office of the Auditor General
                  and comprises the Office of the Public Protector and the
                  Investigating Directorate for Serious Economic Offences
                  in the Office of the National Director of Public
                  Prosecutions.


             iii. believes that the subject matter of the complaint falls
                  within the scope and ambit of the above investigation and
                  that a separate investigation of the Committee would
                  traverse the same issues. Therefore a parallel
                  investigation, at that point, into the matter was not
                  desirable.


     Accordingly, the Committee in respect of the above two matters;
     recommended that Parliament should await the Report of the Joint
     Investigation Team; and should consider that Report in order to proceed
     with the complaint.


     Report on the Consideration of the Joint Investigating Report into the
     Strategic Defence Packages


     6.     The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests considered
         the Report of the Investigation into the Strategic Defence
         Packages referred to the Committee on the 14 November 2001 by the
         Speaker of the National Assembly and tabled on 6 December 2001, in
         respect of the allegations against Mr Yengeni.


     6.1    The Report in Chapter 1.3.1.2 (point four in the table) states
         that a criminal case was pending against Mr Yengeni. The opinion
         from the Chief Parliamentary Legal Adviser was, that in terms of
         the sub judice Rule, it would be prudent for the Committee to wait
         for the conclusion of the criminal case before it considered the
         allegation of the non-disclosure of the benefit by Mr Yengeni. The
         Committee agreed to pursue the matter after the conclusion of the
         criminal case against Mr Yengeni.


     Guilty Plea


     7.     Following Mr Yengeni's plea of guilty, case number 14/09193/01
         in the Regional Court for the Regional Division of Northern
         Transvaal held at Pretoria, the Committee at its meeting of 25
         February 2003, resumed its consideration of the complaint against
         Mr Yengeni.


     7.1    Based on the plea of guilty the Committee requested that Mr
         Yengeni be given the opportunity to place his views on record and
         state any possible mitigating factors. Mr Yengeni's attorney
         indicated that he was of the view that he had expected the
         Committee to follow proper procedure. On this basis, a formal
         notice of a hearing was sent to Mr Yengeni, setting out the
         charges against him.


     7.2    Mr Yengeni resigned from Parliament before the date of the
         hearing.


     Resignation


     8.     It is the Committee's view that the complaint against Mr Yengeni
         may not be pursued, as he is no longer a Member of Parliament.


     8.1    The Committee can, however, consider Mr Yengeni's guilty plea
         and express its view on whether he breached the Code of Conduct
         with regard to financial interests.


     8.2    The Committee considered Mr Yengeni's admission that he breached
         the Code and his acknowledgement to the Court that his failure to
         disclose the benefit he received, "constituted a breach of his
         duties and was potentially prejudicial to the integrity and
         reputation of, and trust in Parliament".


     8.3    The Committee notes that Members of Parliament are expected to
         display the highest standards of propriety, and that any deviation
         from those standards of ethical behaviour by Members, results in
         the erosion of public trust in Parliament.


     8.4    It is the Committee's task to ensure that the integrity of
         Parliament is beyond question.


     8.5    The Committee re-iterates that Members of Parliament are
         expected not to take any improper advantage or benefit by virtue
         of the office they hold.


     8.6    On the basis of Mr Yengeni's admission in court, it is the
         Committee's view that his continued participation in Parliament
         would have been inappropriate.  Mr Yengeni's resignation is
         therefore appropriate.
     In addition, the Committee is of the view that Mr Yengeni breached the
     Code of Conduct. Furthermore, the Committee deplores, in the strongest
     terms possible, the damage done to public trust in Parliament by Mr
     Yengeni.


     Review of Code


     9.     The Committee further notes in its consideration of the
         complaint, that a review of the Code and some of its investigation
         procedures are necessary, including:


         (a)     guidelines in the Code of Conduct in respect of discounts
              received by Members;


         (b)     Clarify rules on the acceptance of gifts which constitute
              a conflict of interests;


         (c)     In terms of the procedure developing rules to deal with
              non-cooperation by Members;
         (d)     Assessing the capacity and powers which the Committee
              requires to fulfill its mandate in terms of the Joint Rules;


         (e)     A review of the sub judice rule;


         (f)     The role and functions of the Registrar.


         The Committee unanimously adopted the report.


     Report to be considered.

