---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 April 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-04-10
---

                           THURSDAY, 10 APRIL 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:06.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr J DURAND:  Mevrou die Speaker, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Huis -


     Die probleem van oorbevolking in Suid-Afrikaanse tronke as gevolg van
     probleme binne die strafregstelsel bespreek.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J DURAND:  Madam Speaker, I move without notice -
  That the House -


     Discusses the problem of overpopulation in South African prisons, as a
     result of problems within the criminal justice system.]

       SPONSORSHIP OF BID TO HOST WORLD CUP SOCCER TOURNAMENT IN 2010

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C H F GREYLING: Mevrou die Speaker, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem -


       (a)  dat Anglo American Woensdag die grootste borg geword het van
           Suid-Afrika se bod om in 2010 die WÃªreldbeker-sokkertoernooi aan
           te bied; en


       (b)  dat Anglo American die bodpoging met R15 miljoen borg; en


     2) Anglo American bedank vir hul steun en betrokkenheid, en glo dat
        ander instansies hul voorbeeld sal volg.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C H F Greyling: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that on Wednesday Anglo American became the largest sponsor of
           South Africa's bid to host the World Cup Soccer Tournament in
           2010; and


       (b)  that Anglo American is sponsoring the bid by R15 million; and


  (2) thanks Anglo American for their support and involvement, and believes
       that other bodies will follow their example.]

Agreed to.

                    COMMEMORATION OF DEATH OF CHRIS HANI

                            (Member's Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY (ANC): Madam Speaker, 10 years ago
Comrade Chris Hani was assassinated. Hundreds of thousands of South
Africans poured onto the streets to express their outrage. The assassins
had hoped to trigger a race war and prevent any advance to a nonracial
democracy. The outcome was the exact opposite. As our country teetered on
the brink of crisis, the stalled negotiations recommenced. Within two weeks
a firm date for elections, April 27 one year hence, was set.

Comrade Chris was born into deep rural poverty in the Cofimvaba district.
Against all odds, he matriculated at the age of 16 and graduated from Fort
Hare at the age of 19. Despite his evident talents, which could have been a
passport to a private escape, Hani refused to separate his destiny from
that of the wretched of the earth. He was among the first young men and
women to join the people's army, uMkhonto weSizwe.

Chris Hani was a patriot. His patriotism was not envy for the elitist
privileges of the oppressors. It was not a narrow nationalism. It was an
inclusive and generous patriotism. It was centred on the aspirations and
struggles of the landless peasants and exploited workers. Comrade Chris was
a communist. His communism was deeply linked to his patriotism. He
understood the instability and violence inherent to a society based on
greed. Hani's socialism was not abstract. For him socialism meant homes for
the homeless, food for the hungry and jobs for the unemployed.

Hani would have been proud of the achievements of the ANC and its alliance
since 1994; a major new water project in Cofimvaba, new houses,
electricity, education and health care. He would have been in the front
trenches of the movement's programme of listening to the concerns and
aspirations of the people. The ANC commits itself to taking forward the
struggle for which Comrade Chris lived and died. United in action, let us
push back the frontiers of poverty. Thank you. [Applause.]

          ROLE OF SPECIAL SERVICE BATTALION IN POVERTY ALLEVIATION

                            (Member's Statement)

Brig Gen P J SCHALKWYK (DA): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. On the 1st
of May 1933, during the Depression era, the government established a
special service battalion known as the SSB in Pretoria. Its purpose was to
get unemployed young men off the streets to teach them basic military
skills and to prepare them for employment in civil society. They received
one shilling a day and were generally referred to as the ``bob-a-day-
boys''. The SSB is still in existence and will be celebrating its 70th
anniversary in Bloemfontein on the 1st of May of this year.

Given our high unemployment levels today, perhaps we should revisit this
concept. If we can employ jobless young people in a service which teaches
them practical skills while using them to assist at all levels of
government, in public works programmes, etc, we could reduce poverty and
help the economy. It is time to invest in our young people. It is time for
us to get to work. Thank you.

      WORKING CONDITIONS AND REMUNERATION IN SOCIAL SERVICE PROFESSION

                            (Member's Statement)

Mrs I MARS (IFP): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The social service profession
plays a vital role in addressing many of the social needs of our country.
The current poor remuneration for qualified social workers, the disparities
between salaries offered in the public sector and by NGOs, the challenges
and the stressful conditions under which they render their services have
led to low morale among these very important professionals, many of whom
have left South Africa.

It is this that also discourages competent young people from entering the
profession. The current situation impacts negatively on our communities and
limits the utilisation of the social service practitioners in dealing
efficiently with their daunting workload. Not only do we need to address
the low remuneration for qualified social workers, we also have to deal
with adequate subsidisation for those working for NGOs. I thank you.

         CONFERENCE OF AFRICAN ELECTION COMMISSIONERS HOSTED BY IEC

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms O R KASIENYANE (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Delegates from all over
Africa have gathered in Pretoria for a conference that is hosted by the
Independent Electoral Commission of South Africa. The theme of the
conference is ``Strengthening African Initiatives''. This conference aims
to provide a platform for election commissioners from all over Africa to
explore ways of deepening the capacity of electoral bodies to contribute
towards delivering free and fair elections.

This historic conference is important in that it will directly contribute
to developing practical steps or programmes to deepen democracy and promote
good governance on the continent. We believe that through this initiative
the electoral commissioners will be contributing to the objectives of the
African Union, some of which are to promote democratic principles and
institutions, popular participation and good governance, and to promote and
protect human and peoples' rights in accordance with the African Charter of
Human and Peoples' Rights and other relevant human rights instruments.

The ANC congratulates all delegates who came to our country to attend this
historic conference, and firmly believes that their deliberations will
assist in making this century an African century. I thank you. [Applause.]

                           DA USES MDC TO BASH ANC

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr B L GELDENHUYS (New NP): Madam Speaker, I rise to draw the attention of
the House to a statement made by the shadow Minister of foreign affairs of
the MDC, the biggest opposition party in Zimbabwe, Mr Msila Ndlovu.
According to the Sowetan of today, he said: ``The DA is using the MDC to
bash the ANC, and this is not helping our cause because it clouds the
issues we are raising as MDC.'' [Interjections.]
The shadow Minister of foreign affairs of the MDC is in fact accusing the
DA of using the plight of the people in Zimbabwe to promote their own
political agenda ... [Interjections.] ... and this is borne out by the
distribution of an appalling pamphlet on Zimbabwe by the DA during the
Swellendam by-election. [Interjections.] Yes, one should not be silent
about what is happening in Zimbabwe, and yes, one should criticise the
atrocities committed by Zanu-PF in the strongest possible terms and the New
NP will continue doing exactly that. One should, however, not use the
events in Zimbabwe to promote one's political agenda as the DA is doing
currently. [Interjections.] [Applause.] And one should not criticise what
is happening in Zimbabwe in such a manner that it will damage the cause of
the MDC, and again the DA is the guilty party. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Order, hon members.

            SORRY STATE OF MABOPANE MOTOR VEHICLE TESTING STATION

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr J T MASEKA (UDM): Madam Speaker, Mabopane motor  vehicle  testing  ground
...

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Mr J T MASEKA (UDM): ... also being the registering offices of motor
vehicles, is serving many areas in the eastern region of the North West.
Residents are experiencing serious problems at these offices. These
problems are often caused by electricity failures which take days to
restore. Sometimes people are told that computers are down, which also
takes days to fix and people have to go back without being serviced after
waiting the whole day in the hope that electricity and/or computers would
be restored that day.

People take leave from work in order to visit these offices for various
reasons, such as testing for learners' licences, drivers' licences, vehicle
registration, converting drivers' licences to card form, only to find out
that they cannot be assisted, owing to the unavailability of electricity or
owing to computers being down. In the end, members of the public are
compelled to pay heavy fines for not registering or for not paying in time.
Yet the delay in registering or paying was caused by the Department of
Transport.

The UDM calls upon the acting Minister of Transport to visit these offices
to see for himself, rather than receive reports from his officials about
the situation at these offices. Drivers were given until the end of April
to convert their drivers' licences from IDs to card form and many people
are not being helped at these offices because of the problems mentioned
above. This matter should be attended to as a matter of urgency.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

                   PROVISION OF CLEAN WATER BY GOVERNMENT

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnu N B FIHLA (ANC): Somlomo, ilali yase-Vaal Bank ngase-Lady Frere, eMpuma
Koloni, ifumana amanzi acocekileyo. I-Vaal Bank Water Supply Scheme yiyo
ethi izise la manzi acocekileyo. URhulumente ufake imali engangezigidi
ezili-18 kule projekthi, kwaye isigaba sesibini sayo siza kugqitywa
kwiinyanga ezimbini. Le nto iza kwenza ukuba abantu abali-1 022 bakwazi
ukufumana amanzi acocekileyo.

URhulumente okhokelwa nguKhongolozi uthabatha amanyathelo aqinisekisa ukuba
abantu bayawafumana amanzi acocekileyo. Le yinxalenye yamanyathelo
okwakhela bonke abantu beli ubomi obungcono. Ukufumaneka kwamanzi kuthetha
ukuba abantu abayi kuphinda basele amanzi asetyenziswa nazizilwanyana, nto
leyo eyenza ukuba bafumane izifo ezifana notyatyazo. Ukufumaneka kwala
manzi kuza kwenza ukuba impilo yabantu iphucuke. Ukufumaneka kwamanzi
acocekileyo kubonakalisa ukuzimisela kukaRhulumente ukuqinisekisa ukuba
abemi ababengahoywanga ngurhulumente wocalucalulo baya kungcamla kule
nkululeko yabantu bonke. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
member's statement follows.)
[Mr N B FIHLA: Madam Speaker, the Vaal Bank village near Lady Frere in the
Eastern Cape gets clean water. The Vaal Bank Water Supply Scheme supplies
this clean water. The Government allocated an amount of R18 million for
this project and the second phase will be completed in two months. This
will see to it that 1 022 people receive clean water.

The ANC-led Government is taking steps that ensure that people do get  clean
water. These are some of the initiatives that seek to better  the  lives  of
people. Getting water means that people will not drink with  animals  again,
something that gives them diseases and diarrhoea. This will also  result  in
a better life for people. Availability of clean water shows  the  commitment
of the Government to ensure that citizens, who were not  cared  for  by  the
previous racist government, do indeed benefit from this free country.  Thank
you. [Applause.]]

                 SERVICE DELIVERY LEAVES MUCH TO BE DESIRED

                            (Member's Statement)
Mrs R M SOUTHGATE (ACDP): Madam Speaker, the various Budget Votes currently
before Parliament reflect the additional allocation and spending patterns
of national, provincial and local government departments.

On a recent talk show on the Budget, callers from Mpumalanga complained
that the state of education has not changed. Schools were built to last for
15 years only, but have now been standing for 20 years. School
infrastructure has not improved and they are in dire need of repair and
amenities. The shortage of teachers is still a big problem and the teacher-
pupil ratios are way too high for effective teaching.

Other issues raised were similar to those affecting people in many other
provinces in South Africa on a day-to-day basis: hospitals in rural areas
are still in a state of disrepair; crime is still rampant despite the high-
profile efforts of the police in the media, and gangsterism is out of
control on the Cape Flats; the licensing scams continue despite the new
card system, and all sorts of corruption can still be found in all nine
provinces of South Africa. Unless capacity at the local government level is
improved dramatically, people will continue to suffer, though the money is
there to assist them.

Drastic steps need to be taken in order to address the serious lack of
service delivery to our communities. Government must also employ personnel
in official positions on merit, regardless of their political affiliation.
Only if appointments are apolitical will the situation improve at the local
government level. I thank you.

                                 HATE SPEECH

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF): Mevrou die Speaker, dit is reg dat Mnr Marthinus
van Schalkwyk, Premier van die Wes-Kaap, die diskriminasie teen die bruin
skoonheidsterapeut, Mej Langenhoven, by die Menseregtekommissie aangemeld
het. Om aan kiesers te wys hoe objektief hy teenoor alle groepe optree,
maak hy vanoggend die bewering dat dit sy en die Nuwe NP se optrede was wat
daartoe gelei het dat president  Mbeki ook die slagspreuk, ``Kill the Boer!
Kill the farmer!'' gerepudieer het. Wat is die ware feite?

Op 18 Junie 2002 het die VF 'n amptelike klag van haatspraak by die
Mensregtekommissie oor diÃ© slagspreuk gelÃª. Die MRK het beslis dat dit nie
haatspraak is nie, waarteen die VF amptelik appÃ¨l aangeteken het. Die appÃ¨l
van die VF word vroeg volgende maand deur die onafhanklike tribunaal
aangehoor. Verder het die leier van die VF, Dr Pieter Mulder, ook op 18
Junie 2002 in die President se begrotingspos in die Parlement na hierdie
slagspreuk verwys en die President gevra om dit te repudieer.

In sy repliek op 19 Junie sÃª die President:


  We must support the hon Pieter Mulder. No one has the right to call for
  the killing of farmers or Boers, nor the right to threaten violence to
  advance their particular goals.
Die VF vind dit ironies dat Mnr van Schalkwyk geen klagte oor die
slagspreuk, ``Kill the farmer! Kill the Boer!'' gelÃª het nie, maar dit nou
as 'n oorwinning vir hom en sy party wil opeis. Dit ruik na tipiese Nuwe NP
politieke opportunisme, wat die rede is vir die huidige politieke krisis in
daardie party. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans member's
statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF): Madam Speaker, it is correct that Mr Marthinus van
Schalkwyk, Premier of the Western Cape, reported the discrimination against
the coloured beauty therapist, Miss Langenhoven, to the Human Rights
Commission. In order to show the voters how objectively he treats all
groups, he claimed this morning that it was his and the New NP's
intervention which also led to President Mbeki's repudiation of the slogan
``Kill the Boer! Kill the Farmer!'' What are the true facts?

On 18 June 2002 the FF lodged an official complaint of hate speech with the
Human Rights Commission regarding that slogan. The HRC determined that it
was not hate speech, against which the FF lodged an official appeal. The
FF's appeal will be heard early next month by the independent tribunal.
Furthermore, during the President's Vote in Parliament on 18 June 2002, the
leader of the FF, Dr Pieter Mulder, also referred to this slogan, asking
the President to repudiate it.

In his reply on 19 June the President said:


  We must support the hon Pieter Mulder. No one has the right to call for
  the killing of farmers or Boers, nor the right to threaten violence to
  advance their particular goals.

The FF finds it ironic that Mr Van Schalkwyk never lodged a complaint about
the slogan ``Kill the Farmer! Kill the Boer!'', but that he now wants to
claim this as a victory for himself and his party. That smells of typical
New NP political opportunism, which is the reason for the current political
crisis in that party. [Interjections.]]

                   THE EFFECTS OF WAR ON THE IRAQI PEOPLE
                            (Member's Statement)

Mr D J SITHOLE (ANC): Madam Speaker, three journalists were killed in the
shelling of Palestine Hotel in Baghdad. Their deaths add to the number of
those of unarmed civilians, women and children who have been injured and
lost their limbs and their lives. This wanton destruction of life, property
and social and cultural life of the Iraqi people is a direct result of
aggressive foreign policy of the United States and Britain. This policy has
worsened the pain of the Iraqi people who suffer as a result of United
Nations-imposed sanctions which have already led to the shortage of basic
food, necessities and medical supplies.

This war has led to a further shortage of food, water and medicine. To date
the US and UK forces that have illegally occupied and waged a war against
Iraqi people have not discovered any weapons of mass destruction. This war
is not sanctioned by the UN Security Council. This act of aggression by the
United States and Britain is neither about weapons of mass destruction nor
about the liberation of the Iraqi people from tyranny. It is about the US's
desire to control oil reserves of Iraq. Through the war both these
countries have demonstrated that they are prepared to take the lives of
innocent people, babies and civilians to pursue their imperialist
interests.

The aggressive action of the US and UK governments has done great damage to
the UN system of collective security built over the past 57 years. It is
likely to cause instability and make the world less safe for us all.

The ANC calls on all peace-loving people to reject ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, our statements are running over time. You are more
than 20 seconds over time now. Please, will you take your seat.

Mr D J SITHOLE (ANC): Speaker, will my statement be printed in full?

The SPEAKER: Yes, we print statements, if we do print them at all.

Mr D J SITHOLE (ANC): Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                  CONCLUSION OF THE CONGOLESE PEACE PROCESS

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms R TALJAARD (DA):  Madam  Speaker,  this  House  applauds  the  successful
conclusion of the inter-Congolese dialogue process at Sun City.

The new constitution which opens the way for a unity government for the DRC
and the swearing-in of President Joseph Kabila are dramatic steps towards
the path of peace, development and democracy, but challenges remain. This
constitution includes provisions enabling the president to rule by decree.
According to the United Nations, new interethnic clashes have tragically
claimed more than 300 lives in the Eastern Ituri region and this loss of
life must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

This region is rich in gold, oil, timber and uranium and continues to be a
target for those who have peddled the Congo's resources on international
markets with no regard for peace or development of the postwar economy of
the DRC.

We wish the members of the Ituri Pacification Commission well in their
efforts to halt the bloodshed and call on all roleplayers, the government
of the DRC and the United Nations to crush the self-enriching elite
networks identified by the UN panel that continue to pillage the DRC's
natural resources for private gain. [Applause.]

                     POLICE ABUSE OF EMERGENCY NO 10111

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr E T FERREIRA (IFP): It is odd that police officials misuse the 10111
number set aside for emergency purposes in order to save people's lives. It
is reported that this number is used by police officials, among other
things, to report that they will be late for work, late for dinner, request
to be picked up for work, request friends to collect things at home and for
many other reasons, such as when they have no air time on their cellphones.

In Pinelands, Cape Town, alone in March this year the radio control office
answered 236Â 000 calls and police responded to 53Â 000 of them. Police
officials have made 1Â 225 personal calls on 10111 in this month and if you
break this down it is 41 personal calls per day made from that number.

It has been the police officers' patient plea that the public should not
use the 10111 number for trivial calls, but it appears now they wanted to
reduce the number of callers in order to use it for themselves. This House
should be concerned about this state of affairs. We need to ensure the
safety of our communities and one of the ways is to utilise 10111 for a
good cause. The police should be helping to fight the scourge of crime and
not be misusing this number. The time spent on dealing with nonemergency
calls could efficiently and profitably be used to save lives of people in
danger.

            TRANSFORMATION IN THE SOUTH AFRICAN EDUCATION SYSTEM

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr N M NENE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance tabled the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Review on 8 April 2003. This report noted that the
ANC Government has made great strides in the transformation of the
education system. The success of the education transformation agenda is
reflected in the following.

Firstly, the improved access of education as reflected in the sharp growth
in enrolment figures; secondly, the accelerated provision of school
infrastructure which was reinforced through the school-building programme;
thirdly, improved learner-educator ratios from 40:1 to 32:1 in 2002;
fourthly, more equitable distribution of resources within the sector;
fifthly, the strengthening of parent and community involvement through
school governing bodies; and lastly, the successful transition from 17
departments to a unified system of school education under the auspices of
nine provinces.

This review also states that the provincial education expenditure has been
growing at 10,1% in the three years up to 2002-03. It will further rise to
R58,9 billion in 2002-03, to R63,4 billion in 2004-05 and reach R67,5
billion in 2005-06.

These great achievements are an indication that the ANC-led Government is
committed to the agenda of eradication of the legacy of apartheid in
education and the establishment of a nonracial, nonsexist and dynamic
education system in a democratic society. These achievements further affirm
the Government's commitment to building a brighter future for our country's
youth. [Applause.]

            THE LOOMING THREAT OF SARS INFECTION IN SOUTH AFRICA
                            (Member's Statement)

Dr S J GOUS (New NP): Madam Speaker, the first unconfirmed case of SARS has
been identified in South Africa. We are now officially directly affected by
this worldwide health threat. This is a serious and dangerous disease which
can have far-reaching implications for South Africa, more so if one
considers what effect Aids might have on the progression of this disease.

The facts are that apparently this outbreak already began last November in
the People's Republic of China, but they swept some facts of the disease
under the carpet. This suppression of information has already cost hundreds
of lives. The Chinese government is guilty of negligence for failing to
inform the WHO and not alerting the rest of the world. The tragedy is that
health authorities in Taiwan reported this situation to the WHO, but as
Taiwan is not a member of the WHO, this did not receive the necessary
attention.

The fact that our Government does not support Taiwan's application for
observer status of the WHO, because they are allowing themselves to be
dictated to by the People's Republic of China, is a travesty of justice and
is placing South African lives at risk. This nightmare is now also a
reality. It is time our Government did the right thing by supporting the
Taiwanese application to become observers at the WHO, a position they
thoroughly deserve in view of their capacity and willingness to co-operate.
Health matters should be above petty politics, as dictated by the WHO's own
constitution. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before asking Ministers to respond, I want to
draw your attention to the fact that gradually over the last few days
statements which should be limited to 1,5 minutes are being extended and I
would ask you to please limit the statements to 1,5 minutes so that one
does not interrupt you. I also want to indicate that we do not print
statements in the Order Paper. They are printed in Hansard but only up to
the point they are delivered. So, your full words of wisdom will only be
printed if they come within the 90 seconds of allotted time.

I will now ask Ministers to respond to any statements directed at them.

                        EXPENDITURE IN THE PROVINCES

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, it is not becoming a habit, but I
sometimes invoke the fact that I am a former schoolteacher. The hon Rhoda
Southgate speaks like a schoolgirl who has been asked to write an essay on
``What's wrong in Mpumalanga?'' When she writes that - a full catalogue of
woes and sins, in particular, to be attributed to this Government - I have
to respond as a former schoolteacher by saying that you have to, in fact,
look at the picture as given to us by hon Nhlanhla Nene, the Chairman of
the Budget Committee.

I think that I will invite the hon Southgate to look at that wonderful
document that has been produced by the Minister of Finance which looks at
the fiscal review and expenditure in the provinces. You will see there not
only what the hon Nene has said about the increase in expenditure, but you
will see that, in fact, we are doing infrastructure development.

I don't know where the hon Southgate was in 1994. I can hazard a guess but
I will not, in the delicacy demanded by being in this House. I will not
hazard a guess then. But, if you realise the enormity of what happened in
Mpumalanga in particular, beyond Marble Hall, you will see that there was
total dereliction. I saw that when I was Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry during the floods that took place three years ago. We were able to
fix up all the damage of the floods within two months, as the national
department together with the provinces.

Maybe we had an enormous amount of money which did not come from the
exchequer only but from developmental assistance in order to give priority
to Mpumalanga. For the first time I can say that, in fact, they have spent
the budget to a great extent, particularly the conditional grants - and I
reminded the House two months ago that I will take political responsibility
if the conditional grants were not spent. The reports show that conditional
grants are now being spent to a great extent more in Mpumalanga than in any
other province.

I think that you ought to come with me then on a Cook's tour of Mpumalanga.

The SPEAKER: Order! I'm sorry, but your two minutes have expired. I think
if we are asking members to stick to their time, we'll ask Ministers as
well.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 9 - Public Enterprises:

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Speaker, hon members, the chairs
and chief executives of state enterprises, ladies and gentlemen, it is said
of Shaka kaSenzangakhona:


  USala kumenyezelwa
  usiShaka kasishayeki
  iLemb' eleqa amanye amalembe ngokukhalipha
  umoy' omzansi womngenelo
  ohlez' ubangenela nangomnyango
  oth' esadl' ezinye adl' ezinye
  wath' edl' ezinye wadl' ezinye

[Applause.]

Those are praises to a mighty warrior and king that echo down through the
ages and which today stir our thoughts towards a warrior of humble birth,
Chris Thembisile Hani. [Applause.] Comrade Chris's lifelong commitment to
the ANC and the SACP's epic struggle to eradicate poverty and place
Africa's poor at the centre of our attention informs, even today, the
policy and programmes of the ANC. Let us recall his cruel assassination but
let us also continue to give flesh and blood to our political democracy by
building a living monument to his memory, enshrined in economic and social
justice for our people.

Allow me to welcome economics students from the Cape tertiary institutions.
I hope that they will be so motivated by today's debate so as to join our
own state enterprises in the not too distant future. [Applause.] A very
special welcome, though, to a comrade and compatriot of African liberation,
Comrade Slava Tetekin. [Applause.] His activism for our liberation
stretches back to the USSR's Afro-Asian Solidarity Committee. Today, he is
the parliamentary secretary to the leader of the Russian Communist Party in
Moscow - Comrade Gennady Zyuganov. [Applause.]

Budget Votes provide single snapshots on the roll of film that is
Government's total programme and activity. The contribution, performance
and restructuring of public enterprises is but one link to the chain of
Government's developmental policy. Because state-owned enterprises are
major instruments of the developmental state, in order to combat poverty,
we have defined and implemented the restructuring of state assets in a
nonideological fashion, seeking the best results by analysing the balance
of evidence on a case-by-case basis, selecting an appropriate method to
achieve our goals.

My report to Parliament today takes a thematic approach that reflects on
the impact of restructuring in its broadest sense. The evidence reveals a
direct link between restructuring and the stronger contribution that SOEs
are making to the development of our country and our continent. State-owned
enterprises are important strategic financial actors in South Africa. Their
restructuring has released financial resources for social and economic
programmes throughout the country.

The major state enterprises play a significant financial role in our
economy. For example, although South Africa's external debt was just over
R32 billion at the end of June 2002, the share of SOE borrowings dropped to
14,9% compared to 46% in 1990. Public corporations contribute about 5,5% of
the GDP. The total surplus of nonfinancial public corporations represented
2,4% of GDP in 2002. They also contributed 10,8% of gross domestic fixed
capital formation. Their credit ratings remain stable.

The financial wellbeing of SOEs is an obvious priority and, assisted by
compliance with the Public Finance Management Act, they must continue. Last
year, our Government carried out 11 transactions to bring their number to
27 since 1997. These included outright disposals, equity sales,
participation of BEE groups, dividend payments, proceeds from the
rationalisation of interest across SOEs and the Telkom IPO. To date - and
these are the most recent figures - we have total proceeds of R35,5
billion, with the National Revenue Fund absorbing just under R22,5 billion.

Income for 2002 was R8,126 billion and was affected by the cancellation of
the Komatiland forestry transaction and slippage in the disposal of
Rosherville vehicles, property and construction, finalisation of Amatola
and Alexkor through legal action, complex negotiations around BAE Systems
and Denel, and liability problems at the remaining Aventura resort. We
expect finalisation of these during the next few months.

Vigorous restructuring activities during 2003 include the 100% disposal of
the loan books of Eskom Finance Company and Transnet Housing that, taken
together, are worth about R6 billion. The partial sale of Freightdynamics
and Autopax to BEE interests, the selection of an SEP for Viamax, the
concession of the Blue Train and the disposal of Transmed's pharmacies will
proceed this year, as will the disposal of Government's remaining interest
in MTN. Transnet's end state will be finalised and we shall continue to
pursue options for South African Airways.

Two major transactions will dominate 2003. First is the preparation to
dispose 30% of Eskom power generation, including a 10% BEE disposal,
subject, as always, to the general market conditions that we would be
foolish to ignore. A more detailed outline of the plans for Eskom is
contained in the parliamentary reply that I provided yesterday and
distributed to members earlier today. The second is the concessioning of
Durban Container Terminal. Government is moving decisively on this front
and requests for qualifications will be issued in June this year once the
preparatory work is complete. There is a high level of interest from the
business community in the opportunities that this programme presents,
including improved performance in the transport sector to support South
African trade.

The reworked National Ports Bill provides for the incorporation of the
National Ports Authority as a Transnet subsidiary before becoming a stand-
alone SOE in the long term, and for an interim regulator to manage the
relationship between the authority and the Transnet group. This reworked
Bill will be returned to Parliament very soon.

A comprehensive concession strategy which covers all aspects of the cargo-
handling terminals operated by the ports operation division of Transnet is
nearly complete. Together with agreed concession architecture principles,
the strategy document will provide the policy and regulatory certainty
necessary for a smooth restructuring process, which are prerequisites for
the start of the intended restructuring transactions. These will, of
course, be made public once they are complete.

We are very mindful of the strategic value of our ports. Their efficient
operation is central to the development of our continent. Port
rehabilitation, modernisation and infrastructure expansion, including
landlocked container terminals and so on, are becoming the norm across
Africa in order to deal with the growing containerisation and increasing
container traffic in Africa.

Government considers the strategic employment of SOE procurement budgets as
an instrument of black economic empowerment that complements their ongoing
transformation. During 2002, Eskom, Transnet and Denel had a combined
discretionary procurement budget of just under R34 billion, of which just
over R9 billion was BEE centred. Transnet committed 54,6% of its
procurement spend to BEE. It was followed by Eskom at 21,2% and Denel at
15%. Eskom and Transnet spread their BEE procurement across manufacturing,
production, resources and professional services. Eskom's BEE spend also
includes a significant 33,7% of coal purchases. Denel plans to increase the
supply of local content products and services from black suppliers to 40%
of manufacturing, including marine freight services, engineering services,
electrical components and raw materials. We will continue to monitor BEE
spending closely to ensure that it is consistent with our goals.

Government believes that the Telkom IPO is the flagship of black economic
empowerment. A short time ago the shares stood at R31,11 on the JSE,
representing a 39% rise in value since the listing. Khulisa shares of R500
and R5Â 000 are now worth R684 and R6Â 938 respectively. In New York the ADR
is trading at 13% above the listing price. Telkom's ordinary shares have
outperformed both the FTSE-JSE TopÂ 40 and the European benchmark index. In
New York they have performed more strongly than their sector, and made
gains in line with the US market.
Over 100Â 000 South Africans took up the retail offer, representing nearly
9% of the total deal. Fifty-eight per cent came through the Khulisa offer
and represents nearly 50% of the total retail money. Women represent 55% of
the Khulisa offer, and 54% of all retail shareholders are women. Sixty-two
per cent of shareholders come from outside Gauteng; almost 18% from KwaZulu-
Natal; 11% from the Western Cape; 7,5% from Limpopo; and 6% each from the
Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga, the Free State and the North West. The Northern
Cape was just under 2%. Over 50% of applicants fall within the age group of
31 to 50 years. A total of 439 stokvels, representing more than 23Â 000
members, also participated.

Progress continues with employment equity. It is extremely encouraging to
note the contribution of SOEs towards education, training and skills
development, which is aimed at scholars and students. Safcol, Eskom,
Transnet and Denel are very active in this exemplary work. Special mention
must be made of the extra efforts to bring women into engineering and
related services.
Improved financial performance and management, including the reorganisation
of pension funds, permitted an expanding commitment to capital expenditure
and investment in infrastructure during 2002. Transnet, Eskom and Denel
spent R9Â billion, R5,6Â billion and R234 million respectively in 2002, and
have budgeted R12,6Â billion, R9,5Â billion and R246Â million respectively for
this current year. Improved longer-term infrastructure investment planning
now stretches, in some instances, over the next 20 years.

Transnet plans to spend over R37,6Â billion in capital expenditure over the
next three years. Metrorail is set to spend some R15Â billion over the next
10 years, including expenditure to improve safety. Spoornet's long-term
projects include a R42Â billion investment in rolling stock, refurbishment
and fixed infrastructure upgrades between 2002 and 2018. Platinum and
ferrochrome plant expansion necessitates a sizable investment in Eskom's
distribution system upgrades. Denel's investment relates mainly to the
replacement and purchase of new equipment required for new contracts.

Too often interesting details of specific projects hide behind financial
data, so let me touch on some of the more interesting projects that these
three SOEs will engage in during 2003 and beyond.

Spoornet's locomotive and wagon fleet is very old, driving up operating
costs, reducing reliability and leading to poor performance. The fixed
infrastructure is also dilapidated and raises the urgent concern about
safety and efficiency. Spoornet seeks to employ more efficient diesel locos
in rural areas to revitalise its branch-line network and boost economic
development in rural areas. The carrying capacity of rail will improve, the
shift from road to rail of heavy freight will accelerate, and the real
pricing of rail services will drop.

Furthermore, 90% of the wagon renewal budget, or R9Â billion, and more than
50%, or about R10Â billion, of the locomotive budget will be spent in South
Africa. Overseas suppliers will transfer skills over the period and will
embed their technology in Spoornet and develop local support networks.

I'm very pleased to see that Government's decision to prevent the closure
of low-density lines in 1999 has begun to bear fruit. A number of lines
have been identified for rehabilitation and continued use in consultation
with provinces, especially in the Eastern Cape, the Northern Cape, the
North West and Gauteng, and will operate as infrastructure corridors in
order to support industrial, mining and agricultural development, or to
boost tourism activities.

The GFB lines of KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Cape and the Western Cape are
earmarked for substantial upgrading. The upgrading of the Kroonstad-
Ladybrand line, linked with work on the Maseru container terminal, will
provide the Vaal Triangle industrial complex, Free State agriculture and
Lesotho with greater access to the Durban harbour.

Both the Orex and Coallink lines will be upgraded to facilitate export
growth of R1,6Â billion and R3Â billion per annum respectively over these
lines. New line construction at Brits will see a R30Â million line carry
ferrochrome exports of some R2,7Â billion per annum through Richards Bay.
The R500 million Coega extension line will link Coega with the Port
Elizabeth rail network.

Ports are also investing. The R25Â million for dredging and deepening East
London's harbour will enable larger car carriers to call on East London on
an average of two per month in order to meet the growing demand for the
service. The Richards Bay coal terminal will undergo a R2,4Â billion
expansion, and work is progressing well on the R3,2Â billion port of Ngqura.
The Coega project, as you know, took a giant leap forward yesterday with an
agreement between the Ports Authority and the French investment and
industrial giant, Pechiney.

In some instances, though, project proposals not mentioned may not yet be
aligned with some of the restructuring initiatives. New challenges have
emerged as well, such as the radical requirements for port and container
security planning and infrastructure. I have therefore instructed the
director-general to co-ordinate a detailed report from SOEs on how their
infrastructure investment plans are aligned with restructuring initiatives
and Government's development priorities, and how they intend dealing with
these new challenges.

Over the past 10 years Eskom has brought electricity to nearly three
million homes in South Africa. [Applause.] Backlogs continue, particularly
in rural areas, and special challenges face us with the growth of informal
settlements in urban areas. In addition to improving the quality of life of
millions of South Africans, the electrification programme has resulted in
the creation of small, medium and micro enterprises within disadvantaged
communities.

It must be said, however, that Government is deeply disturbed by the
practice of not keeping price increases within inflation limits. Pricing
policy is complex, and Eskom's case is no exception, but we must be
sensitive to the fact that prices higher than the inflation rate undermine
Government's macroeconomic objectives. The costs to the economy are great,
but the negative impact on the poorest of the poor is simply not
acceptable.

SOEs also promote development programmes beyond our borders. Eskom
Enterprises operates in over 30 African countries, covering generation,
transmission and distribution sectors across the continent. Transnet
divisions are spreading their activities into Africa as well. Denel has
also built a platform for improved capacity with defence and security
establishments for greater potential participation in peacekeeping
activities. South Africa will continue to promote a policy of commonality
and interoperability of equipment.

South Africa is a proud member of the African community of states. We are
blessed with natural resources, human skills, strength of industry, and
solid defence and security capabilities. We are a burgeoning democracy.
When we consider South Africa's contribution to Nepad, particularly that of
our SOEs, we understand that there are no borders between our RDP
programmes and how we should operate on the continent. Just as we emphasise
SMMEs and BEE in South Africa for historical reasons, so we encourage our
SOEs, when they operate in African countries, to apply similar principles
of empowerment and local support.

In the welter of reports around the invasion of Iraq, little note has been
taken of Denel's mine clearance activity in northern Iraq under a United
Nations mandate. Mechem's team consisted of 27 South Africans, 689 local
Iraqis and Kurds, and 180 mine-detection-trained dogs.

They have cleared nearly 10 million square metres of landmines and
unexploded ordnance in Mosul, Dohuk, Ebril and Sulaimaniya. Thankfully the
South Africans have left Iraq and are safe, but I must express concern
about the safety of the Iraqi and Kurdish members of the team who remained
in Iraq along with the dogs. The current US-led invasion has turned back
the clock considerably with the prospect of even greater horror for the
local population as landmines, cluster munitions and other unexploded bombs
litter the Iraqi countryside once more. Mechem's team remains on standby to
return to Iraq at short notice when called upon by the United Nations to do
so. I must commend their excellent if extremely dangerous work. We wish
them Godspeed and hope and pray for their safety. The tragedy really is
that the situation was avoidable and, indeed, should have been avoided.

I have sketched the achievements of our SOEs and our restructuring
programme in bold strokes and identified ongoing challenges. Most important
of all, the evidence of our collective endeavour tells me that we have
truly turned the corner. No longer are the SOEs financial albatrosses
around Government's neck. No longer do they wastefully absorb precious
human and other resources. They are engaged in a transformation of
personnel and purpose to become truly efficient contributors to the
economic development of Africa, let alone South Africa. Although problems
still arise, as is natural, I would suggest that these are isolated
incidents whose impact should not deviate them from their important task.
We therefore commend SOEs for the work that they have done and the
successes that they have made from the shop floor to the boardroom of all
SOEs. [Applause.]

Hon members, Chris Hani belongs with other African leaders who were cut
down by colonial and reactionary oppressors: Bambata, Johannes Nkosi, Omar
Mukhta, Eduardo Mondlane, Patrice Lumumba, Dedan Kimathi [Applause.] He was
never shy to confront challenges and always demanded clarity of purpose,
commitment to co-operation and consultation. His example is a valuable
lesson for us all. May we all continue to learn from him. It is customary
to thank a range of people at the conclusion of a budget speech, but I
shall reserve my appreciation and thanks until my reply so that I may
reflect first on what participants of this debate may say about their
performance. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Speaker, hon Minister for Public Enterprises,
esteemed members of Parliament, nine years since the historic advent of
democracy in 1994, Government has made steady progress in addressing
apartheid's dubious legacy of inequality and abject poverty. This has
required the development and implementation of substantial programmes for
expanding service delivery and confronting the stubborn socioeconomic
disparities still found within South African society. This state of affairs
has further required ensuring sustained economic growth in a mercilessly
competitive and volatile global setting, whilst at the same time
consolidating democracy and a culture of human rights, reconciliation and
peace.

Two successful rounds of democratic elections have also seen the
consolidation of democracy. If truth be told - and it must be told - the
ANC has steered the ship of state well in these sometimes rough and stormy
waters. It has charted a path of more effective and speedier transformation
towards development and improved the quality of life for all South
Africans, especially for workers and the poorest of the poor. The evidence
of concrete experience tells us that the historic position of the ANC on
state asset restructuring remains correct and valid. These positions have
sought to redirect state-owned enterprises towards the developmental goals
of the state. In the context of the many complex challenges facing our
society, a case by case approach to restructuring has informed the approach
of the department.

There are still some people, however, who think that restructuring is
simply a polite word for privatisation. Restructuring is a far more complex
process with a variety of options and results. Those averse to a powerful
developmental state constantly appeal to reduce the state's involvement in
economic activity and wish even to curtail its regulatory functions in
favour of naked market forces. Adherents of this approach view the state
sector and state-owned enterprises in democratic South Africa as nothing
more than single-opportunity cash cows to be milked to death once and for
all, through the wholesale disposal at bargain basement prices, to
consolidate and even create a concentration of capital in select private
hands in South Africa. The same people decry infrastructure investment as
unprofitable and the improvement of people's social conditions as
patronage.

Hon members, state-owned enterprises must continue to meet the
developmental goals of South Africa. The objectives of the restructuring of
state-owned enterprises, which include increased efficiency, enhanced
service delivery, mobilisation of private sector capital, economic growth,
employment, human resource development and black economic empowerment,
should be pursued with increased vigour. Proceeds realised through the
restructuring of state-owned enterprises since 1997 amount to R27,6
billion, of which R18,4 billion was paid to the National Revenue Fund.

The Government's programme of restructuring various state assets remains an
integral part of the broader reconstruction and development of South
African society. It is envisaged that restructuring will improve the
overall competitiveness of the country's economy both from a macroeconomic
and a microeconomic perspective by lowering production input costs in the
economy. By lowering the cost to consumers it promotes wider access for
consumers to affordable services. Significant progress has been made in the
restructuring programme. A key achievement for 2002-03 is progress in the
restructuring of Denel, Transnet and various noncore entities. The focus of
restructuring activities for 2003-04 and beyond will be on the energy,
forestry and transport sectors.

The public debate about restructuring confirms the fundamental realities of
our society. State-owned enterprises permeate almost all aspects of our
lives on a daily basis. They provide the essential services, such as
electricity and transport, critical to our goal of a better life for all.
It is thus important for state-owned enterprises to remain accountable to
the public and it is important that they administer their prices within
acceptable levels.

As a portfolio committee we are concerned about the impact of some of the
recent price increases on poor households, especially that of Eskom. Hon
Minister, I wish to call on the department to ensure that this matter is
addressed as a matter of urgency. A related matter where we think there
should be clear policy is in the allocation of performance bonuses for
management. Whilst recognising that performance bonuses are a legitimate
way of providing incentives it is, however, important that state-owned
enterprises do so within a policy framework so that there is transparency
and so that such a process is not manipulated.

Hon Minister, concerns have also been raised about safety on our trains. I
am aware that safety is a transport function; however, as a shareholder
department, I should think that there are interventions that could be made
by Metrorail and Transnet in this regard. We are also concerned about the
ongoing legal dispute between Metrorail and civil society organisations,
especially in the Western Cape. We accept that restructuring will serve to
integrate the country's public, private and social capital and expertise to
maximise South Africa's economic growth. Under our democratic dispensation,
however, political democracy without economic democracy will have no true
meaning. Our Constitution entrenches both civil and political rights as
well as economic rights. In sum, what we describe as quality of life flows
from the structure and management of the economy. The ANC remains dedicated
to creating a better life for all our people and pushing back the frontiers
of poverty. The ANC supports this Vote.

In conclusion, ten years ago today when I received a phone call informing
me about the assassination of Comrade Chris Hani, the following words by
the poet Brecht acquired a new meaning for me:


  this is the year which people will talk about,
  this is the year which people will be silent about.


  the old see the young dying,
  the foolish see the wise die.


  the earth no longer produces, it devours,
  the sky hurls down no rain, only iron ...

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R J HEINE: Madam Speaker, the DA also remembers Chris Hani on the 10th
anniversary of his death. [Interjections.] His contributions form part of
our glorious collective South African history.

On the day of the listing of Telkom on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and
the stock exchange in New York, the DA issued the following statement, and
I quote:


  For the first time since the ANC became the Government, a public listing
  of a parastatal is taking place. We want to congratulate Government on
  this bold step. Despite stern opposition from some quarters, including
  members of their own alliance, they stood their ground. This is about
  empowering the people and not only a black elite. The DA has been
  supportive of public participation all along.


  Notwithstanding the depressed market conditions, and much could be argued
  about the timing of the listing, we maintain that this is absolutely the
  way to go. The focus and energy that has been directed at a successful
  IPO, must now be turned to encouraging competition where previously the
  state had a monopoly.


  We would like to appeal to the Minister and his Cabinet colleagues to
  follow through with this process and not to be sidetracked by opponents
  of privatisation.

The listing of Telkom has raised the profile of the Government's
privatisation programme dramatically on the international stage. The
challenge ahead is not to lose momentum on the sale of state assets now.

The announcement by Mr Sivi Gounden, the Director-General, about his
resignation from Public Enterprises, will hopefully not slow down the
process, and let me take the opportunity to thank him for his efforts in
this process and wish him well in his new career.

Mr Minister ... I don't see the Minister around, but nevertheless ... Where
is he? [Interjections.] Oh, thank you. Mr Minister, in announcing the DA's
economic policy, we make the point that privatisation is not only important
in its own right, but is looked upon by potential investors as an important
indicator of a Government's mindset with regard to private enterprise and a
market-orientated economy. The listing of Telkom is ample proof of the
correctness of this view.

South Africa's privatisation programme has at times been a disaster. Let's
admit that. Unnecessary delays, continual ambivalence, infighting within
the tripartite alliance and excessive conditionality have cost South Africa
dearly. South Africa has lost out badly because of the slow and
inappropriate process. Billions of rands have been lost as a result of
Government's failure to implement a workable privatisation plan timeously.

Let us not dwell on the past. Hopefully we have learnt from our mistakes.
Let us move forward and proceed with urgency. South Africa should be
privatising R15 billion to R20 billion of state assets and enterprises per
year for each of the next five years, and the proceeds should be used
primarily to reduce state debt. Part of the proceeds of privatisation
should be set aside for education or retraining of workers who may become
redundant as a result of privatisation.

Mr Minister, in your presentation to the portfolio committee on your
planned activities for 2003-04, you listed energy, telecommunications,
defence, transport, forestry, Alexkor and Aventura as priorities. Under
transport you listed concession of the Durban Port, as a first series of
port operation concessions. May we suggest that the concession of the
Durban Port be treated with great urgency, as this is affecting our export
and import operations.

You also stated that the Airports Company of South Africa's ``End State
Model'' is currently under review. Let me reiterate that there is no reason
why restructuring of ACSA has been put on the back burner for so long. I
would urge you, while you are also acting as Minister of Transport, to give
urgent attention to this matter. Again referring to our economic policy,
the DA will apply the following criteria in order of importance when
evaluating privatisation bids: firstly, the ability to do the job, that is
where a public service is concerned; secondly, increasing competition and
market efficiency; thirdly, the price offered for the state asset;
fourthly, technology and skills transfers; fifthly, foreign exchange
earned; and sixthly, empowerment.

If these criteria had been strictly adhered to, and good corporate
governance was in place, we would not have had the following unpleasant
experiences, and let me just mention a few: firstly, the Komatiland
forestry debacle. The whole process has now been delayed for more than a
year, because of ... Well, that history is well known to everybody.
Secondly, the Transnet privatisation process, where a tender was awarded to
Skotaville Press, which resulted in damages of R57 million awarded by the
High Court to the unsuccessful bidder, who was obviously better qualified
than Skotaville Press. It is a waste of taxpayers' money, and we have
referred this matter to the Public Protector for investigation. Thirdly,
donations were made by parastatals to the ANC network lounge, amounting to
between R70Â 000 and R140Â 000 per parastatal. This matter has been referred
to the Auditor-General for investigation.

Lastly, let me turn to Eskom and the announcement of tariff increases,
which has not been accepted by consumers in a positive light. I agree with
the Minister and I also agree with the chairman of the portfolio committee
that they are deeply concerned and disturbed by this tendency. Let us
consider the following: Eskom declared R250 million in dividends to
Government. The questions that I have are: What are the unpaid electricity
accounts of, firstly, Government; secondly, provincial governments;
thirdly, municipalities and fourthly, Zimbabwe? Are we perhaps subsidising
Zimbabwe on electricity?

It was further announced that Eskom lost R127 million in a foreign exchange
deal because the procurement department did not follow the required
procedures. Then there was an investment in Mountain Communictations (Pty)
Ltd to the amount of R46 million and the nondisclosure of all the
investment transactions, and in particular a guarantee that gave rise to a
continuance liability for Eskom of R424 million. That is absolutely
shocking!

The above nondisclosure constituted procedural noncompliance with the PFMA,
and as my chairman has correctly raised, at the same time, it is announced
that performance bonuses, amounting to over R6 million, have been allocated
to certain top executives. Is this justified in view of the above? We are
all in favour of performance-related bonuses, but not nonperformance-
related bonuses. [Applause.]

This whole matter is cause for grave concern, and should be investigated
properly. We await the outcome of this investigation urgently. It is sad
that, notwithstanding the department's commitment and assurance that SOEs
will strictly adhere to corporate governance principles, these unacceptable
practices still exist. No wonder consumers are raising questions on tariff
increases while this fruitless and wasteful expenditure is ongoing.

In conclusion, the DA stands for proper and well-structured privatisation
proposals, but not for shady deals, questionable actions and noncompliance
with the Corporate Governance Charter. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nksz P N MNANDI: Sihlalo, Ngqongqoshe uBhungane, Sekela Ngqongqoshe,
bahlonishwa, maqabane nezihlobo, le nyanga uMbasa yinyanga yezigigaba
kithina singuKhongolose.

KuMbasa ngonyaka ka-1652, kwafika uJan Van Riebeeck la eNtshonalanga Kapa
elethe ubandlululo nengcindezelo la kwelengabadi.

KuMbasa ngonyaka ka-1979 uhulumeni wamabhunu wanquma uSolomon Mahlangu
ePitoli. KuMbasa ngonyaka ka-1993 labulawa iqhawe lamaqhawe iqabane
uThembisile Chris kaHani. KuMbasa ngonyaka ka-1994 uhulumeni wabantu
wabekwa kule Ndlukazi yesishayamthetho.

Mangiphinde futhi ngivule inkulumo yami ngokucaphuna kusomqulu wenkululeko
yezwe owashicilelwa ngenyanga kantulikazi ngonyaka ka-1955. USomqulu
weNkululeko uthi bonke abantu bayokwabelana emnothweni wezwe. Umcebo wezwe
uyifa lawo wonke umuntu waseMzansi Afrika. Umcebo wezinto ezimbiwayo
eziligugu nezimboni kuyodluliselwa ekuphathweni ngabantu. Zonke ezinye
izimboni nezohwebo ziyophathwa ngendlela yokuthi zisize isimo sempilo
yabantu. Bonke abantu bayokuba nelungelo lokuhweba lapho bethanda khona
bazakhele futhi bangenele lonke uhlobo lohwebo nemisebenzi yezandla
efundelwayo.

Angizothetha bulanda ngoba angiganisi, ngizongena ngqo kwezamachweba
aseMzansi Afrika, ngolukaGoerge i-National Ports Authority. Ngaphansi
kukahulumeni wobandlululo amachweba akuleli awazange abe sesimweni
sokuvuleleka kumazwe omhlaba futhi akukho nolunci uhulumeni wamabhunu
alwenza ekuthuthukiseni amachweba ngoba phela kwakungekho nakancane
emaphusheni abo ukuthi ngelinye ilanga izwe liyobuyela kubanikazi balo.
Yingakho nje kwathi uma kuthatha uhulumeni oholwa uKhongolose wathola
amachweba akuleli eyinkundla yabamhlophe kuphela. Abamnyama babekude le
lapho kunzima khona, lapho besindwa imithwalo khona.

Yebo siyavuma izinkinga zikhona emachwebeni akithi futhi ziningi. Imikhumbi
nezimpahla kuyabhadla laphaya isikhathi eside kuminyene utshumo
emachwebeni. Ubugebengu bukhona, nobugebengu bomshosha phansi bukhona.

Nansi-ke enye inkinga enkulu bakwethu, ubandlululo lusadla umunyu
emachwebeni akuleli. Laphaya echwebeni laseRichard's Bay, i-Richard's Bay
Terminal iphethwe yibona ondlebe zikhany' ilanga. Kungumzukuzuku uma u-
Transnet ethi akudedelwe bonke abavukuzi abamnyama basebenzise le ndawo
njengoba phela babencishwe amathuba ubandlululo.

Uma u-Transnet ethumela u-NPA no-Spoornet uzama ukuletha izinguquko
ezihambisana ne-Mining Charter kodwa kuze kube yinamhlanje akukho
sivumelwano esisetafuleni. Kulolu daba thina singuKhongolose sithi le RBCT
ayiwukhombe umuzi onotshwala.

Nansi-ke enye inkinga engaphansi kwechweba laseThekwini. Kukhona indawo
okuthiwa iMaydon Wharf. Abaqashe kule ndawo osomabhizinisi abamhlophe
bakudalo. Le ndawo bayiqasha kuhulumeni wobandlululo. Banikezwa amalungelo
okuqasha iminyaka eminingi, abanye babo yikhulu leminyaka. Abanye
sebeyayiqashisa nabo, sekuyingxubevange nje ongayazi. Okubuhlungu ukuthi le
ndawo bayikhokhela intela yamanani akudala, njengamasenti amathathu
isikwemitha ngalinye ngenyanga. U-100% wabaqashi abakule ndawo abakwenzayo
lapha akuhlangene neze namachweba.

Thina singuKhongolose sithi aziphele nya lezi zicagogwana zamalungelo
obandlululo. Ngisho nomntanami oneminyaka eyishumi nanye ngeke avume uma
ngimupha u-3c. Noqabane uTito Mboweni akasabagayi o-1c.

Thina singuKhongolose siyahambisana nokuhlelwa kabusha kwamachweba. Lokhu
akusho ukuthi amachweba akuleli azodayiswa. Lokhu kusho ukuthi amandla
okuphatha izingxenye ezahlukene emachwebeni azonikezwa izimboni zangasese
kodwa ubunikazi buzohlala njalo bungaphansi kukahulumeni. UHulumeni yena
uzobamba iqhaza lokuba ngumasitende.

UHulumeni uzokwazi ukusebenza kahle njengonompempe enze imithetho, abheke
kahle ukuthi amanani awambi eqolo, abheke nokuthi izinga lo msebenzi
lihlala licokeme ngaso sonke isikhathi, nokuthi imigomo yezivumelwano
iyalandelwa na. Masivume bakwethu ukuthi zikhona izimboni okungeke kulunge
kuzona uma sizoba umdlali futhi siphinde sibe unompempe.

Yebo siyavuma uHulumeni angawathuthukisa amachweba ngaphandle kokufaka
osomabhizinisi bangasese. Yebo imali engafakwa ekuthuthukiseni amachweba
iyona le yabakhokhi bentela.

Thina singuKhongolose sithi kunoma uHulumeni athathe le mali engaka ayifake
ekuthuthukiseni amachweba, thina siseyizwe elithuthukayo, elinezinkinga
zendlala nobuphofu, imali yentela ayiye ekuthuthukiseni izimpilo zabantu
okuyilapho idingeka khona kakhulu.

Ukuhlela kabusha amachweba kuzokwenza ukuthi amachweba akithi asebenze
kahle kakhulu njengamachweba asemazweni athuthukile. Kuzokwenza futhi
ukuthi amazwe aphesheya kwezilwandle akhuthale ekusebenziseni amachweba
ethu. Lokhu kuzokwenza ukuthi amanani ezimpahla eziphuma kumazwe aphesheya
ehle nje kuphela. Lokhu kuzosiza kakhulu ukuthi osomabhizinisi balapha
eMzansi Afrika bakwazi ukuba sezingeni elifana nelozakwabo abakumazwe
asathuthuka, kanjalo kuthi nezimpahla ezikhiqizwa kumbe ezitshalwa la
eNingizimu Afrika zikwazi ukufinyelela kwezinye izindawo.

Kafishane lokhu kusho ukuthi ukukhula kosomabhizinisi wukukhula komnotho.
Ukukhula komnotho kusho ukwanda kwamathuba omsebenzi. Ukwanda kwamathuba
omsebenzi kusho impilo engcono kubantu. Impilo engcono kubantu kusho
ukuhlehla kwezihibe zobuphofu. Halala Khongolose Halala!

Kwenzekani kubasebenzi uma amachweba ehlelwa kabusha na? Umnyango wezimboni
zikahulumeni uzokwenza izivumelwano nalabo abazoqasha ukuthi bangabaxoshi
abasebenzi futhi uzoqikelela ukuthi mazakhiwe izinhlelo zokuthuthukisa
abasebenzi futhi bavulelwe amathuba okuthi bafundiswe imikhakha emisha.
Phela lapha emachwebeni azokwanda amathuba omsebenzi kunakuqala.

Phezu kwalokhu abasebenzi bazovulelwa amathuba okuthi bakwazi ukuthenga
amasheya ukuze babe nogqozi nofuqufuqu uma besebenza.

Sizoqiniseka kanjani ukuthi laba osomabhizinisi bangasese ngeke bayisenge
ize yome bese bebaleka beyofuna amadlelo aluhlaza kwezinye izindawo na?

UMnyango wezaMabhizinisi kaHalumeni uzoqasha ochwepheshe bamazwe aphesheya
ukuba basize ekucwaningeni ukuthi lezi zinkampani eziza lapha zinawo
ngempela yini umbele omude. Futhi zizoba nawo yini amandla okwakha izakhiwo
ezinobuchwepheshe nobuyoninco. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Ms P N MNANDI: Chairperson, hon Minister Bhungane, Deputy Minister, hon
members, comrades and relatives, April is a historical month for us, the
ANC.

In April 1652, Jan van Riebeeck arrived here in the Western Cape. He was
bringing apartheid and oppression to the land of our forefathers.

In April 1976, the Boer government killed Solomon Mahlangu in Pretoria. In
April 1993 a hero of the people, Comrade Thembisile Chris Hani was
assassinated. In April 1994, a democratic Government was launched in this
House of Parliament.

Let me introduce my speech by quoting from the national Freedom Charter,
which was published in July 1955. The Freedom Charter states that the
nation's economy will be distributed to all people. The nation's wealth is
the heritage of every South African. The wealth of the national resources
and industries will be transferred so that it will be administered by the
people. All other trade industries will be managed in such a way that they
assist everybody's conditions of life. Everybody will have the right to
trade wherever he or she wants to. People will build and enter any type of
trade and any work that is done by hand and which can be learned.

I will not talk too much, instead I will just go straight ahead and talk
about the National Ports Authority. Under the apartheid government,
harbours of this country were not at an international level and the Boer
government did nothing to improve them, because it did not think that one
day the land would return to its real owners. That is why, when the ANC-led
Government took over, it found that the harbours of this country were the
playing field of the whites only. Black people were out there where they
were experiencing hardship and carrying heavy loads.

Yes, we agree that there are problems with our harbours and that those
problems are many. Ships and goods just pile up there for a long time. It
is always full at our harbours. There is crime and even deep-seated crime.

Here is the other problem, fellow people: apartheid is still alive and it
is serious at the harbours of this country. At Richards Bay, the Richards
Bay Terminal is administered by the whites. It is a big struggle if
Transnet says that all black miners should be allowed to use this area
since they were deprived of this opportunity by apartheid.

When Transnet sends NPA and Spoornet there, it is trying to bring changes
which are in line with the Mining Charter. But even today, no agreement has
been reached. We, the ANC, are saying that this RBCT must face the music.

Here is another problem that the Durban harbour is facing. There is a place
called Maydon Wharf. People who are renting this place are conservative
white businesspeople. They rented that place from the apartheid government.
They were given the right to rent that place for quite a long time. Some
have been renting it for a hundred years now. Some are even renting it out
to other people. It is a mix-up, one cannot understand what is happening
there. The bad thing is that they are still paying the same amount of rent
that they used to pay before. They are paying 3c per square metre monthly.
There are about 100% of the tenants who rent this place and whose
activities have nothing to do with the harbour.

We, the ANC, are saying that we must do away with these small rights that
were granted by apartheid. Even my child who is eleven years of age, will
not accept 3c if I give it to her. Even Comrade Tito Mboweni is no longer
producing 1c coins.

We, the ANC, support the restructuring of the harbour. This does not mean
that harbours in this country are going to be sold. It only means that the
power to run different sections of the harbours is going to be given to
private companies. But the the right of ownership will always belong to the
Government. Only the Government will play the role of landlord.

The Government will be able to act as the referee. It will pass laws and
see to it that prices are not too high. It will also see that the level is
always high and that the terms of agreement are respected. We must accept
that there are industries in which we cannot be players and referees at the
same time.

We agree that the Government can improve harbours without involving private
companies. Yes, the money that can be used in improving the conditions of
harbours is the taxpayers' money.

We, the ANC, say that instead of the Government taking this money and using
it to improve harbours, we must remember that we are still a developing
country. We are a country that still has problems with poverty. The
taxpayers' money should be focused on programmes that are aimed at
improving people's lives, which is where it is most needed.

Restructuring our harbours will help them to improve and they will function
well, like harbours in developed countries. It will also encourage
countries overseas to use our harbours. This will also reduce the price of
the goods from overseas. It will also help South African businesspeople to
be at the same level as their counterparts in developed countries. Even the
goods that are produced in South Africa will reach other countries.

In short, this means that when businesspeople improve, the economy will
also improve. When the economy improves, there will be more job
opportunities. More job opportunities will mean a better life for people. A
better life for people will mean that the frontiers of poverty are being
pushed back. Congratulations, ANC! Congratulations!

What will happen to workers if harbours are restructured? The Department of
Public Enterprises will conclude an agreement with those who will rent
these harbours not to retrench workers. This department will also see to it
that programmes to improve the skills of workers are implemented and that
they are taught new skills. There will be more job opportunities at the
harbours than before.

Opportunities will also be open for workers so that they can buy shares so
that they will have the courage to work. How are we going to ensure that
the private companies will not suck up all the wealth and then leave the
industry for other greener pastures?

The Department of Public Enterprises will employ experts from other
countries who will assist us in finding out which companies are going to
offer a more worthwhile service. We will also have the power to build
structures of science and technology. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr M S M SIBIYA: Chairperson, today marks the 10th anniversary of the
assassination of Chris Hani. The IFP pays tribute to this freedom fighter,
may his spirit still live on. [Applause.] It is an honour for me to once
again participate in this Public Enterprises Budget Vote. Firstly, the IFP
believes that the Minister and his department should be commended for the
work that they have done with the running of this department over this past
year. A lot has been achieved, the most notable the successful completion,
after numerous setbacks, of Telkom's initial public offering. We hope that
this will set the tone for another successful public offering and for the
department.

South Africa cannot afford to lose momentum on the privatisation and the
restructuring of state-owned assets in the various sectors, as the recent
successful listing of Telkom has dramatically raised the profile of
Government's privatisation programme on an international stage. An amount
of R60,205 million is to be voted for the Department of Public Enterprises
in the 2003-04 Budget Vote. This amount represents a decrease of R188,837
million or 75,8% from the R249,078 million that is shown in the 2002-03
adjusted appropriation. This big decrease is as a result of funds that were
rolled over from the
2001-02 budget to the 2002-03 budget in order to accommodate the initial
public offering of Telkom that took place earlier this year.

The aim of the department is to direct and manage the accelerated
restructuring of state-owned enterprises to maximise shareholder value. As
I mentioned in my budget speech of last year, if the restructuring process
is to be successfully and swiftly completed, organised labour and
Government have to work together. They should continue to engage in
discussions and try and reach an agreement with regard to the restructuring
and privatisation of state-owned enterprises.

There has been significant progress made in the restructuring programme
thus far, with over 27 transactions undertaken in various sectors between
1999 and 2002. The IFP fully supports the restructuring of state assets,
but we urge the Minister to find additional ways of including the majority
of the population in the process so as to ensure that they also get some of
the benefits.

We must also congratulate the Minister and his team for their efforts in
creating great public awareness and interest in the Telkom initial public
offering, as a large number of people did register to buy shares. We hope
that the second round of bidding for Government's Komatiland forests will
be more successful than the original bid. We must again commend the
Minister for cancelling the entire original bidding process and putting it
out to tender for a second time, after it was discovered that the bid rules
and procedures were breached. Corruption of any sort must not be tolerated
and needs to be stamped out in the department.

There should be a concerted effort on the part of the department to get
SOEs into a position whereby they can be used as examples of how well-run
businesses should operate and lead the way for businesses in the private
sector to follow. The first step to doing this is to root out all the
corruption, irregularities and controversies that are currently plaguing
the parastatals. The awarding of tenders has come under the spotlight
recently and is one area in particular that requires urgent attention. The
tendering process should be conducted and contracts awarded in a
transparent and open manner where all who comply with the relevant
requirement of the tender have an equal chance of getting the contract.

As part of their affirmative action drive, the department should encourage
SOEs to increase the representivity of women and the disabled at all
levels. Real black economic empowerment and its promotion is a priority.
Although the department is making great strides to empower the previously
disadvantaged and has awarded a number of key contracts to previously
disadvantaged groups, BEE is still mainly taking place at a higher level.
It needs to be brought down to the people. There has to be a greater effort
when dealing with BEE to get it to benefit a larger and wider pool of
people.

The restructuring of state-owned enterprises provides the department with a
perfect opportunity to lead the way with BEE and empower the majority of
the people and not just the few that have up until now been the main
beneficiaries. We urge the Government to guard against creating another
black middle class as is the case in other countries.

The recently released broad-based strategy for black economic empowerment
by the Department of Trade and Industry is greatly welcomed and gives us
hope. It is an indication that the Government is very serious and sees
black economic empowerment as a priority. We hope that this will assist in
bringing empowerment down to a level where it will benefit the majority of
South Africans. The IFP support the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson and hon members, in my contribution to this
debate, I will focus on Programme 2 of the department which deals with the
development, implementation and management of the restructuring programme
in order to meet Government's social and economic objectives. Having been
part of this portfolio committee since 1999, I can recall the enormous
challenges facing this department then.

At the time, the performance of state-owned enterprises fell short of the
objectives set by Government. This period was marked by the collapse of
corporate governance within Transnet. The financial position of Aventura
was precarious and many other anomalies existed. Since then, a significant
improvement in the performance of state-owned enterprises is evident.

The hon Minister has referred to the improvement in the financial position
of Transnet which has enabled the state-owned enterprise to invest billions
of rands in infrastructural projects in rail, ports and airlines. These
positive developments are not a coincidence, but are the result of policy
choices the Government has made since the mid-90s.

Members of the portfolio committee have continuously engaged the department
by asking probing questions on key policy issues on the performance of
various SOEs. The department and SOEs resorting under it have consistently
provided high-quality information central to the realisation of
Parliament's oversight role.

It is important for this vital oversight function to continue, not in an
attempt to be destructive or negative, but rather to ensure that the
process of restructuring succeeds. My experience in the portfolio committee
for the last few years and the current balance sheet of the restructuring
process suggest and convince me that the department is succeeding in
redirecting SOEs towards the development objectives of Government.

This brings me to the controversy that surrounds the Komatiland forestry
deal. You need to be commended for the decisive action taken in this
regard, which sent out a clear message on the firm and consistent action
that is necessary to address corruption. This is unlike the pre-1994 era
when mismanagement of state assets was the order of the the day.

The example of Club PrivÃ© within Aventura is an illustration of the extent
of the malpractices that prevailed at the time. In this scheme, investors
made a minimal investment of a few thousand rands which guaranteed them
free holidays for 10 years at the best holiday resorts in our country. At
the end of the 10-year period, investors are entitled to a full return of
their investment, plus interest accrued for this period. We welcome current
efforts by the department to finally close the book on these historical
anomalies.

It is important to recognise the strategic significance of some of the
interventions by Government. A key strategic intervention by Government led
to the delay in the listing of Telkom, since market conditions were not
favourable at the time. This illustrated Government's commitment to enhance
the role of SOEs, thereby ensuring that the full potential and value of
SOEs are realised.

It is against this background that we have witnessed the successful listing
of Telkom on the JSE and in New York. This success is a clear indication
that the restructuring progress is embedded in firm and solid management,
which has resulted in numerous benefits to our society and the economy.

Today, as part of a larger family of people who seek to advance the
interests of the overwhelming majority of South Africans, I wish to call on
the department to further accelerate their efforts to enhance service
delivery in a cost-effective and efficient manner.

We should not lose sight of the fact that the restructuring process is very
complex and dynamic. Concerns raised by trade unions, regular briefings by
the department and SOEs to the portfolio committee as well as the public
debate on restructuring, are indicative of the challenges and difficulties
we face. Irrespective of these challenges, the restructuring and
transformation of SOEs must continue.

However, it is important for us to appreciate the difficulties facing some
of our SOEs. In this regard, I wish to highlight the position of Alexkor
and the complex nature of challenges it faces. Reasons for the lacklustre
performance at Alexkor can be ascribed to the following factors: lack of
investment, which contributes to low production, which in turn leads to job
insecurity, theft of diamonds and lack of proper and effective management
structures. All these factors combined led to a situation where Alexkor
became unprofitable.

The financial position of Alexkor for the last three years is as follows.
In 2001 it made a loss of R45 million, in 2002 the profit was R1,7 million
and the prospect for this year is looking good.

The turnaround in the past two years as far as building profit is concerned
was mainly due to the favourable rand and dollar currency fluctuations.
However, this turnaround is of a short-term nature and is not a solution to
the long-term problems facing these SOEs.

Investment required in exploration in order to turn Alexkor into a
profitable and a sustainable business is estimated at not less than R100
million. The state, in the light of the pressing social priorities, will
not be in the position to provide all the resources needed in this regard.
Therefore, it has become imperative to sell off 51% of the entity to the
private sector. By so doing, it would be possible to mobilise the necessary
resources for investment in exploration, which could result in returns of
billions of rands to the state coffers. Investment in exploration would
lead to increased production and result in job security. At the same time,
the people of Namaqualand in the Northern Cape stand to benefit in the form
of a 10% stake reserved in the community trust.

However, a key challenge to the entire process is the recent judgment of
the Supreme Court, which ruled in favour of a community land claim. The hon
Minister's department needs to approach this matter positively in order to
build a strong partnership with the local community to ensure that the
restructuring of Alexkor brings long-term benefits to the people of the
region and the country as a whole.
I trust that the hon Minister's department and the Board of Alexkor will
work hand in hand with the community to ensure long-term prosperity. That
will continue the Government's quest to push back the frontiers of poverty.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N D NGCENGWANE: Chairperson, today marks yet another year when we as
public representatives from the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises
assess and evaluate ourselves on the mandate which we were given by the
people of South Africa. Today we are talking about the state-owned
enterprises, and I am going to talk about Transnet. I must state from the
outset that I am in support of the budget of the DPE.

I am assuming that we are all aware of the history of Transnet. Transnet
has a total asset base of R72,3 billion. The turnover for the financial
year ended 31 March 2002 was R35,8 billion and a profit of R3,4 billion for
this period was reported. This is the largest public company in our
country. It serves as the nerve and vein that move goods and services
within our economy. Therefore, the state of Transnet is in itself linked to
the health of our economy. The Government's approach is one of ensuring
that through restructuring of the transport sector we reduce the cost of
doing business in our South African economy. The performance of Transnet
and its divisions is vital to achieving competitiveness of South African
goods.

As we are all aware of the history of this country, we really appreciate
the commitment of Transnet to the development of this country, especially
the socioeconomic objectives. The apartheid era left a legacy of social and
economic infrastructure that is not integrated. The rural areas are in the
poorest, worst conditions because their needs were never considered. Over
two decades, Spoornet and Transnet have not spent on capital investment due
to the limited resources. Spoornet has been faced with big challenges due
to high maintenance costs, poor service because of the ageing fleet, and
infrastructure.

Spoornet and Transnet have so far approved the acquisition of new rolling
stock and infrastructure investment to address the poor performance,
safety, quality service and others. The cost of the new fleet is estimated
at R10 billion in five years. A few years ago, Transnet and its divisions
faced many critical challenges, amongst which were the historic backlog and
ageing infrastructure, rolling stock that was never upgraded for the past
25 years and cable theft that caused train delays.

The pension funds debt burden hindered Transnet from realising its full
potential. The pension fund liabilities as of 31 March 2001 were R7,5
billion and increased to R8,3 billion as of 31 March 2002. It should be
noted that these obligations take into consideration the effects of the
recently promulgated Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Act during the year
2000, which resulted in the decline of overall pension liabilities by R4,4
billion from 2000 to 2001.

Development is all about improvement for millions of poor South Africans,
and it is about equity and justice. It is all about democracy and popular
participation of all people for this country, but Transnet goes beyond
that. Long before our President called for a united action to push back the
frontiers of poverty, Transnet took an initiative in support of Nepad in
assisting millions of people in neighbouring countries like Malawi, Zambia,
Lesotho, Zimbabwe, Swaziland and Mozambique by sending millions of tons of
maize in famine relief.

Transnet also takes part in corporate social investment, such as building
schools in rural areas and supplying computers to them. Transnet is
committed to investment in education as part of its drive to help break the
cycle of poverty in the country. It is through education that this yoke of
poverty can be broken. A budget of R14,9 million has been set aside for
infrastructure provision and capacity-building at impoverished schools in
South Africa's rural areas. This is a deliberate attempt to bridge the
widening digital divide and to bring rural learners on par with their peers
in affluent areas and the rest of the world. Those who participated in the
Imbizo activities last week have witnessed Transnet's investment of R8,4
million in the community of Taung in the North West province.

In conclusion, it is the responsibility of each and every individual here
in this country to pay for services rendered, be it electricity or
transport services. At the same time, the ANC-led Government has made
provision for free basic services for households that cannot afford such
services. Let us appreciate the fact that some of our SOEs are globally
competitive and of world-class standard. Government can only provide the
framework and policies. And it is the institutions such as these SOEs with
good leadership that will position the country competitively in the global
economy. The HIV/Aids issue is also taken seriously by all the SOEs in
their programmes.

Today I stand tall and feel proud to be a South African. We wouldn't be
where we are today with the SOEs, had it not been for the good leadership
skills shown by different leaders in different departments of SOEs. They
have shown vision and commitment to whatever they did. Ladies and gentlemen
from different SOEs, you are true patriots of this country.

Some writer said, and I quote:


  Leaders are navigators, who see more than others see and see further than
  others see, but also see before others do.

In one of the books I read, written by Luli Callinicos, about the former
President of South Africa, he said:


  I have walked that long road to freedom. I have tried not to falter. I
  have made missteps along the way, but I have discovered the secret that
  after climbing a great hill, one only finds that there are more hills to
  climb. I have taken a moment here to rest, to steal a view of glorious
  vista that surrounds me, to took back on the distance I have come. But I
  can only rest for a moment, for with freedom come responsibilities, and I
  dare not linger, for my long walk is not yet ended.

That goes for all of us too. Freedom comes with commitment and
responsibilities. I thank you.

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Chairperson, I would like to sincerely wish Mr Sivi
Gounden, outgoing Director-General for Public Enterprises the best of luck
and all the success he needs for the next chapter in his life. He and his
personnel did an excellent job with the privatisation and the restructuring
of South Africa's state-owned enterprises.

This, of course, means that the Minister for Public Enterprises as a senior
political partner in this venture also deserves to be congratulated on his
successes thus far. South Africa did indeed benefit by privatisation,
unlike countries such as Argentina and Brazil where money raised from the
privatisation, process was merely wasted by dumping it into a bottomless
pit of state debt.

The upgrading of infrastructure announced by the Minister during his budget
speech today will certainly have a far-reaching, positive effect on South
Africa's future economic performance and our ability to combat poverty. The
New NP therefore supports this Budget Vote.

There were some hiccups, however. Some unfinished business needs to be
attended to and the same mistakes made up to now, if heeded properly, can
be avoided. One of the major factors considered by local and foreign
investors before they embark on new ventures is the decision-making
predictability of the Government of the day. Investors take calculated
risks, but nobody wants to invest if an uncertain decision-making
environment prevails that makes it almost impossible to predict future
economic variables.

South Africa suffers from a worrying degree of government unpredictability.
Issues come to mind, such as the South African Government's indifferent
stance on the property rights debacle in Zimbabwe and the future impact
this may have on property rights in South Africa. Up to now nobody has been
willing to predict what effect the murky governmental policy on HIV/Aids is
going to have on the labour force and the subsequent effect on economic
growth in our country.

What is relevant to this debate is that the restructuring/privatisation
process contributed in a major way to the problem of Government's
unpredictability. The stop-start approach with privatisation of SAA and
Telkom, for instance, led to great book losses for the fiscus and bred more
uncertainty amongst investors. Hopefully we learn from our mistakes. The
restructuring of Eskom and other state-owned enterprises lies ahead. Let us
avoid the same mistakes.

The second issue I would like to address is that of black economic
empowerment. BEE is one of the major objectives of the privatisation
programme and aims to empower and enable members of previously
disadvantaged communities from all walks of life to participate in the
South African economy.

The New NP believes that we will not succeed in making the new South Africa
work if we do not effectively address the problem of poverty through the
process of job creation. To achieve this goal it is imperative that we
simultaneously attend to the creation of a strong black middle class as
well as that affluent black upper class. Without plenty of black captains
of industry, The necessary number of job opportunities will not be created
to supply the vacuum for the poor to prosper into.

However, the problem is that the perception has firmly been embedded that
the masses of the people will never benefit from the BEE process, only the
fortunate few share in prosperity. Wealth will only be distributed amongst
the inner circle of party faithfuls.

BEE for many still means nepotism, self-enrichment, political favouritism
and jobs for pals. When outsourcing for preferential procurement is done,
in too many cases it only proves to be a case of self-enrichment. Such
perceptions may nullify all the good work that has been achieved so far.
Everybody serious about empowering the disadvantaged will accept the
concept of preferential procurement as long as it is based on merit, which
means awarding Government contracts to competent black bidders and
competent black entrepreneurs and not faithful party supporters alone. The
case of Schutte still will not go away.

Transnet simply discarded the tenure of a certain black empowerment bidder
with the required expertise and resources to succeed with the job in favour
of this incompetent bidder allegedly financially tied to the ANC. This kind
of conduct surely has to be rooted out from the BEE programme.

As is the case with affirmative action, BEE is still perceived to be based
on acquirement rather than empowerment. Up to now black captains of
industry were simply appointed by Government rather than cultivated by
means of an enabling empowerment programme and, more importantly to create
the climate for private enterprise and entrepreneurship to excel, create
wealth and jobs.

Black participation in the economy is still achieved by facilitation rather
than by individual excellence. Government is still facilitating black
participation in the economy instead of providing the right economic
climate for black private initiative to flourish.

I think that the time has arrived for a shift in the focus of AA and
empowerment from Government decree and regulation to a programme of
enablement for black private entrepreneurs to flourish and to be allowed to
be awarded for their excellence.

Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia and other Pacific Rim countries
recently created successful economies by encouraging private enterprise and
entrepreneurship. Their new captains of industry created wealth, economic
growth and the needed job opportunities. South Africa likewise needs to
embark on a programme to unleash the entrepreneurial skills among members
of disadvantaged communities.

If we can establish sports institutes to enable disadvantaged sportspersons
to become world champions, why not create an academy of excellence for
disadvantaged entrepreneurs? We are not asking for a negative sunset clause
on affirmative action. We are proposing a positive sunrise clause for
merit, based on a creative skills development programme for disadvantaged
entrepreneurs.

I therefore propose that some of the proceeds from the privatisation
process be allocated for the cultivation of such centres of excellence.
[Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Chairperson, hon Minister, members and comrades, this
budget presented today is a very important budget and this budget is
presented also on a very important day in our lives: the day on which
Comrade Chris Hani lost his life; lost his life through a white racist
bullet which had the intention to plunge this country into anarchy, but the
ANC was sober and finally everything went well and people accepted that
Chris lived his life in the shadow of death.
Re batla ho hopotsa maAfrika Borwa, haholo-holo rona batho ba batsho hore
comrade Chris Hani o phetse bophelo ba hae ka tlasa moriti wa lefu ho
fihlella a bile a eshwa. Mme kajeno lena re beha bajete ena ya Public
Enterprises ho bontsha ka moo madi a hae a ileng nwesetsa sefate sena seo
rona kaofela mmoho le ba bolai ba hae, re phelang ka tlasa moriti ona wa
sona ka kgotso kateng. (Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[We want to remind South Africans, especially blacks, that Comrade Chris
Hani lived his life in the shadow of death until he died. Therefore today
we put forward this Public Enterprises budget to show how his blood watered
this tree so that we, together with his assassins, are now living in peace
under its shadow.]

We have had nine years of a legitimate and democratic Government. We have
achieved what the apartheid government could not achieve in more than 40
years. The major instruments for social and economic progress, under the
control of the state, were in an absolute shambles and the ANC took over in
1994. More importantly, state-owned enterprises were facing many
difficulties as a direct result of the past mismanagement. Today we are
proud to say that under the ANC Government state-owned enterprises have
made a major turnaround and are beginning to make a critical contribution
to the development goals of our country.

Allow me, hon members, to highlight some of the key benefits of the
restructuring process in our country. I will highlight some of the issues
and challenges within South African Airways and Transnet.

Hon Minister, we have noted with keen interest the progress that South
African Airways, our national airline, continues to make. This is despite
the difficulties facing this industry, and the collapse in 2001 of its
strategic equity partner, Swissair.

South African Airways has increased its network, entering into partnerships
and entering into new routes over the past year. Today SAA flies to more
than 20 destinations within Africa with the help of its regional partners,
SA Airlink and SA Express. This is more than any other national carrier.

I want to take this opportunity to congratulate SAA on its recent
acquisition of a 49% stake in Air Tanzania, with the formation of a new
company, Air Tanzania Company Limited, where the government of Tanzania
holds the remaining 51%. This partnership with the sister countries in
Africa is vital in the realisation of the goals of Nepad.

The modernisation of the South African Airways fleet is in itself an
important and positive development. There is no doubt that a modern fleet,
with cost-effective and fuel-efficient aircraft which require low
maintenance, is key to turning around South African Airways.

In this context, I must say that we are aware of the difficulties that lie
ahead in this industry, including protectionist tendencies within the
developed countries, where the interests of their national airlines come
first.

These positive gains are directly linked to the process of decentralisation
and transformation of our country. It is primarily because South Africa is
no longer a pariah state among the nations of the world that South African
Airways was able to expand its network in this manner. I am also satisfied,
as a member of Parliament, that such expansion, informed in the case of
business, is towards more so-called strategic interests, than in the
apartheid past. Democracy in South Africa has indeed opened the path and
creates the opportunities for us as a whole.

Most importantly, South African Airways continues to play an important role
in promoting tourism in our country. This was also demonstrated during the
recent Cricket World Cup. More people flew into our country. It is also
important that South African Airways keeps improving its services to the
passengers so that they can feel proud in a manner that gives real meaning
to ``Proudly South African''. Fly SAA.

The consolidation of Transnet's property portfolio under Propnet was an
important development. Already the positive spin-offs of such a decision
are beginning to bear fruits. The consolidation should enable us to
maximise value and unlock the potential of the properties. As you are
aware, Transnet is the second largest property owner after the South
African Government. It is vital that we unlock the value of this area in a
manner that stimulates local economic development and empowers the majority
of South Africans.

Among the major contributions by Propnet, which are consistent with the
Urban Renewal Programme, are the following. Portnet purchased the Carlton
Centre when it was about to be closed and saved more than 300 jobs. I have
not heard anybody saying: ``Mr Minister, what a strategic move to acquire
the Carlton Centre to save 300 jobs!'' This has not been said by anybody
and even those who said that restructuring of state-owned enterprises was
creating job losses have never seen an intake of 3 000 people. The
restructuring process of the ANC is a strategic one; it is a correct one
and it is informed by a balance of forces in the economic sector.
[Applause.]

Propnet is currently doing a precinct development which is very good. We
have also seen this in Bloemfontein, in the Free State, where it is
improving the inner city of Bloemfontein to the tune of R100 million to
bring life, to resuscitate the economy, so that that place can be a better
place. We congratulate Propnet on that.

In Cape Town the Culemborg redevelopment of 60 hectares is also part of
this Propnet project. Along with the Roggebaai canal development, which
connects the V & A Waterfront with the Convention Centre and ultimately the
inner city, these are all things done by Propnet.

Hon Minister, I must also inform you that there are still many Transnet
assets that lie idle in most parts of the country. Propnet should complete
its registration and ensure that they are better used to the benefit of
this country.

Before the restructuring of this, hon Minister, on the brink of democracy,
these properties were sold below the market price and people resold them at
the market value, while others were stolen. We are saying to Public
Enterprises to go and look into those and repossess them and give them back
to Government, as it was pillaging and plundering, theft of Government
property. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, the PAC submits that the money allocated to
the Public Enterprises budget is quite adequate. We also think that the
Minister is doing his work efficiently and effectively.

The PAC holds that the national economy must be planned to promote the
interests of its nationals, otherwise the newly independent country
emerging from the ravages of apartheid and colonialism will fall victim to
the highly dangerous forces of economic oppression and find that it has
merely substituted one kind of colonialism for another.

The PAC does not believe that the economic liberalisation on the basic
needs and essential services of the nation must be privatised and auctioned
to the rich and foreigners. Privatisation of state assets does not benefit
the poor in the country at present. The policy of privatisation has made
the present Government a helpless spectator that ensures increased profit
to the rich. The workers - the important role-players in the economy of
this country - have lost jobs on an unprecedented scale. This is where the
PAC challenges the leaders of Cosatu who, quite aware of a policy of
privatisation which has created massive unemployment, are content with
organising a two-day strike against privatisation. No, comrades, with due
respect to you, you are missing the point. The weapon against privatisation
is how you ask the workers to vote. Privatisation, which has put millions
of people out of jobs, needs more than a mere token strike. I'm sure
Comrade Chris Hani may be turning in his grave when he sees what the
proletariat is getting out of the liberation he fought for.

Statistics show that the poorest of the poor, constituting 77,6% of our
country's population, are the hardest hit by unemployment. Their poverty
has increased by 19% whilst the wealth of the minority has gone up by 15%.
As a result of this massive unemployment, the number of youths in prisons
is frightening. Conditions must be created to give our youth hope, not
despair of resorting to crime.

We hear a  lot  about  telephones  and  electricity  which  have  been  made
accessible in the rural areas and African townships. The issue is that  they
are not affordable. Township dwellers pay  30%  more  per  unit  than  white
urban areas. This is up to 10 times higher than off-peak prices  offered  to
business. This means that low-income households are unable to  purchase  the
volume of electricity they need to sustain even the most basic  requirements
of heating and cooking.

Privatisation is not helping the poor. In state hospitals standards of
medical treatment have dropped. Meanwhile, private hospitals have become
large commercial houses for the rich and butcheries for the poor who cannot
afford the fees. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr R J B MOHLALA: Go wele dinatla; go wele boChris Hani. Go wele dinatla,
baferehli; go wele kgong tÅ¡a phethoga; Å¡ikiÅ¡a dira le molapo, mphago wa
dira ke meetse. Ke komana-madula-a-bapile, mohla wa dira ga o tsebje. Go
wele mosesapholo, go wele morw'a mpaneng, go wele letsogo la go ja dimake,
go wele dinatla boChris Hani.

Serurubele ke selo se sebotse; le tÅ¡hengwana ke selo se sebotse. Bjale ge o
rata dirurubele; o kitimiÅ¡a dirurubele o nyaka go di swara, tÅ¡a tsena ka
tÅ¡hengwaneng, ge o ka fela o tÅ¡wela pele go rakediÅ¡a dirurubele tÅ¡eo, o
tlile go senya tÅ¡hengwana ka gore o tla gata matÅ¡oba. Ke molaetÅ¡a wo ke
ratago go o fa seboledi se se fetÅ¡ago go tloga mo. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr R J B MOHLALA: A hero of the struggle has fallen. The cadre of the
struggle has fallen. Chris Hani the hero has fallen. Keep troops alongside
the river to sustain the energy. They are on the alert all the time. A teak
tree has fallen, a volunteer has fallen. A stronghold has fallen. Chris
Hani has fallen.

A butterfly is a beautiful thing. And a garden is a beautiful thing.
Therefore, when you like beautiful things like butterflies and you chase
them, they run into the garden. If you keep on running after them you will
damage the flowers. This is the message I would like to give to the speaker
who has just left the podium.]

I am really disappointed by the speech by the DA speaker, hon Rudi Heine. I
had thought that having interacted with us at the portfolio committee
level, he would have appreciated the position with regard to the economy of
this Government of the majority of South Africans. Economics should be and
is about people. You have done nothing more than repeat market
fundamentalism, which is of course probably the policy of the DA. For this
reason, however, I want to leave you with a message: You have raised the
issue of Skotaville, but, selectively, you chose to ignore the fact that
there has been an audit and corporate committee formed by Transnet, a
committee that came back and reached a conclusion that neither the
department nor the Minister or the director-general have anything to do
with that tender. As a result, I apologise. [Interjections.] You never see
anything. [Laughter.]

Restructuring of state-owned enterprises is a highly political process in
which the powers of the state, international agencies and national
political institutions are deployed to achieve transfer of a public service
to the domain of private companies. In that process is balanced a
divergence of goals in promoting economic efficiencies with state
responsibility for ensuring broad social welfare and, as such, to deliver
services.

In managing this programme, we need to present a situation which is not
merely technical in nature or just a futile exercise of relieving the state
of barren, wasteful and inefficient enterprises. In plain English, what I
am saying is that you don't simply restructure that which you cannot
manage. You look at the strategic state-owned enterprises and say this is
what I want to restructure, and the purpose is to ensure that we push back
the frontiers of poverty. Even many members of the elite within your own
political party are becoming conscious that the issues involved are much
more fundamental than the sale of state-owned enterprises. And in the
process, of course, it will be the height of political naivety forever to
imagine that political parties like the DA will appreciate this. Let me
illustrate this point: In your input, for one reason or the other, I'm
still worried. You brought the issue of Eskom and managed to link it with
Zimbabwe and say as Eskom we are subsidising Zimbabwe. But in the same
breath, on other days you try to feel very, very sorry for the people of
Zimbabwe. When they are being helped, you complain. What is it that you
really want? [Applause.]

One big mistake that is made very often is that when something wrong
happens within the restructuring of state-owned assets, people stand up and
shout: Corruption! Let me leave one lesson on corruption: Corruption and
capitalism are sons of the same parent called ``greed''. They have nothing
to do with the process and the programme of Government in restructuring
state-owned enterprises.

The restructuring process is for this Government one of the major strategic
service delivery tools. It is a service delivery in so far as it relates to
job creation and economic transformation that aims at increasing growth and
development of the economy and an infrastructure to meet the basic needs of
our people and strengthen the economic potential of our country. It has
been argued that growth and development have to be sustainable and ensure
that meaningful jobs are yielded by the economy.

When we look at what has been happening in our country, the following
transpires: As and when we restructure, we don't simply just sell, as other
people like us to believe. At the same time, new entities are formed. To
illustrate the point: Since Arivia.com was formed it has harmonised the
licensing requirements of the whole SADC region and is moving to ensure
that Nepad strategies and objectives are realised. It has a contract with
the Lesotho government for electoral purposes. This is a consolidation of
IT capital of Denel, Eskom and Transnet. There was no selling in this
regard; there was reorganisation.

It is not only about issues of ownership. In the case of Transnet,
restructuring, among other things, entailed amendments through legislation
of the pension fund debt burden. This was done through this very august
House - Parliament. But when we want to do whatever we want to do for
whatever reasons, we tend to forget these things. This has become a
strategic entity. Transnet has been restored to profitability, and as a
result has brought huge capital investments in a number of areas.

It would make a lot of sense if people would have taken the advice that I
gave to hon General Bantu Holomisa. It's no mistake that he is not in the
House today. [Laughter.] I said to him: Economics is not like a troop of
soldiers which are standing to attention and waiting for an order.
[Laughter.] And he took that advice so well that he did not even field a
speaker for today's debate. [Laughter.] Maybe the numbers have depleted,
I'm not quite sure. [Laughter.] But I would imagine that the DA should
learn that lesson, that when we discuss issues of economics we are
discussing complex, technical and very involved issues. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, Chair. Firstly, I need to
express a word of gratitude to all members who participated in this Budget
Vote debate. Just to answer some of the questions that have been posed by
members, on the issue of Eskom, there was a question on the arrears by
Government. Yesterday I did give a reply to this honourable House during
Question Time, but for those who have not had an opportunity to read that
answer, there are some municipalities that owe Eskom, such as Ogies
Municipality, Nogeng mine at Cullinan, Nongoma Municipalities, and there
have been agreements with all these local authorities to ensure that they
pay these arrears.

On Zimbabwe, during the Cricket World Cup I had a meeting with the Minister
of energy from Zimbabwe. There are agreements as to how they are going to
erase these arrears of theirs with Eskom.

On the issue of the bonuses that have been indicated, I also want to refer
hon members to the answer I provided to Parliament yesterday, that we as a
Department of Public Enterprises have been very consistent in ensuring
adherence by SOEs to ensuring good corporate governance. A lot of things
have been done by the department, including strengthening the various
boards of directors of Transnet and many others to ensure compliance with
the Public Finance Management Act, so that they would be able to tighten
the control on financial management issues.

Specifically on bonuses, the decision to award performance bonuses is that
of a company. However, our Government recognises the need and urgency of a
framework on performance bonuses to guide SOEs wherever they have to make
such decisions. It is important to acknowledge, hon members, that
performance bonuses are legitimate incentive mechanisms in both public and
private sectors. The SOEs, as public institutions, must also take into
account the principles of accountability and transparency in doing this.
That is why the department, very shortly, will be finalising an overarching
policy on how this issue can be handled.

On the issue of safety on trains, our Government is very committed to a
safe, reliable and affordable public transport system. I must assure
members of the public also that are using Metrorail and other services of
Government, that steps are being taken to address this question, including
the announcement that we have made an agreement with Transnet with regard
to a major infrastructure investment on our rails, which will ensure the
safety of our people.

In terms of this dispute we have indicated that there is a need for
partnership between Metrorail and all those communities that are
represented in terms of this issue of safety and I do believe that we are
going to resolve these challenges that we are facing.

The Department of Safety and Security is the one that is co-ordinating the
initiative of ensuring that police are put back on the trains in South
Africa, so I am very hopeful that the joint discussions that are taking
place now, that involve the Departments of Transport and Safety and
Security and the provincial and metro structures, are going to resolve this
challenge that we are facing.

On the issue of the so-called billions that the Government has lost with
the slowness of so-called privatisation, I do not know where these billions
are coming from. In fact, this notion of billions lost is a very warped
view of saying that if we had listed Telkom so many years ago, this is what
we would have got. Those are just opinions of people that have no sense of
reality. If one puts it the other way round, if we had listed Telkom and we
got all those billions, what would have happened to all those investors now
that the real market price or market valuation of Telkom is known? So,
there are no billions that we have lost.

The stop-start process, the Telkom IPO, was done in a highly professional
manner, with global joint co-ordinators, Deutschebank and J P Morgan,
involving our own black empowerment groups, such as the Lekgaya Securities
and African Harvest, and Standard Bank, with one of the best legal brains
in South Africa, Michael Katz, and others. So I am confident that this
transaction has in fact been executed not only professionally, but also
successfully.

On the issue of the so-called Transnet and Scotaville Press, I also
answered this question yesterday, that the board of Transnet deliberated
this matter after a thorough investigation, that neither the Director-
General of Public Works nor myself issued any instruction to the board of
Transnet to effect this tender. This was done by the Transnet board.

On the issue of the relationship between Alexkor and communities,
colleagues will recall that we have a 10% stake that we have reserved for
the community of Namaqualand. So we are looking at the issue of the legal
case, but the relationship that exists between the Government, Alexkor, the
North Cape government and the communities will proceed in a manner that
will ensure that the communities of Namaqualand are going to be benefiting.

On the issue of the Richards Bay coal terminal, the ports authority has
embarked upon a major expansion of the Richards Bay container terminal, to
increase the capacity of the terminal from 72 million to 82 million tons
per annum. We are going to ensure that all those BEE coal mining companies
are going to benefit from this expansion when they export their coal.

And on the issue of these noncommercial leases, it is an issue that is of
grave concern. That is why, in this ports Bill, there is a lot that is
being done on this particular issue.

On the SAA deal with Swissair, I am sure that those who are sniffing at
this deal must realise that this was one of the most lucrative deals for
the Government. I mean a R1 billion windfall in the repurchasing of
Swissair is like manna from heaven.

On the issue of BEE and SOEs that have been restructured, there is a lot of
progress that is being made, especially on the south coast forest. In
Siyaqubeka, for example, there is a programme of ensuring that HDI
management increases their stake in the next three years. Already there is
progress that indicates what has been achieved.

With regard to Ntate Mbephu, this is the fourth year in succession he is
coming with the same issues that we have addressed, time and time again.
Maybe he lives in another country, not South Africa; a country called
Azania, where he is divorced from reality, so I suggest that he read the
National Treasury's Intergovernmental Fiscal Review, where he will see from
the figures on electricity and on water that the Government is really
responding to the challenges that face our people. There is no
privatisation of municipal services that has taken place in South Africa.
Our Government will continue to ensure that the basic services to our
people are provided.

Lastly, members, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all state
enterprises, the chairs and chief executives and all people who work in
SOEs, for a good relationship that has ensued. And I believe that we are
going to be moving from strength to strength in ensuring that state
enterprises play an important role.

I want to thank Cabinet colleagues for their support; thank the portfolio
committee and the chairman for the good working relationship that has
ensued. My thanks also go to the collective leadership and workers of the
Department of Public Enterprises for the professional manner in which they
execute their mandate.

But lastly, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Director-
General of Public Enterprises for the good work that he has done. I have
known him for the past 10 years and I wish him well in his new endeavour in
the private sector. [Applause.]

I want to commend him, because I believe that he has been one of the
outstanding public servants in South Africa. The loss of Sivi Gounden to
Government, I believe, is a gain to the private sector, because he leaves
the department with our blessing and our best wishes. With what he
initiated many years ago, I am sure those who are going to take over from
him are going to take this department to a higher level than the one that
he has left behind. With those words I would like to say, good luck, Sivi,
and thanks for supporting this Budget Vote.

Cocktails, as usual, will be served in the Old Assembly restaurant. Viva
DPE! And viva SOE! Viva!

HON MEMBERS: Viva!
Debate concluded.

 AN ASSESSMENT OF THE LEGISLATION ALLOWING PUBLIC REPRESENTATIVES TO CHANGE
 PARTY AFFILIATION IN THE CONTEXT OF THE CONSOLIDATION AND STRENGTHENING OF
                                OUR DEMOCRACY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M T MASUTHA: Chairperson, hon members, colleagues, this debate comes on
the occasion of the commemoration of the 10th anniversary of the life of
one of the finest of Africa's sons, the late Comrade Chris Hani, whose life
and subsequent untimely and violent death represented his unwavering
commitment to political change for the betterment of the lives of our
people, particularly the very poor and disenfranchised or previously
disadvantaged.

One recalls those passionate words of Mark Anthony when he first saw Julius
Caesar shortly after he was assassinated and said:


  O mighty Caesar! dost thou lie so low?
  Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils shrunk to this little
  measure?
  Fare thee well.

Today, we all bask in the warm sunrays of democracy, the attainment of
which was speeded up by the blood that oozed out of Comrade Hani's veins as
he fell and lay still, following the brutal act of his assassins, and for
that we remain eternally indebted to him - Lala ngoxolo, qabane. [Rest in
peace, comrade.]

In its article entitled ``Floor crossing a curse for our democracy'',
published in November 2002, AZAPO argues as follows:


  To the extent that the Constitutional Court decision on floor crossing
  does not take into cognisance good values, ethics and integrity of a
  stable political order, its judgement lends itself to frivolous legalism.
  More so, because the ruling party's narrow and selfish interests of
  expansion occasioned the floor crossing saga at all costs. It is by no
  means to the best interests of the nation and the country.

It continues as follows:


  Save for independents, candidates are seconded by their political
  parties. The party expends financial and material resources in
  campaigning for their chosen candidate. The party offers the candidate
  its good name, history and branding to give credence to the election
  campaign of the individual candidate. As such, what moral rights does
  such a candidate have to steal in broad daylight the legislative seat so
  earned? Legislating floor crossing approximates the condonation of
  cheating and defrauding the electorate by corrupt politicians.

Finally, they state:


  Floor crossing is an insult to the sacrosanct concept of the will of the
  people. It distorts and disfigures the will of the people before dumping
  it into the deep bottom of the dustbin. Floor crossing is also a real
  threat to multiparty democracy in the present political landscape in our
  country. The ruling party has been given the unfair advantage to
  manipulate and tamper with the results of the elections to the detriment
  of smaller parties in particular.

These are quite strong assertions indeed and deserve close scrutiny, as is
the intention of this debate. In responding to these assertions, allow me
to begin with the very foundation upon which our constitutional
dispensation is based, namely the founding provisions contained in section
1 of the Constitution and, in particular, paragraph (d) thereof, which
state:


    1.      The Republic of South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic
        state founded on the following values:


        Universal adult suffrage, a national common voters roll, regular
        elections and a multi-party system of democratic government, to
        ensure accountability, responsiveness and openness.

It is our considered view, as the ANC, as confirmed by the finding of the
Constitutional Court, that none of these values is incongruent with the
system of floor crossing as introduced by recent constitutional amendments.

Democracy is like a mosaic that consists of colours and patterns in
different shades and shapes, which, when viewed collectively, must produce
a clear picture that has aesthetic value. The key elements of this mosaic
are the electorate, political parties and public representatives, each of
whom occupies a unique place in this mosaic, none any less important that
the others.

Indeed, in an electoral system such as our own, the electorate choose the
party that must govern them, whilst at the same time electing people who
must represent them in the decision-making processes of governance.
Political parties, on the other hand, present their policies to the
electorate in the form of manifestos, on the basis of which they hope the
electorate will vote for them. There is no problem with that.

These manifestos do not constitute binding contracts between parties and
voters that vote for them, nor do they form legally binding mandates
between parties and the political representatives they nominate for
election. Departures from these mandates and undertakings, therefore, do
not in themselves constitute breaches that can attract successful
litigation, save for the political repercussions that may ensue.

In the case of a party, such repercussions may manifest themselves in
diminished support from voters in subsequent elections and, in the case of
a public representative, in a vote of no confidence against him or her or
expulsion from the party, resulting in the loss of his or her seat in a
particular legislature or municipal council.

The political landscape is always fluid, dynamic and responsive to changing
political circumstances. Contrary to many predictions, the ANC made
significant political gains in the 1999 elections by coming very close to
obtaining a two-thirds majority, thus significantly improving its 1994
electoral record.

It is also significant to note that the people who have crossed over to the
ANC, viewed collectively, constitute a tapestry of different racial,
linguistic, geographic and gender backgrounds, confirming the fact that the
ANC is premised on the values of diversity and inclusivity. The accusation
that by introducing the system of floor crossing the ANC sought to steal
seats from other parties is clearly ludicrous, given the overall political
support we have amassed, following the last elections.

The outcome of the recent floor crossing is a reflection of various
political trends, which include increased realisation amongst those of our
people who had doubts about the political intentions of the ANC, that we
remain truly committed to the cause of building a new society and creating
a better life for all.

The assertion that floor crossing is inimical to multiparty democracy is
equally without any substance and is not borne by the facts. The very
reason that members of legislatures are allowed to change party loyalties
and to even form new political parties, as is evident from the first floor
crossing that ended last week, has resulted in the creation of new parties
and in the increase in the total number of parties, rather than in their
reduction.

The system of floor crossing lends itself in a perfect position to advance
the notions of accountability, responsiveness and openness envisaged in the
founding provisions of the Constitution, which I alluded to earlier, in
that it empowers an important element of the democratic system, namely
public representatives armed with inside information about what their
political parties are up to, to keep their parties in check on behalf of
the electorate. By having the option of depriving their party of their
seats, they can compel a situation of meaningful political discourse in
their parties, in an unthreatened environment, knowing that they have the
option to cross the floor, if they cannot achieve political change within
their political parties. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Deputy Chair, unfortunately time does not permit me to follow
the very erudite arguments of the hon Masutha.

The DA, Deputy Chair, supported the fourth amendment to the Constitution.
We did so because the voters of South Africa, and not party bosses, elected
the members of this House. Because of this, members of this House must be
able to represent the voters, to speak their minds and vote according to
their consciences, without the fear that a party will take their seats from
them. We have lost too many members of this House in this way - Andrew
Feinstein, Pregs Govender and Jennifer Ferguson, to mention but a few.

These are the reasons it was right to support the legislation, but we would
be fooling ourselves if we thought that the public like it. The public feel
that politicians who cross the floor put their own careers ahead of the
mandate that they had received from those that elected them. The way to
overcome the cynicism of the public, is, of course, to introduce a
constituency system. But the ANC passed up the opportunity to do so when it
rejected the majority recommendations of the Slabbert task team.

At issue then, is the mandate received by MPs from their voters. In 2000
nearly 24% of the electorate supported the DA, because they wanted a
bigger, stronger opposition to the ANC. They did not vote for a bigger ANC.
They certainly did not vote for some ludicrous form of co-operative
opposition. We, in the DA, will continue to build that strong alternative
to the ANC, and we salute those who have returned to us, or who are working
with us, to carry out this mandate.

The window of opportunity has opened and shut, and we can now assess what
the implications are. First, the trend in South Africa is towards a bipolar
or two-party system. In our context that means you either support
nationalism, or you support liberal democracy. You support mobilisation
around groups, or you support the rights of the individual. Either you
perpetually reinvent apartheid, or you move beyond it. In short, either you
support the ANC, or you support the DA and its allies. It is therefore not
surprising that the DA and the ANC were the parties of choice of those who
crossed the floor.

The New NP has now reached the end of the road. It has lost nine MPs and
eight MPLs. The New NP now has a mere 10 seats out of the 42 in the Western
Cape legislature. While the ANC has gone out of its way to say that
Marthinus van Schalkwyk will remain the premier, everybody now sees and
knows that he does so at the grace and favour of the ANC. He is a puppet
premier, the useful idiot, whose job it is to deliver the votes to the ANC
that the ANC itself cannot get. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Are you rising on a
point of order?
The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chair, I would like to ask whether it is
appropriate for the member to refer to Mr Van Schalkwyk as an idiot? It
seems to me language ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I've indicated to
you ... [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: I would like that the Chair should rule this out
of order. It is appropriate to criticise individuals, it is another thing
to label them.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you. I've taken the decision,
yes. Hon Selfe, if you will just take your seat for a second. I've just
been looking at the practice in the Canadian parliament in order to get an
idea in respect of this, because of the incident that also arose, I think,
either yesterday or the day before yesterday, in a portfolio committee. The
practice is quite clear: that the integrity of the individual, who is a
public representative, must be upheld at all times.
Hon member, if you wish to take a point of order, I will permit you, but I
think you should understand that the Chair has the right to be heard
undisturbed. I will insist on that. When I am finished with that, you are
quite in order to take a further point of order. I need to explain that
this Parliament is still a new parliament. It is an evolving practice and
therefore it is a practice determined by the rules that it has made for
itself, but also, it takes guidance from parliaments that have had much
more experience.

Now, the Canadian parliament makes it quite clear that the integrity of the
individual, who is a public representative, has to be guaranteed. I would
therefore like to indicate to you also what the hon Speaker of this House
had to say. She ruled that we should speak to one another and address each
other bearing in mind that we will be treated as we treat others. She urged
moderation and moderate use of language. And I would therefore like to
suggest that words not go beyond normal, moderate use in a situation that
is unwarranted because the hon Van Schalkwyk is not in this House to be
able to defend himself. If he had been here then I think it would be quite
possible for the hon member to defend himself. So, hon Selfe, I would like
to advise from the Chair that you moderate the use of language in referring
to those who are public representatives. Thank you.

Mr J SELFE: Thank you, Deputy Chair. I shall certainly do that.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Are you  rising  on  a  further
point of order?

Mr J DURAND: Yes, Deputy Chair. The hon Van Schalkwyk only appears in this
House at Joint Sittings, which does not normally make him a member of this
House, and we have a ruling in this House that members outside this House
must be respected by the Chair. I demand that that member withdraw that
remark.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Hon members, please
allow the Chair the opportunity to be able to make progress. If you are all
going to be speaking while the Chair speaks, it is then not going to be
possible for me to try and formulate a train of thought, because you are
going to be distracting the Chair from doing that. What I think we will do
in this matter is to take further advice, and I will come back to you. Hon
member, you may now rise.

Mr K M ANDREW: On the particular term of ``useful idiot'', I suggest, when
you're taking advice, you get somebody who has some knowledge of history,
and the historical connotation of the use of that term ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon members. I just
indicated to you that when a person - any member of this House - is taking
a point of order, it is right and proper that you observe silence in order
that the member can make his point, and the Chair can try to understand.
You can have your say after that when we return again to the normal course
of the debate. Yes, hon member?

Mr K M ANDREW: Deputy Chair, I'm asking you to make sure that in the
consideration the historic origin of the phrase ``useful idiot'' is not
simply a free choice of words. It in fact has a particular context and
history, and if looked at in that context it may be educative for some
members on my left. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you very much. I think the
context is going to be very much to the point in the determining of the
ruling in this instance. Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Hon Chair, if I may? I do want to clarify my
objection: When in this House any member is making arguments, or has
actions they committed, it is my view - that is why I requested you to make
a ruling on the matter - that we are entitled to criticise the actions ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!  Hon  Minister,  let  me
take the point of order, because I think the hon member wants to take it  on
a procedure. Yes, hon member?

Mr K M ANDREW: Chair, I very much want to test it on a procedure. Thank you
very much. On what points does the hon Minister rise? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you. I think, Minister, the
matter is in hand. Your explanation, I think, will be unnecessary for now,
because the matter is going to be looked at, and therefore I will come back
and give a ruling. Hon Selfe, you may continue.

Mr J SELFE: Thank you very much indeed, Deputy Chair. If one needs any
further convincing of the New NP's irrelevance, one need look no further
than its by-election record since withdrawing from the DA. For 18 months it
failed to contest a single by-election, even in its former heartland of the
Western Cape. When it finally did contest a by-election in Swellendam, it
came a dismal third.

Now the New NP has raised the white flag once again. It has failed to put
up a candidate in Grassy Park. Presumably, it will be backing the ANC. The
New NP is a spent electoral force.

Secondly, the ANC has emerged stronger, perhaps too strong. It now commands
an absolute majority in the Western Cape legislature. It is also stronger
in KwaZulu-Natal, although it does not control an absolute majority there,
even with its allies. It nevertheless assumes it has a God-given right to
rule, and issues ultimata like some invading force. One glaring absence in
the current legislation is the necessity which we should have in our
legislation to hold an election if the floor crossing results in a change
of political control in any sphere of Government. But here in the National
Assembly, the ANC now has more than two thirds of the seats. With this
majority it can change the Constitution at will. Again, the ANC has said it
won't tamper with the Constitution and it won't abuse its power, but we've
only got its word for it.

One thing is for certain: The ANC may have more than two thirds of the
seats in this House, but it certainly does not have the support of more
than two thirds of the voters in South Africa. Next year's election will
demonstrate that.

About 50 members of the ANC will not return to this House next year,
because the ANC is losing support. The ANC will be smaller, not bigger. The
people who don't come back to the National Assembly will not be high up
enough on the list. Those hon members who have recently joined the ANC need
reminding that street credibility and service to that organisation is the
only way that they will get a return ticket. I predict that many will not.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Yes, hon member, are you
rising on a point of order?

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Nee, ek wil vra of die agb lid bereid is om 'n vraag te
beantwoord? [No, I would like to know whether the hon member is prepared to
take a question?]

Mr J SELFE: Nee, ek het ongelukkig geen tyd om 'n vraag te beantwoord nie.
[No, unfortunately, I do not have the time to take a question.]

Finally, five new parties have been formed, the majority consisting of
single MPs. Most of these parties have been formed simply because the
Constitution doesn't allow for independents. Most of these parties, I
predict, will disappear at the next election, because, as Mrs Suzman will
tell you, there is a great deal of time and effort, sweat and tears to
convert what may be good ideas into a viable political party.

In conclusion, politicians can chop and change their political allegiance,
but our challenges in South Africa remain the same. If the window of
opportunity has any enduring value, it will be to make the debate around
these issues clearer, and their resolution easier. I thank you.

Prince N E ZULU: Chair, the IFP takes issue with the notion of the floor-
crossing legislation serving the purpose of consolidating and strengthening
democracy. Indeed, the opposite is - true that the legislation has served
the purpose of undermining and weakening democracy.

In 1997 this Parliament endorsed a report of an ad hoc committee charged
with evaluating the merits of floor crossing. For a number of reasons, it
was held that floor crossing was inappropriate in this country at this
particular juncture, and moreover, it specifically made the point that the
issue should only be revisited in the context of a different electoral
system in which representatives would have a freer mandate than they have
at present.

Now, it is true that certain problems arose in respect of the break-up of a
particular party which existed only at the local governmental level.
Frankly, this could have been left alone, and while the parties to the
conflict might not have enjoyed each other's company, this would not in
itself have served the purpose of making local government unworkable.
Nonetheless, even if it were to be accepted that some accommodation was
required to allow the party concerned to unbundle itself, this has little
reaction to the legislation that was, in fact, passed.

We say this because the laws passed were not framed to deal with that
particular exigency, because the law dealt with all spheres of government
rather than one, and because the period covered by the laws was extended
way beyond the period required to become a permanent feature of our
electoral system.

In fact, it was apparently earlier on that the break-up of that party
served as an excuse to reopen an issue that had already been closed by this
very House. It became clear that the legislation was to be used as an
instrument to strengthen the ruling party at the expense of democracy.

The fact of the matter is simply that each MP in this House carries the
votes of tens of thousands of voters for the party he or she represents. I
carry not a single vote for myself and my name is not on the ballot paper.
I am a servant of my party placed in this House by way of a pure party
proportional list system to serve the interests of my party. I am, as it
were, an agent of the party and I carry no free mandate. I stress this
point because we need to recognise that this is the electoral system within
which we operate. Indeed, it was this very fact that prompted this House
earlier to reject floor crossing. We said let this matter be revisited if
and when the electoral system is changed.

Well, the results should surprise no one. Yes, the DA has unbundled itself
as intended and the ANC has strengthened itself, also as expected. It was
clear from early on in the process that a key purpose of the legislation
was to empower the ANC to achieve what it could not achieve at the ballot
box, namely to seize control of those provinces and municipalities which it
did not win in 1999 and 2000, one of which is KwaZulu-Natal.

If you look at the past year from the time the legislation was first mooted
in this House until now, it must be sad that South Africa has been
subjected to the worst form of politicking as of late. How can this be said
to have strengthened democracy? How can it be said to have consolidated
democracy? The reality is that the political system is now viewed with
contempt by millions of South Africans whose greatest pride was probably
our new democracy.

Everywhere ordinary people express their disgust for the type of politics
being engaged in. Civil society is one in condemning the floor crossing.
Across the spectrum people say they are disillusioned, and they ask whether
there is any point in voting again. Everywhere you hear people talking of
their votes having been stolen.

People may well talk of a realignment in politics, but one has to ask
whether the realignment is one that reflects the aspirations of MPs or the
aspirations of the voters. There is a big difference.

The DA has reverted to its constituent parts, but can it really be said
that the voters have given the ANC carte blanche to rewrite the
Constitution, now that it has the numbers to do so? Can it really be said
that the electorate has given its approval to the virtual demise in this
House of an important party whose members now sit on the other side of the
House? Can it be said that the plethora of single-MP parties reflects real
new constituencies? Can it be said that the electorate has given its
blessing to a multitude of public representatives gravitating to a one-
party honey pot? And, should it come to pass, would the electorate be as
ecstatic as the ANC appear to suggest it will should the ANC take control
of KwaZulu-Natal? I think the answer to all these questions must be an
emphatic no. [Applause.]

Our conclusion, therefore, is that the floor-crossing legislation has not
served to consolidate or strengthen democracy. It has instead consolidated
the positions of political parties, and it is time this House learnt to
appreciate the difference.

Mr J DURAND: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson.
Die Nuwe NP het gedurende 1999 na die kiesers gegaan en 'n mandaat gevra om
'n nuwe benadering tot die Suid-Afrikaanse politiek te begin volg. Ons glo
dat ons weens Suid-Afrika se unieke omstandighede nie kan voortploeter met
die uitgediende Westminster-stelsel nie. Die Nuwe NP glo in 'n stelsel
waarin opposisiepartye en die Regering saam 'n maatskaplike kontrak sluit
om Suid-Afrika te laat werk vir al sy mense. Opposisiepartye moet 'n
konstruktiewe rol speel en 'n bydrae lewer om die uitdagings wat Suid-
Afrika in die gesig staar die hoof te bied. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[During 1999 the New NP went to the voters and asked for a mandate to start
following a new approach to South African politics. We believe that due to
the unique circumstances in South Africa we cannot toil on with the worn-
out Westminster system. The New NP believes in a system in which the
opposition parties and the Government mutually conclude a social contract
to make South Africa work for all its people. Opposition parties must play
a constructive role and make a contribution to overcome the challenges
facing South Africa.]

In this plight the New NP looked at different models to achieve this. We
formed an alliance with the DP, hoping that this could be a vehicle for
nation-building and reconciliation. It quickly became clear that what was
good for South Africa was bad for the DA-DP. Our leaving the DA-DP is
history. More than 417 DA-DP councillors and two MPs joined us because they
believed in our noble cause and nine New NP MPs crossed to the DA. Only
they know why.

Almal besef dat 'n herskikkingsproses waardeur voorvoegsels soos wit en
swart in die niet sal verdwyn noodsaaklik is vir die werklike vestiging van
veelpartydemokrasie in ons land. Baie min gebeurtenisse het egter al ooit
soveel gedoen om die herskikkingsproses moontlik te maak soos hierdie
pakket wysigingswetgewing. Hierdie wysigingswetgewing as sodanig beteken
nie noodwendig 'n herskikkingsproses nie, maar hiersonder sal die
herskikkingsproses nooit 'n werklikheid kan word nie.  (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Everyone realises that a restructuring process through which prefixes such
as white and black will disappear is necessary for the true establishment
of multiparty democracy in our country. Very few events have actually done
as much to make the restructuring process possible as this package of
amending legislation. This amending legislation as such does not
necessarily mean a restructuring process, but without it the restructuring
process will never become a reality.]

Without the legislation which allows elected representatives in all three
spheres of government to defect from their parties, the realignment of
politics would not be able to take place. Politicians, knowing that their
continued membership of a legislature and their income depend upon party
discipline, are very seldom to follow the dictates of personal conscience.

The DA-DP pathetic cries of stealing the vote and betraying the voters and
the accusation of moral councillors will only serve to highlight their own
hypocrisy. Their sudden change of mind when they receive members of
Parliament is not principled. Not only did the DP-DA vote in favour of
defection legislation, but Chief Whip Douglas Gibson even introduced
private member legislation to provide for defections.

The DP themselves have a long track record of gleeful acceptance of
defectors from other parties into their own ranks. In fact, the DP-DA
consists almost of defectors only. Just look at their MPs to prove my
point. [Laughter.] The New NP rejects with utter disgust the hon Leon's
name-calling, categorising defectors - and you must listen, defectors - as
computer viruses and cancers that you have to get rid of, while the few
defectors who have fallen for the misrepresentations are being welcomed as
heroes and not crosstitutes; what double standards!

We agree with the reputable international magazine, The Economist, and many
South Africans recently, that the DA is a right-wing party. The hon Tony
Leon and the DA acted as the champions of the MDC and the people of
Zimbabwe. What do the MDC and its leaders say about Tony Leon and the DA? I
quote:


  The racist Tony Leon-driven DA are not concerned about the lives of
  ordinary Zimbabweans.

What do black South African youth say about the DA? They talk of-


  ... their racist surrogate and their hatred for the indigenous people of
  Zimbabwe and their passion to crook Africans of their land ...

We, in the New NP, welcome the more than 419 public representatives, black,
white, coloured and Indian from all towns and cities, who followed their
conscience and decided to play a constructive role in South African
politics. They joined the New NP because they believed the future of this
country lies not in creating white fears, neither in living with black
angst, but in creating a caring, nonracial South Africa for all. This right-
wing party lost control of more than 15 local councils, including the Cape
Town Unicity.

We agree with Carol Paton, senior journalist of the Sunday Times, that the
DA-DP cannot govern and should be happy that the ANC-New NP coalition is
now governing the Unicity and the Western Cape province. [Applause.]

In conclusion, this Parliament has overwhelmingly voted for the legislation
on crossing the floor. The Constitutional Court has found it to be
constitutional. The people of the Western Cape and South Africa will enjoy
the sweet fruits of this co-operation between the ANC and the New NP that
was cemented by this legislation. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, democracy in the
parliamentary context is about the will of the people. The voters have
expressed their choices during elections, where they give mandates that
last until the next elections. The rallying call for many years of struggle
to attain democracy was: One person, one vote. Inspired by this rallying
call, many people sacrificed their lives and their health in order to usher
in a new South Africa where, indeed, the rule of one person, one vote would
be applied.

Assessing the floor crossing, one can say that a new rallying cry has
replaced the old one, namely: One MP, 50 000 votes. The voters were not
consulted, yet their mandate is fundamentally altered before the next
election. If the political landscape changes, then it is the voters that
expect the right to express that change.

The UDM remains opposed to this legislation, though we as a player on the
political field now have to play by these rules. The voters are disgusted
and disappointed and they have said so to anyone willing to listen. I need
only switch on the radio or pick up a newspaper to see proof of this. Any
party that talks of the strengthening and consolidation of democracy in
this context is arrogant and deserves to be punished during the next
elections.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Deputy Chair, hon Minister Lekota, the Chairperson of
Committees and hon members, in looking for solutions for all the people in
South Africa as the ANC started in 1912 in Bloemfontein, the ANC finally
yielded to the legislation allowing public representatives to change party
affiliation.

This legislation was advocated by the DP, which now calls itself the DA,
even before South Africa became a democratic country. The ANC has
undertaken research in a number of mature democracies, and it has debated
this matter, received advice from a number of quarters in as far as this
legislation is concerned, even before deciding on this issue.

Finally the  ANC  agreed  to  the  legislation  so  as  to  consolidate  and
strengthen our democracy.  As  our  democracy  matures,  the  objectives  of
development and stability will be realised faster with this  legislation  in
practice. It is therefore surprising now when  the  very  advocates  of  the
legislation opportunistically stand  up  in  this  House  to  say  that  the
legislation was formulated because the ANC wanted a one-party state.

The ANC has demonstrated a number of times that this is not the case, even
by appointing a premier from another party in the Western Cape despite the
majority it commands in that legislature. Members of the Executive Council
in the Western Cape are not only from the ANC but from that party as well.
In this the ANC demonstrates inclusivity, tolerance and reconciliation as
these provide the right climate to finding solutions in South Africa.

We are a party of solutions, and not the party advocating conflicts. These
provide the right climate for development and nonracialism in South Africa.

Abanye bathi i-ANC iwugimbela kwesakhe, abanye bathi ifuna ukucindezela
ezinye izinhlangano njengoba kuzobakhona ukhetho ... [ubuwelewele.]

ILUNGU: Wena Uthini?
Mnu D M GUMEDE: Ngithi i-ANC iqhuba inqubo eyavunywa u-85% kule Ndlu,
iningi elingaphezulu kweningi. Le nkulumo yaqala nangaphambili kokuzalwa
kwalo Hulumeni. Kungakho-ke kwatholakala ukuthi cishe bonke abantu kule
Ndlu bavumelana nalesi simo. Babengekho ababekhuluma ngokuntshontshwa
kwamavoti ngaleso sikhathi. Babengekho abantu ababekhuluma izinkulumo
zokuthi lokhu kungukundinda nokugcogcoma. Sonke savumelana ngokuthi
kuyisimo esifanelekile. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Some people say that the ANC is selfish. Others say it wants to oppress
other political organisations as the elections are on the horizon.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: And what do we say?

Mr D M GUMEDE: I am saying that the ANC is carrying out the mandate that
was agreed to by 85% of this House, a majority that is more than a
majority. This issue was started before this Government was born.
Therefore, it was found that almost all the people in this House accepted
this state of affairs. No one was talking about the stealing of votes at
that time. No one was saying this is tantamount to prostitution and jumping
from one party to another. We all agreed that it was a fair thing.]

Can I have your protection Chairperson, please.

Ngaleso sikhathi abanye babekholelwa ochathweni lwemfundisoze yabo yokuthi
abantu abayemukeli i-ANC, kuzothi nje emuva kwesikhashana bahlubuke baye
kwamanye amaqembu. Lapho bebona ukuthi abantu abalutheki kalula, sebethi lo
mthetho wenzelwe ukuba i-ANC agombele wonke umuntu kwesakhe. Sebethi
yingoba uKhongolose engafuni ukuphikiswa. Iqiniso ukuthi i-ANC isebenza
ngendlela abayithandayo abantu, indlela ethandwa nayilabo ababekhethe ukuba
bamele amanye amaqembu. Bathe uma bewezwa amaqiniso, beyibona indlela,
bakhangwa isibani sikaKhongolose. Akusibo bodwa, kodwa abaningi bahamba
nokuphenduka kwabantu ezizindeni zabo.

Inkulumo ye-ANC yomile futhi icacile ngoba i-ANC ufuna ukuxazulula
izinkinga zezwe kuyo yonke iNingizimu Afrika. Abantu bayizwile i-ANC
eyikhomba indlela, izinkokheli zamanye amaqembu zayibona zalandela
nabalandeli bazo.

Kade ngilalele olunye uhlelo kuMhlobo Wenene, umsakazo wesiXhosa, kwaQumbu
kwasuka abantu ngaphambi kwenkokheli, inkokheli elapha ePhalamende
yalandela abantu. Ezizindeni eziningi abantu bajikile balandela
uKhongolose. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[At that time some people believed the propaganda that said people did not
like the ANC, and that after some time people would leave the ANC for other
parties. Having realised that people are not easily deluded, they are now
saying that this legislation was passed so that the ANC would swallow up
everybody into its membership. They now say that it is because the ANC does
not like to be opposed.

The fact is that the ANC operates in a way that people like. It operates in
a way that is liked by those who were elected to represent other parties.
When they discovered the truth and saw the way they were overcome by the
light of the ANC. They are not the only ones; some are following the
changing trends in their areas.

What the ANC is saying is simple and clear because it wants to solve the
problems of the nation in the whole of South Africa. People listened to the
ANC when it showed the way. Members from other parties heard the ANC and
followed it.

I was tuning in to Mhlobo Wenene, a Xhosa radio programme, and heard that
in Qumbu people had made the first move and their representative, who is
here in Parliament, followed them. In many areas people have joined the
ANC.]

A number of constituencies have indeed changed their allegiances. People
examined their lives, parties, constituencies and the best interests of
South Africa, and they have found the light and the way in the ANC.

Abanye abaholi bahamba bethi i-ANC ayihambelani nezwi leningi. Abantu bathi
sebebajoyinile bathole ukuthi yibo kanye abawondlovu kayiphendulwa.
Bakuthola lokhu sebephakathi. Yingakho-ke behlubuka nje. KwaZulu-Natal
uKhongolose usemi khona lapho ayemi khona ngemuva kokhetho luka-1999.
Uzimisele ukubambisana ne-IFP njengokwesivumelwano. UNdunankulu wakhona
usephulile lesi sivumelwano ngokuxosha amalungu e-ANC kuhulumeni wakhe.
UKhongolose kodwa usemi lapho ayemi khona ngo-1999 yize uNdunankulu
esebaxoshile ongqongqoshe ababili be-ANC.

Yize ithuba lokumkhipha uMantshinga lilihle, i-ANC uthi, ``Cha Mantshinga
wena lungisa nje kuphela lokhu esavumelana ngakho''. I-ANC yehlele ngezansi
ebheke ikusasa eliqhakazile kuwo wonke umuntu, hhayi kuphela KwaZulu-Natali
kodwa eNingizimu Afrika iphelele. I-ANC ithi makube khona ukubambisana
phakathi kwamaqembu amele abantu abenziwa ubandlululo ukuthi balambe. Uthi
labo abanobubha abahlale phansi bahlahle ikusasa eliqhakazile,
elinentuthuko nokuzwana.

Yilokhu okuzosenza sifake amanzi ezindaweni ezingenawo, sifake nogesi
kulabo abampofu, kuphele ukubulalana nokushiselana izindlu kodwa sazi kahle
ukuthi sibhekene nobubha; sisizane ekwakheni izindlu kunoma sishiselane
izindlu. Izimpesheni lo Hulumeni oholwa yi-ANC usezibeke ku-R700,00,
komhlophe nakomnyama, emadolobheni nasemakhaya. Lokho kuzosiza ukuxosha
ikati eziko emizini eminingi.

Ngibuyela kulo mthetho, lo mthetho kwavunyelwana ngawo emini kwabha cishe
yiwo wonke amalungu akhona lapha. Uyingxenye yomThethosisekelo. Ungomunye
wemithetho esidlala ngayo esavumelana ngayo, yimithetho esavumelana ukuthi
siyoqhubeka ngayo lapha eNingizimu Afrika. Akuwona umthetho oqhamuke kwenye
indawo kodwa umthetho owakhiwe abantu baseNingizimu Afrika bezwana,
bexoxisana futhi bemele abantu baseNingizimu Afrika. Eyokundinda
neyokugcogcoma neyogimbela kwezabo yayingekho ngaleso sikhathi kuxoxwa
ngalo mthetho.
Baningi abantu asebekubona ukukhanya. Akekho othengwe yi-ANC ukuze ajoyine,
okunalokho abaningi balahlekelwe yizikhundla ezinkulu abebenazo, imiholo
emihle abebenayo, ezinye izinsiza ebebenazo ezinhlanganweni zabo, behliswa
ezikhundleni lapho bejona i-ANC. Abanye kade bengososwebhu kodwa abaseyibo
manje ngoba bebalekela umlilo okhona abawutholile emaqenjini
abawahlubukile.

Imingcele yobuphofu sesizoyidudula. Isizwe siyahlangana. (Translation of
Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Some leaders are spreading the rumour that the ANC is not following the
voice of the majority. But when people have joined the parties of those
leaders, they have found that those leaders were the ones who are
autocratic. They discovered this after they had joined their parties. That
is why they left those parties. In KwaZulu-Natal the ANC is where it was
during the 1999 elections. It is prepared to work together with the IFP, as
their agreement states. The Premier of KwaZulu-Natal has violated this
agreement by firing ANC members from his cabinet. But the ANC is still
where it was before the 1999 elections regarding this matter, even though
the premier has fired these two ANC MECs.

Although this is a good opportunity to kick Mantshinga out, the ANC says:
``No, Mantshinga, rectify only what we have agreed upon''. The ANC has
compromised so that everybody can have a bright future, not only people in
KwaZulu-Natal, but people in the whole of South Africa. The ANC says there
should be co-operation between parties that represent people who were
disempowered by apartheid. It says that those who experienced poverty
should sit down and plan for a better future, a future that is full of
development and harmony.

That is why we are giving water to those areas that do not have any. We
install electricity for the poor so as to eradicate poverty and the burning
down of houses. The ANC wants us to know that we are facing poverty. We
need to help one another to build houses rather than burning each other's
houses down when there is a war. The ANC Government has increased the state
pension to R700 a month to both black and white, urban and rural people.
That will help many households in fighting poverty.

Returning to this legislation, we agreed on this legislation openly with
all members who are here. It is part of the Constitution. It is one of the
pieces of legislation that we play with and which we agreed upon. This is
the legislation that we agreed to follow in South Africa. It is not the
legislation that came from another planet; it is the legislation that was
drafted by the South Africans in harmony. They discussed it as they
represent the people of South Africa. The issue of being a political
prostitute, a jumper and an autocrat never existed when this legislation
was discussed.

There are many people who are now seeing the light. No one is bought by the
ANC to join it, instead many lost big positions which they had been
holding. They lost their fat salaries and other benefits that they had
enjoyed in their organisations since they were demoted when they joined the
ANC. Some were Chief Whips, but are no longer now because they ran away
from the fire that they were experiencing in the parties that they came
from. We are now going to push back the frontiers of poverty because the
nation is uniting.]

Indeed, let us unite in action to push back the frontiers of poverty. I
thank you, Deputy Chairperson.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Chairman, proponents of floor crossing did so on the
basis of stabilising politics in South Africa.

The ACDP said it would disestablish politics in addition to striking at the
principle of proportionality, which was our other objection. As far as
accepting new members is concerned, we agonised over the decision in view
of our adopted position. We decided not to actively approach any member,
but felt convinced that we should not shut the door on those members who
out of inner conviction belong in the ACDP and who approached us.

Having said this, in assessing the consequences of allowing public
representatives to cross the floor, possibly one of the most serious
aspects that we as the MPs will be faced with is the anger and
disappointment felt by voters.

Many voters have indicated that floor crossing has effectively nullified
their votes and they have intimated that they do not intend voting at the
next elections, further contributing to the already high level of voter
apathy. This is an issue that we will be faced with.

A further serious consequence relates to the standing of the National
Council of Provinces. The ACDP, through no fault of its own or floor
crossing of any its members, faces the prospect of losing its Western Cape
NCOP seat. This followed the defection of a number of MPLs at the
provincial level and the recalculation of percentages. As a consequence,
members of the NCOP tenuously hold their seats from one window period to
another, hoping that their seats will be retained following the
reconstitution of the NCOP after the window period has closed. This erodes
and devalues that Council and we must clearly revisit this constitutional
amendment.

We also raised concerns regarding the financial implications arising from
defections. Party employees have employment contracts with the party. When
a member crosses the floor the party remains liable for the fulfilment of
the employment contract unless a suitable clause was inserted in the
contract relating to floor crossing. Who would want to work for a political
party where your future is seemingly not only dependent upon members being
re-elected ... [Time expired.]

Dr C P MULDER: Deputy Chairperson, anyone who believes that this crossing
of the floor fiasco was good for our democracy, will probably also believe
that the Mafia make all their money by selling olive oil.

Genadiglik is die oorloopfiasko nou verby. Die VF het dit van die begin af
heftig teengestaan. Daarom het die VF nie daaraan deelgeneem nie. Die
onmiddellike gevolg is dat die ANC nou die sterkste party in die laaste
twee nie-ANC provinsies is en 'n tweederde meerderheid in die Parlement
het. Nou kan die ANC alleen die verskanste eiendomsklousule skrap of Engels
as enigste amptelike taal verklaar. Hoe het ons in hierdie gemors beland?

Die ANC het sedert 1994 sterk standpunt ingeneem teen enige
oorloopklousule. Die Nuwe NP en die DA het met hulle egskeiding druk op die
ANC geplaas om van standpunt te verander. Op 11 Junie verlede jaar het ek
die Nuwe NP in die Parlement gewaarsku en ek haal aan:


  Ek wil die Nuwe NP vandag baie vriendelik waarsku ...

Hoor wat ek vir u sÃª.


  Die ANC speel hierdie spel met julle omdat hulle die Wes-Kaap as 'n
  ''nonliberated area'' beskou waarvan hulle alleen beheer wil kry, so ook
  van Kaapstad. Die ANC het net een doel en dit is om die Nuwe NP te
  vernietig ... Hulle gaan dit ook regkry.

Presies dit het gebeur. Mnr. Van Schalkwyk is in die onmoontlike posisie om
premier te wees van 'n provinsie waar die ANC 'n volstrekte meerderheid
het. Hy kan nie roer sonder die ANC se goedkeuring nie.

Net die ANC het werklik gewen. Is dit wat die Nuwe NP en die DA wou gehad
het met die die oorloopwette? Oorloopwette bevoordeel altyd 'n regering,
want net regerings deel poste uit. Gelukkig het die kiesers die laaste en
finale sÃª en wel by die stembus in 2004. Die VF wil derhalwe 'n beroep op
die kiesers doen om partye soos die ANC, maar ook die DA en andere wat vir
hierdie wetgewing gestem het, te straf en vir ander partye soos die VF te
stem.

Hoekom het hulle dit gedoen? Net op nasionale vlak alleen het in hierdie
Raad 62 lede hulle bestaande party in die steek gelaat en sonder 'n mandaat
oorgeloop na ander partye. Sodoende het hierdie lede deur hulle optrede 2
542 000 kiesers daar buite se stemme gesteel en nutteloos gemaak. Dit is 'n
absolute skande waardeur 'n klug van ons demokrasie gemaak word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mercifully, the floor-crossing fiasco is now over. The FF vehemently
opposed it from the beginning. For that reason the FF did not participate
in it. The immediate consequence is that the ANC is now the strongest party
in the last two non-ANC provinces and has a two-thirds majority in
Parliament. Now the ANC can, on its own, abolish the entrenched property
clause or declare English the only the official language. How did we end up
in this mess?

Since 1994 the ANC has taken a strong position against any floor-crossing
clause. With their divorce, the New NP and DA put pressure on the ANC to
change their point of view. On 11 June last year I warned the New NP in
Parliament, and I quote:
  I want to warn the New NP in a very friendly manner today ...

Listen to what I'm telling you.


  The ANC is playing this game with you because they regard the Western
  Cape as a nonliberated area of which they alone want to gain control, and
  also of Cape Town. The ANC has only one aim, and that is to destroy the
  New NP ... They are also going to get this right.

That is precisely what happened. Mr Van Schalkwyk is in the impossible
position of being the premier of a province in which the ANC has a clear
majority. He cannot move without the ANC's approval.

Only the ANC has truly won. Is that what the New NP and the DA wanted with
the floor-crossing legislation? Floor-crossing legislation always
advantages a government, because only governments assign positions.
Fortunately, the voters have the last and final say at the polls in 2004.
The FF would therefore like to appeal to the voters to punish parties like
the ANC, but also the DA and others who voted for this legislation, and
vote for other parties like the FF.

Why did they do this? At the national level alone, 62 members in this House
deserted their existing party and crossed over to other parties without a
mandate. In so doing these members, through their actions, stole the votes
of 2 542 000 voters out there and rendered them invalid. This is an
absolute disgrace through which a farce is being made of our democracy.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Chairperson, the UCDP supported the legislation
in question and at the same time we said that the legislation is a big test
for elected representatives who have a conscience towards those who placed
them there. It is a litmus test for those who have the convictions of the
policies and values of parties that brought them to the various
legislatures.

Our position has been and still is that opportunism has no place in serving
the nation. Spineless turncoats who are as changeable as the weather do not
deserve the trust of the people. We are averse to people who hunt with the
hounds and run with the hare. Politics dictates that one sticks to one's
guns for better or for worse.

Right now, even after being legitimised by the highest court in the
country, the legislation is giving Parliament a headache. Parties have
sprung up like mushrooms. There will be more constraints on speaking times
because time has not grown while parties have.

This is a test for the majority party to show their commitment to
multiparty democracy and preparedness to listen to the views of the other
parties without the current benign gagging of parties by hiding behind
proportionality without testing other variables such as equity. The latter
refers to the fact that in a democracy all parties in Parliament are equal
as parties and have to be accepted as parties that are on the same
starter's block of the athletic race.

The other poser to this crossing the floor is: On what basis do members who
have crossed qualify for a constituency allowance? [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Deputy Chairman, the PAC rejects political prostitution ...
[Laughter.] ... which has been allowed in this Parliament.

This pseudo-democratic act has reached the treacherous stage of political
Gomorrah and Sodom. [Laughter.] It is not democracy. It is a mixture of
plutocracy, kakistocracy and kleptomania. This exercise is bound to
engender a constitutional route of trouble. It will destabilise this
country sooner rather than later.

The Constitution of the country has been turned into a farce. The
sacredness of the Constitution of this country has been thrown into a
dustbin. The rule of law and the doctrine of retrospectivity have been
sacrificed on the altar of opportunism and betrayal of the voters and the
people of this country.

People and parties that have no democratic right have been let into this
National Assembly through a window of opportunism. They have been allowed
not only to steal the votes of the citizens of this country, but to steal
seats that are not theirs. That is a fact. [Interjections.]

We accept and uphold the independence of the judiciary, but can the
bankrupt political phenomenon witnessed in this country be considered right
just because the Constitutional Court pronounced it right? This would make
nonsense of jurisprudence and human rights. [Interjections.] The system of
proportionality should have been changed in 2004. You do not change the
rules of the game in the middle ... [Laughter.] [Time expired.]

Mnr J P I BLANCHÃ: Mnr die Voorsitter, op die vraag of oorloopwetgewing die
demokrasie versterk het, kan net die kiesers 'n antwoord gee, maar die
oorloopwetgewing het die persoonlikheid van politieke partye ontbloot.

In 1996 het die NP die Regering van Nasionale Eenheid verlaat met die doel
om, soos mnr De Klerk gesÃª het, die opposisie in 'n magtige bolwerk teen
die ANC saam te snoer''. Ek lees vir u uit een van hulle pamfletjies wat
uitgegee is:


  Die ontwikkeling van 'n sterk en 'n waaksame opposisie is noodsaaklik vir
  die handhawing en bevordering van 'n ware veelparty-demokrasie.

En toe, in 1999 met die verkiesing, beloof hulle die kieser hulle gaan hul
saamsnoer nÃ¡ daardie verkiesing. En nÃ¡ die verkiesing vind dit toe plaas.
En kort daarna verlaat hulle die bolwerk om poste in die ANC-regering ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J P I BLANCHÃ: Mr Chairperson, as to the question whether floor-
crossing legislation has strengthened democracy, only the voters can give a
reply, but the floor-crossing legislation has revealed the personalities of
political parties.

In 1996 the NP left the Government of National Unity for the purpose of, as
Mr De Klerk said, ``die opposisie in 'n magtige bolwerk teen die ANC saam
te snoerââ [uniting the opposition in a mighty stronghold against the ANC].
I would like to read you an extract from one of their pamphlets which has
been published:


  Die ontwikkeling van 'n sterk en waaksame opposisie is noodsaaklik vir
  die handhawing en bevordering van 'n ware veelparty-demokrasie.

And then, during the 1999 election, they promised the voters that they were
going to unite after the election. And after the election it happened. And
shortly afterwards they left the stronghold in search of positions in the
ANC Government ... [Interjections.]]

Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, on a point of order, I need a ruling from you.
Don't you feel the voters of South Africa deserve an explanation as to why
...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member! That is not a
point of order. Please proceed, hon BlanchÃ©.

Mnr J P I BLANCHÃ: Ons is dankbaar dat hulle toe daardie bolwerk verlaat
het, net daardie groepie wat daar sit, want hulle het die demokrasie nie
versterk nie.

Die Demokratiese Party het ook in die 1999-verkiesing na hulle kiesers toe
gegaan en gesÃª nÃ¡ die verkiesing sal ons 'n sterker opposisie vorm en hier
sit hulle: die leiers van die Demokratiese Alliansie ... [Tussenwerpsels]
... die mense met ruggraat. Die alternatiewe regering sit hier. Die kieser
het reeds waargeneem op watter politici kan hy pyl trek en wie van hulle
die demokrasie sal uitbou.

Die Federale Alliansie het in 1999 van daardie kiesers wat 'n verenigde
opposisie voorgestaan het 'n mandaat gevra en hulle het vir ons daardie
mandaat gegee en daarom staan ek hier. Ons is deel van die Demokratiese
Alliansie en ons pleit by die verkleinde partye om aan te sluit.

Julle het 'n plig in belang van ... [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J P I BLANCHÃ: We are grateful that they then left that stronghold,
just that little group sitting there, because they had not strengthened
democracy.

The Democratic Party also went to their voters during the 1999 election,
and said that they would form a stronger opposition after the election, and
now they are sitting here: the leaders of the Democratic Alliance ...
[Interjections] ... the people with backbone. The alternative government is
sitting here. The voters have already discovered on which politicians they
can rely and who among them will build democracy.

In 1999 the Federal Alliance asked those voters who  were  in  favour  of  a
united opposition for a mandate and they gave us that mandate, and for  that
reason I am standing here. We are part of the  Democratic  Alliance  and  we
are pleading with the diminished parties to join us.

You have a duty in the interests of ... [Time expired.]]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Deputy Chairperson, the MF feels that since persons are in
representation of a certain number of persons who belong to the citizenry,
they should uphold their position as such.

Basically such a representative should know that he or she is not holding
the seat out of his or her personal capacity, but has been placed in the
position because persons supported him or her being there as a suitable
candidate to put forth their needs and be a representative for them.

Noting that, the MF feels that if such representatives want to change party
affiliation, they should resign their duties in totality, including their
seats, before changing affiliation. Once again, if the party they now
choose to join should select such person into an authoritative position,
then it would be acceptable.

This is how a democracy should be handled. By all means, persons in such an
authoritative position have a democratic right to choose, but they also
have a duty to the persons who have placed them into such authority.

When we chop and change parties it makes our democracy seem insincere and
like a game. The needs of those we represent then become secondary to our
personal ambitions. We have taken an oath to which the MF stresses we
adhere. The MF has no objection to the affiliation as long as it is done in
a manner that does not offend or hinder the persons previously represented.

The MF supports freedom of association, freedom of movement and the
democratic rights of the people, as long as we do not forget the voters
that supported us during the election.

Ms J MOLOI: Madam Speaker and hon members, allow me to join hands with all
those speakers who have echoed the voices saying that today this country
marks the 10th year since the brutal murder of Comrade Chris Hani. A decade
later we are gathered here to assess the impact of the legislation that
allows public representatives to change their affiliation in the context of
the consolidation and the strengthening of democracy.

We remain clear in our mind and conscience of the fact that this is well-
meant legislation which is influenced by the natural progression and new
realities unfolding. The consolidation of these new circumstances has been
brought about by the political, economic, social and also cultural aspects.
We are a country in transition, affected by changes occurring on a daily
basis. We therefore have to accommodate the fact that change, in a manner
that facilitates the transformation agenda of the ANC, is informed by the
needs of the majority of our masses on the ground.

We have never developed policies that cater for self-interest, since our
inception as an organisation in 1912, and even during the period of the
struggle under the oppressive regime. We are continuing to drive this huge
transformation agenda in a way that accommodates everyone.

The crossing of the floor is not a new practice. It happens in many
countries and should never be seen as an attempt, by the ANC, to assume
total political control. The reality is that, as a country in transition,
we are engaged in a huge social experiment that, where necessary, requires
flexibility and proactive leadership.

Imagine yourselves, as drivers of your car, given a map to reach a
particular destination, having to drive through various kinds of weather
conditions. Once you are deep into your journey, you hit an extremely
dangerous road that has sharp curves, steep hills and all other factors
that require cautious driving. Obviously, if you are brave enough, you will
not consider turning back at that point in time, but you will seek to
manoeuvre and exercise all the necessary safety measures as a driver.

As required by the rules of driving in our country, you keep left, pass
right when there is a slow vehicle and stick to the left all the time, and
drive at an acceptable speed. If you exercise your driving skills quite
correctly, then you will be advancing towards your destination.

What comes as a surprise is that the opposition, the opposing parties which
live on opposing the policies we initiate, become beneficiaries of the same
policies they oppose. They always scorn the ANC and make a noise about how
bad the ANC's policy initiatives are. Not only that, they go to the extent
of voting against those policies. When they benefit from the same policies
they prefer to benefit quietly ... [Applause.] ... and will never mention
the fact that, as much as they were opposed to the policy, they realised
that it was a correct decision. And they do not have the decency to say:
``Thank you, ANC. Now we understand, we realise what you meant.''

As a result of the influence of changes, policies of a  number  of  existing
political organisations that  were  relevant  nine  years  ago  may  not  be
relevant now. For  instance,  Azapo  was  known  as  a  black  consciousness
movement and was relevant in the 1970s. That  is  why  most  people  aligned
themselves with it. It was in order to build confidence amongst  blacks  who
were subjected to inhuman laws at that time.

After being black, being proud, what next? You need to move forward and
take up other challenges. A policy may not be relevant in the same way it
was a decade ago. For instance, the PAC with its land concept needs to
expand beyond seeing one factor and merge with all other developmental
programmes. The realisation by the NP to change from the old to the New NP
was in alignment with the realities that are unfolding. The commitment to
work with the ANC further confirms the willingness of the New NP to be part
of the building programme.

The DP's fighting-back alliance, which was short-lived when the New NP
withdrew, had no legal provision for MPs and the MPLs to become DA members
of Parliament. I may cite an example. I may cite many more examples.
However, in response to these abnormalities the crossing of the floor
legislation had to be introduced.

As a matter of fact, the ANC remains stable in what it stands for, that
being racial integration, the nonsexist agenda, the plight of the poor and
the underdeveloped and, broadly, democratic transformation based on social
security, economic prosperity and equal justice for all. That the ANC has a
quest for total political control cannot be true. The ANC is in the
majority now and was in the majority even under the oppressive regime. The
ANC will remain in the majority in years to come. [Interjections.]

However, we will always work with the existing parties which are willing to
take this country forward. In KwaZulu-Natal, for instance, the ANC is in
the majority but opts to work with the IFP for the sake of peace and
justice for the people in that province. In the Western Cape the ANC is in
the majority but prefers to remain working with the New NP in order to
improve the lives of South Africans. [Interjections.]

We are certain that the crossing of the floor legislation came at the
correct time and has made a major political statement which is influenced
by change. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, thank you very much. I know
that the events of the last week have bruised emotions and feelings and I
do want to start out by saying: I think we must insist on the protection of
the right of each one of us to hold his or her views. We must not treat
each other with contempt purely because our views differ.

In the wake of the window period, I think that collectively, as this House
and as South Africa's electorate, we ought to be proud of what has
happened. All of us deserve it. We are a young democracy. There is no
blueprint to follow. Right from the process when we negotiated our
settlement we have had, as a nation, the task of finding our way steadily
into the future. Nations of the world admire what we have done. Here too we
have opened a chapter. We have taken a step that few countries which have
attained democracy have taken before. We are guided by the experience of
our people and our nation. So I think that we must applaud ourselves, from
time to time, for this achievement. [Applause.]

This debate, as I understood it, was about floor crossing. It was about
whether what we have done is right or not. This is an issue which has been
raised on the floor of this House for some time and we have not really
confronted it. An assertion has been made in this House over and over again
that this democracy cannot succeed unless there is a strong opposition.
[Applause.]
The question we have never asked ourselves and which I have never heard
asked and answered is: What do we mean by ``opposition''? [Interjections.]
What is meant by it? I looked at the history of the ANC. I found that
throughout the course of its history, since 1912, the ANC has evolved
policy. I could not immediately find any body that has since then been
opposed to the development of the policy that is now, in my view, guiding
this country.

I noticed the processes, internal to the ANC as a Parliament of the people
of South Africa, that afforded us an opportunity to scrutinise policy.
Decade after decade, our movement produced concrete and solid and reliable
policy. We are not in this Parliament with some opposition. When we came to
the conclusion that the future of our country lies in the fact that black
and white South Africans must be accepted as permanent citizens on the
basis of equality, living in this country, we were not here. [Applause.]

So the question must be asked - and we must ask ourselves - what do we mean
by ``opposition''? When I take that history, it seems to say to me that if
by ``opposition'' we mean effective scrutiny of policy, then I would agree
with that if that is one of the elements of ``opposition'', because that is
what we are capable of doing. The ANC as a movement was able to do that
over all of these decades, and all of those who scrutinised and often
opposed proposals on policy were right inside the ANC itself and loyal to
the movement. That is the one issue.

The second element is what we mean by ``strong''. What is meant by that?
Does it mean strength in numbers? If you put together large numbers of
fools and empty-headed people, you will not produce reliable and viable
alternatives. That is not what is going to happen and therefore we have now
to think whether it is a question of numbers alone, or the quality of the
viable alternatives offered. At the present time, I cannot think, with the
policy positions that are being put forward by this Government, that there
is a viable alternative.

I make it a point and I say this with all humility, that we must make it a
point to listen to each other's point of view, however much we may differ.
We must try to listen and find out whether there are indeed issues which we
need to take account of, which we are ignoring. I say that both to members
of my party and to members of the opposition. If those are to be found
somewhere, we must apply our mind whether it is correct for us to ignore
them, simply because they come from the opposition; or from people we do
not like. We must judge them on the basis of their merits and when it is
like that, I think that if therefore by ``strong'' is meant viable
alternatives, then I think I would agree with that.

In order to offer viable alternatives, you do not need to be outside of the
ANC. You can do that right inside the ranks of the party. [Laughter.]
[Applause.] It has been done for decades.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, are you rising on
a point of order?
Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Minister if he is
prepared to answer a question.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Could I complete the next point and then I will
entertain the question? I will also buy you a whiskey that we could proceed
to, once we have finished here. [Laughter.]

The next element in this issue is: Who takes part in that scrutiny process
of policy? Who takes part in it? In the operation of our movement over the
decades, we started policy from the base, from a branch in the countryside,
a branch in the compound, mine compound, hostel and so on. Men and women
there were asked to say what they thought the future South Africa should
look like. It was those masses of the people in the countryside and in the
locations and the shebeens who said what they thought and that, by a
process, gravitated and ultimately produced the Freedom Charter. That
guaranteed us that if those were the views of our people, they would vote
for them, which is why when we went to the 1994 elections, the first thing
we did was to go to our people and say to them: What are the issues you
think we must prioritise if we were to win the election? In the people's
forums our people said peace, jobs, this and that. That was on the placards
we put out and the commitments we made to them; housing and things like
that. It was bound to happen. Experience has taught us that when that is
the position, nobody could stop us. In the struggle for freedom, we had
always pursued that and even though the previous regime had the most
powerful weaponry on the continent of Africa, we were able to bring them to
their knees, precisely because the masses of the people are an unstoppable
force; here too. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Are you willing to take the question
now, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: May I take your question?

Dr C P MULDER: Thank you, Mr Minister. The speech you have just made has
very, very serious implications for democracy in South Africa - and that is
my view. The point that you made, Sir, is that there is no room for
opposition and that all views should be expressed within the ANC.
[Interjections.] The question is: In the light of what the Minister has
just said in this speech, how does he interpret Section 1(d) of the
Constitution's founding provisions that this country should be a multiparty
democracy?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: I have not said that people who want to be outside
of the ANC must not stay outside. As a matter of fact, in the history of
the ANC there have been those who were in our ranks who sometimes, when
they did not agree, walked out of the ANC. We never fought them. The
members of the PAC, for instance, were all members of the ANC. When they
did not agree with the majority, they walked out. We will defend and
protect their right to stay out of the ANC and I insist that we must
protect you to stay outside the ANC. [Applause.] I did not say that. The
point I am making is simply that ``opposition'' does not mean standing
there and distancing yourself from the majority. I am saying it must be
understood to mean effective scrutiny of policy and the capacity and
ability to contribute to policy. If at any time the ANC denied people the
opportunity to make contributions to policy, they were free to walk out of
the ANC. That is why this floor-crossing legislation is also applicable. If
there is anybody within the ranks of the ANC that wants to cross over, we
would be the first to protect their right to do so.

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order, Chairperson. The Minister's time expired
a long time ago. [Laughter.]

Debate concluded.

                            BANKS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chair, hon members, in 1999 the IMF
and World Bank identified South Africa as one of a few countries to form
part of the pilot financial sector assessment programme.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, those who are
leaving, please do so quietly and quickly in order that we may proceed.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Deputy Chair. One of the main
objectives of the financial sector assessment programme was to evaluate the
countries' level of compliance with international standards. Those
standards refer to the Basel core principles for effecting banking
supervision set by the Basel Core Committee on Bank Supervision with the
aim of facilitating an international accord for prudential and risk-
sensitive banking supervision.

The 2000 financial sector assessment programme evaluation of the South
African financial system described it as robust, highly developed,
sophisticated and well regulated with a strong banking system, a well-
developed securities market, a strong presence of institutional investors
and low corporate leverage. The assessment evaluation report further stated
that South Africa is compliant with 22 of the 25 core principles for
effective banking supervision.
Since that assessment, further work has been done to effect full
compliance. Most importantly, we established the Financial Intelligence
Centre in terms of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act to combat money-
laundering. With the financial centre becoming operational this year, we
believe that South Africa is now compliant with 23 of the 25 core
principles for effective banking supervision.

The current Bill has been drafted over the past three years and has been
through a very wide and thorough consultative process. It initially came
about from the directive of the select committee of the National Council of
Provinces to correct the gender-insensitive provisions of the Banks Act of
1990. This was to be done to reflect the constitutional imperatives in that
regard. Flowing from the financial sector assessment programme of South
Africa and domestic circumstances, there was a regulatory need to
strengthen the supervisory powers of the banking supervisor. Accordingly,
some of the amendments introduced through this Bill flow from the report
pertaining to the affairs of the Regal Treasury Private Bank Limited that
was delivered by Adv Myburgh.

Whilst the Bill is largely intended to correct gender-insensitive
provisions of the Banks Act, it also seeks to give legal clarification for
fiduciary duties and responsibilities of directors, chief executive
officers and managers of banks. In other instances, this Bill seeks to
create legal clarification in those provisions of the principal Act that
require further clarification.

Modern chief executive officers, and managers of companies in general and
of banks in particular, command wide powers. It is therefore important to
ensure that only fit and proper persons, directors and chief executive
officers and others comprise the management of our banks. To give effect to
this principle, the Bill, in an extensive clause 40, affords the registrar
new supervisory powers to approve or reject the appointment of new
executive and nonexecutive officers of a bank. The Bill also gives the
registrar clear powers to terminate the appointment of current officers if
he or she has reason to believe that such an officer is no longer fit and
proper or that it is not in the public interest for such officer to remain
in office. Further, the Bill lays down detailed procedures on how to
exercise these powers.

To give further teeth to the registrar in order to act on behalf of and in
the interest of depositors, clause 40(b) provides that the registrar may
institute an action against officers who knowingly carry on a reckless
banking business. Any amount recovered by this legal action from those
officers would be applied to defray expenses incurred by the registrar,
offset the amounts paid to depositors by the registrar or any deposit
insurance scheme and, thereafter, for the pro rata payment of losses to
depositors.

It is also important to extend corporate governance measures developed by
common law in respect of directors, chief executive officers and executive
officers of banks. Clause 40 of this Bill codifies the generally accepted
common law principles of fiduciary duty, and duty of care and skill owed to
the company. This is different from the existing Banks Act which only
refers to a fiduciary relationship. So this clause clearly defines the
parameters of such a duty. The other key elements that this Bill introduces
are a requirement for a greater degree of care and skill from the directors
and executive managers of a bank than is normally required in respect of
duties of directors of other companies.

Certain regulations pertaining to corporate governance have already been
incorporated in the regulations relating to banks. Clause 1(b) inserts the
important new definition of corporate governance in relation to the
management of a bank, or a bank controlling company. This is a legislative
first for South Africa. Clause 42 of the Bill introduces a system of
compulsory rotation of auditors under such conditions as may be prescribed
by regulation. This far-reaching amendment is meant to ensure the
independence of a bank's auditors at all times. Practicalities of this
system will be prescribed by regulation. Further, the principal Act
provides that the registrar may prescribe that a bank with total assets
exceeding R10 billion appoints no fewer than two auditors. This requirement
has proved to be somewhat rigid and the Bill proposes to prescribe the
amount by regulation.

All these measures that I have mentioned are just a synopsis of this Bill.
It is important to state that this Bill is a significant improvement on
existing legislation. We are pleased that this Bill will strengthen South
Africa's banking industry, extend the prudential regulatory framework
pertaining to banks and sharpen the oversight powers of our banking
supervisory authority. We have no doubt that in doing so it will further
strengthen South Africa's ability to comply with international standards.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Chairperson, colleagues, the most important amendments to
the Banks Act before us revolve around the powers of the Registrar of Banks
in order to ensure sound corporate governance and increase the powers of
the registrar in this regard. These amendments are largely the Regal
Treasury Private Bank Limited amendments by any other name.

Given that no formal investigation has been launched by either the
regulator or the National Treasury to probe the specific circumstances that
led to the collapse of Saambou Bank, a Regal-type commission of inquiry, in
retrospect, would have been advisable and might still have to be
considered. Regrettably, the SA Reserve Bank have decided to use exemptions
42 and 44 of the Promotion of Access to Information Act to refuse access to
section 6 of the KPMG report. As the access Act overrides both the Banks
Act and the South African Reserve Bank Act, the DA is seeking advice as to
whether to proceed with litigation to obtain a copy of that report.

This Bill before the House should not only have been the Regal Treasury
Private Bank Limited Bill; we should have seized the moment. It should also
have been the Saambou Bank Bill with sufficient amendments to ensure that
there would be no more Saambou-style collapses or implosions. Arguably,
these amendments go a very long way in addressing corporate governance.
But, as legislators, we do not know whether they go far enough because we
do not know what happened.

The questions around Saambou Bank's collapse are many and remain
unanswered. The former depositors, taxpayers and all banked South Africans
have a right to know what happened to Saambou and have a right to be
reassured that the regulatory system has all the checks and balances
required to ensure a well-regulated sector. In addition, due to the R4
billion contingent liability, we all have a right to know whether Saambou's
assets were disposed of in a sound manner which maximised revenue and
minimised liabilities.

The Bill before the House provides for the establishment of a compliance
function within banks. It requires banks to establish and maintain adequate
processes of sound corporate governance. The key feature of the Bill is the
new regulatory powers that it gives to the registrar in respect of the
directors of banks. The Bill contains provisions regarding the fiduciary
duty and duty of care and skill which rest on directors. It extends such
duties to chief executive officers, executive officers of banks and bank
controlling companies.

The registrar has new powers to institute an action for breach of the
fiduciary duties to the registrar that will be civil in nature and could
fulfil a powerful function in protecting the interests of depositors. There
is no doubt that this Bill will cause a shake-up in corporate governance in
the banking sector. In the context of some of the factors that clearly
contributed to the collapse of Saambou Bank, these amendments are welcome
and overdue.

The DA supports this Bill. Had its provisions been in place, arguably,
Saambou may still have been with us. But we will not relent in probing all
the circumstances that led to the collapse of Saambou. We need answers on
the dubious incentive schemes and secondary capital structures of Saambou
Holdings Limited and Saambou Bank Limited and whether similar schemes are
present in any of our other banks. The Governor of the SA Reserve Bank has
stated that the bank should be exempted from the provisions of the
Promotion of Access to Information Act. Such a blanket exemption cannot be
countenanced. Only Cabinet, controversially, enjoys it. The bank is not
only a responsible regulator - it is also an accountable institution.

In sharp contrast to the governor, the Minister of Finance does not appear
to have principled objections to a release of the Saambou reports. He
merely expressed reservations that a release may impact negatively on
criminal investigations, in a recent parliamentary reply to a question from
myself. The SA Reserve Bank stated that releasing the report would
jeopardise the economic interests of the Republic. The Minister of Finance
does not appear to share that sentiment. They cannot both be right. It is
time for everyone involved to come clean on what happened with Saambou -
the National Treasury, the SA Reserve Bank, the FSB and the National
Directorate of Public Prosecutions. If investigations are ongoing, they
have to be expedited in order for the public to know what happened to that
bank. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Chairperson, the relationship between banks and depositors
or clients is based on mutual trust. People who put money in banks always
believe that their money will always be safe. I agree, that assumption is
correct. This mutual trust between banks and their clients or depositors
makes banks viable institutions and this is their source of credibility.

Any economic activity in any country relies on banks for funding. It is the
bedrock of our economy. We need to protect the integrity of banks and the
interests of consumers. We cannot afford the erosion of the confidence of
our people in our banking industry. This can only be achieved by holding
management of banks accountable and by prescribing, through legislation,
good corporate governance measures.

The recent bank failures and the report pertaining to the affairs of Regal
Treasury Private Bank Limited indicated the need to give the Registrar of
Banks additional regulatory powers. Some of the problems around small banks
could have been averted, especially the Regal Treasury Private Bank
Limited, if the registrar had the powers contained in this Bill.

This Bill gives the registrar the powers to prevent the appointment of any
person intending to be a director or a manager of a bank, if they are
deemed not to be fit and proper. The Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision, a banking supervisory authority originally established by the
Central Governors of Group of Ten countries, indicates that a person who
has judicial judgments or investigations cannot be regarded as fit and
proper.

The registrar is also empowered by the Bill to remove or replace existing
managers or directors of a bank if the registrar is of the opinion or has
reason to believe that they are no longer fit and proper or it is no longer
in the public interest to let them continue to hold their positions.
Let me emphasise the points I made earlier. Depositors or clients of banks
are the largest source of funding of a bank. They have to be protected. The
registrar may take legal action against bank officers who knowingly conduct
bank business recklessly, to the disadvantage of depositors. The registrar
is also empowered to approve the appointment of auditors of banks and those
of bank controlling companies. This Bill stipulates the compulsory rotation
of auditors of banks to ensure the independence of auditors. This is born
out of certain experiences.

The Enron debacle, that became a symbol of business corruption and greed,
alerted the whole world to the need for enforcing the independence of
auditors. An American publication, Business Week, of 6 May 2002 had this to
say after the Enron debacle, and I quote:


  Auditors should rotate every few years to ensure a fresh look by a new
  firm. Instead of just asserting that the financials meet generally
  accepted accounting principles, the auditor's statement should illuminate
  just where in the wide range of acceptable practices a particular company
  falls. As an up-close reviewer of the numbers, the auditor is in a unique
  position to judge how dependent the financial statements are on
  assumptions that are faulty.

I can continue to cite many examples from the United States of America to
emphasise the seriousness of this matter and the need for credible and
independent auditors.

According to the same American publication on 1 April 2002, Xerox, an IT
company, agreed to pay US$10 million to settle charges that it engaged in
fraudulent accounting practices. In May 2001, Arthur Andersen, an auditing
firm, agreed to pay US$110 million to settle a shareholders' claim alleging
fraud in its audit of Sunbeam. On 11 January 2000, Al Dunlap agreed to pay
US$15 million to settle a lawsuit from Sunbeam shareholders and
bondholders, alleging that he cooked the books of Sunbeam.

Although we have not witnessed serious auditing scandals in South Africa on
the scale experienced in the USA, we cannot rest on our laurels. We are a
small economy that cannot accommodate anything that erodes confidence. The
critical matter that needs to be considered by this House at some stage,
which has been raised by the hon Ms Taljaard, is the issue of access to
confidential and sensitive information held by the Registrar of Banks. This
is not an easy matter, hon members. We need to engage in this debate on
access to information, considering international experience and the need to
protect the integrity of our banks. We need balance. We come from a history
of repression, denial of information and unjust administrative action.

The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision had this to say on this matter.
Let me quote:


  Banks should be required to disclose to the public information regarding
  their activities and financial position that is comprehensive and not
  misleading. This information should be timely and sufficient for market
  participants to assess the risk inherent in any individual banking
  organisation. Although market participants should have access to correct
  and timely information, there are certain types of sensitive information
  that should be held confidential by banking supervisors. In order for a
  relationship of mutual trust to develop, banks need to know that such
  sensitive information will be held by the supervisory agency.

Let me continue to indicate the investigation of the Basel Committee, after
realising that this is a very difficult matter. Let me quote again:


  The committee recognises that it is important to determine the right
  level of detail for disclosure in the light of the proprietary nature of
  information held by banks. Proprietary information encompasses
  information, that is for example information on customers, products or
  systems, the sharing of which with competitors would render a bank's
  investment in these products or systems less valuable, and hence would
  undermine its competitive position.

But the same committee continues to urge for a disclosure around a number
of areas, for example, the capital adequacy. A bank should disclose work
possible and appropriate capital structure and accounting principles that
accompany it, and also a number of risks that the bank intends to take.
They should disclose that to their clients. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Deputy Chairperson, the passage of this Bill has been a
fairly smooth one. There was a general agreement in the Portfolio Committee
of Finance. We did attract a few stakeholders, we tried to have hearings.
There was not too much interest from the industry. We note that the
industry in general and other interest groups have been well consulted by
the department in putting together this legislation. Given that other
speakers have covered the more topical or the more substantive issues, I am
going to try and give something of a broad sweep across the more central
themes of the Bill. Hopefully I'll not repeat too much of what has already
been said.

The Deputy Minister is correct in that we have to see this Bill and its
amendments against recent international experiences and against internal
experiences. Regal Bank has been mentioned. I think a number of other
observations were made by the registrar as to weaknesses in the current
Act. We acknowledge that banks are very special institutions in our
society, and more perhaps than any other institutions, they are entrusted
with the material interests of millions of people and in many cases the
last savings of the lowest-income earners.

The responsibility is therefore to protect the interests of these millions
of people by regulating these institutions through law, and by constantly
revisiting, revising, reviewing the appropriateness and the sufficiency of
this law. Of course this Bill in front of us is just such a revision. It
covers a broad number of areas. I will just read across a few of these that
attracted our attention and which we are very supportive of. It gives
greater clarity and coherence to the existing legal and regulatory
environment, and it limits the improper use of persons who carry on
businesses as banks, where a number of loopholes have been exposed.

Changes here have taken place to the legal provisions and the registrar's
scope to intervene where these anomalies occur. It obligates banks to
establish a compliance function, as has been mentioned, and to enhance risk
management in each bank, and to limit risk by extending that 40% rule which
concerns certain specified investments of a controlling company's share of
capital in the reserve funds. Now this is to apply the 40% limitation to a
consolidation of all banks and the holding companies within that particular
group.

We note that the Minister is going to issue regulations to introduce more
stringent levels of corporate governance, appropriate to the changing
banking environment, and these I think are pretty well covered by both the
hon Taljaard and the hon Moloto. There is the elevation of chief executive
officers and executive officers into the fiduciary duty arrangements, and
the provision of an objective test for what is defined as the duty of care
and skill, as will be required by the actions of these directors and senior
managers.

It also clarifies the relationships between directors and the senior
management. Other issues are the risk management committees which are now
introduced, directors' affairs committees, rotation of auditors, increased
penalties, and the limitations to paying out of dividends of the share
capital. All these are very welcome and they strengthen the corporate
governance and the risk management arrangements. There is also the
accommodation of a new body of related best practices which have come about
through international experience.

All this will go towards adding to the protection of those depositors, as I
mentioned at the beginning of my speech, as well as, not only the
depositors, but other categories of the banking industry's clients as well.
The IFP is very happy to support this. Thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. The Minority Front is pleased with
the efforts to bring banking in line with our Constitution. Further, it is
encouraging to note various role-players doing so, as it depicts an
earnestness to uphold and install our democracy in all sectors. The
amendments in this Bill appear to bring clarity in banking activities. Such
clarity and definition allow for greater control over banking activities.

Clause 3 appears to hold much control and allows for the greater assurance
of delivery of activities in a standardised and efficient manner. The Bill
amends, deletes and provides for a number of factors crucial to the banking
sector, upholding a democracy in which we are protective of the interests
of our citizenry. We have to ensure that the interests of such persons be
maintained and carried through effectively and efficiently.

The Minority Front supports the Banks Amendment Bill. Thank you,
Chairperson.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Deputy Chair. I would like to
thank members for participating in the debate, but also for the general
support that has been given to the Bill. This is certainly reflective in
our understanding of what also happened in the committee. There are
important issues which I think have been raised in this particular context
of the Bill that we are dealing with.

The one view is that perhaps this Bill should have also taken into account
some of the things that happened around Saambou. The collapse of Saambou
should have been taken into account in drafting this particular
legislation. As members would understand, the matter of Saambou is a matter
that is still very fresh in South African banking experience, particularly
the experience of collapses that have taken place. We are still grappling
with matters that relate to the demise of Saambou.
But I do not believe that we needed to wait and not act on those matters,
where we could already identify gaps currently, until the work around
Saambou has been completed. Issues have been raised about the South African
Reserve Bank, and the request that has been made to it, to make available
certain information to the public. I think it is fair to make the request,
but we must also understand that the Reserve Bank itself has to exercise
great responsibility in dealing with issues of information that are given
to it in the course of carrying out its regulatory functions.

There are matters of confidence there, there are matters of ensuring that,
in the way you deal with that information, you don't end up undermining the
effectiveness of your regulatory framework. That responsibility, with which
the Reserve Bank has to deal with those kinds of requests, flows from the
extensive powers that the Reserve Bank has. It has extensive powers to
access information, from very, very sensitive institutions such as banks.

We therefore need to understand that the manner in which you deal with that
information that is at your disposal must not lead to unintended
consequences. I think instead of just castigating the Reserve Bank we must
also understand where the Reserve Bank is coming from. The greater focus,
from our point of view, is on ensuring that when we do identify gaps,
corrective action is taken, and that is what we do on an ongoing basis.

There are matters of competition which are of concern to institutions when
they make information available to a regulator such as the Reserve Bank.
There will be concerns that such information does not end up landing in the
hands of their competitors. Perhaps another point to make is, and I think
it was the final point Miss Taljaard also made, that the investigations
that may be taking place must be expedited, thank you very much, so that
the public can know what happened.

Of course, investigations do not always happen at our own pace. Certainly
it would be in our interest as well that investigations are expedited. We
are concerned about continuous insinuations around our actions at some
point. There have been suggestions that we did not act correctly. There
have been suggestions that we did not apply our minds properly. We believe
that we applied our minds and we believe we acted correctly.

We are therefore grappling with that unease around our actions. The fact
that the Government and the Minister of Finance may differ on whether this
information should be released or otherwise, I think is healthy because the
specific responsibilities that the two have are not exactly the same. So it
should be understood if they may differ on particular points. Really, the
general point I would like to make is that we have to exercise great
responsibility in dealing with the information that is put at our disposal,
in order to enable us to carry out our regulatory responsibilities.

I would like to thank members for the general support they have given to
the Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 18:36.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills:


     (i)    Local Government: Municipal Structures Second Amendment Bill [B
          68B - 2002] - Act No 1 of 2003 (assented to and signed by
          President on 4 April 2003).


             NOTE: The name of the Act is the Local Government: Municipal
             Structures Amendment Act, 2003.
     (ii)   Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Third Amendment
           Bill [B 33B - 2002] - Act No 3 of 2003 (assented to and signed
           by President on 9 April 2003).


             NOTE: The name of the Act is the Constitution of the Republic
             of South Africa Second Amendment Act, 2003.


     (iii)  National Development Agency Amendment Bill [B 70B - 2002] - Act
             No 6 of 2003 (assented to and signed by President on 9 April
             2003).Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for
             assent:


             (1)  Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on  10  April
                 2003:


                 (i)   Deeds  Registries  Amendment  Bill  [B  65B  -  2002]
                       (National Assembly - sec 75).

             2.   Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:
     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 10 April 2003 in  terms  of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as  a  section  76
         Bill:


         (i)     Financial and Fiscal Commission  Amendment  Bill  [B  21  -
              2003] (National Assembly - sec 76).

National Assembly:

1.    Membership of Portfolio, Joint, Standing and House Committees:


     (1)    The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
         Committees, viz:


         Ethics and Members' Interests:


         Appointed: Madikiza, G T (Alt); Van Wyk, A.
         Discharged: Frolick, C T.


         Foreign Affairs:


         Appointed: Bapela, O (Alt).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
     the Government of the Republic of Angola on Waiving of the Requirement
     of Visas on Diplomatic and Official Passports, in terms of section
     231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

