---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 February 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-02-26
---

WEDNESDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, President - welcome back - Deputy
President, Cabinet colleagues, including our brand new Minister of Housing,
Brigitte Mabandla ... [Applause] ... Governor and Deputy Governors of the
Reserve Bank, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, Amartya Sen,
the Nobel laureate for economics, writes:


  Freedom is both the primary objective, and the principal means of
  development ... What a person has the actual capability to achieve, is
  influenced by economic opportunities, political liberties, social
  facilities, and the enabling conditions of good health, basic education,
  and the encouragement and cultivation of initiatives. These opportunities
  are, to a great extent, mutually complementary, and tend to reinforce one
  another.

Today we table the tenth budget of a free and democratic South Africa - a
South Africa proud in the assumption of the benefits and responsibilities
of freedom: freedom we have won to choose our own destiny and, in so doing,
to take our development into our own hands; freedom we have won to choose
our own representatives and, in doing so, to decide for ourselves the
character of our state and the actions we direct it to take on our behalf;
freedom of which this Budget is but one expression, albeit a very visible
one.

Freedom, writes Amartya Sen, is the primary aim of development, and also
the principal means of achieving it.

Budget priorities - development as freedom

Our long walk to freedom bears testimony to a leadership and a people
driven by a commitment to democracy, human rights, peace, shared
opportunities and a better life for all. Our history bears testimony to our
commitment and determination to do the right thing. We have always done so
with the courage, integrity, energy and selflessness born from the
knowledge that our principles and our values are worth fighting for. We
fought apartheid because it was the right thing to do. We fought for
democracy because it was the right thing do. When, on 26 June 1955, the
Congress of the People adopted the Freedom Charter, it rose above the
tyranny of that time to proclaim with one voice:
  We, the people of South Africa, declare for all our country and the world
  to know: that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white
  ...

[Applause.] And, as a reminder, the charter ends with a pledge:


  ... and we pledge ourselves to strive together, sparing neither strength
  nor courage, until the democratic changes here set out have been won.

The Freedom Charter reflected our people's aspirations for political
freedom; freedom from poverty; freedom to transform our society, its
culture and values; freedom to explore our capabilities; and the freedom to
choose a future for our children. We fought for that freedom because it was
the right thing to do. Bekufanele! It was the right thing to do.
[Applause.]

And it still was the right thing to do when, on 8 May 1996, in this very
House, we adopted our new Constitution, embraced our history and accepted
the enormous challenge of rebuilding our country and economy, of healing a
nation, of restoring dignity, of inspiring hope and nurturing dreams, of
assuming both the benefits and the responsibilities of our freedom.

In just under nine years we have worked hard to push back the frontiers of
poverty, to rebuild a tattered economy, to return pride to our people, to
build confidence, to care for the poor and most vulnerable. We have steered
clear of the illusion that is populism. We have sought to build rather than
postulate. We have chosen decision over vacillation and progress over
stagnation. We have chosen inclusion over exclusion. We have chosen
stability over chaos. We have chosen predictability over irrationality. We
have embraced the present, mindful of the past, and boldly face our future.
[Applause.] We nurture our youth while caring for our elders. We respect
the community and the individual. We cherish our diversity and our common
humanity. We have chosen respect over disregard. We have chosen humility
over arrogance. We have chosen partnership over isolation. We have chosen
learning over assuming. We have chosen frankness over glibness.

In the northwestern part of our country, people speak a language that was
probably the most downtrodden under apartheid, Nama, the language of the
gods. People there say: Sieda kee kghanoe goena ra die, kghanoe douwb y da
kou goei-ouw! [Applause.] They say: We have chosen the right path, and that
is why we take the correct decisions. [Interjections.]

And yet, Mr President, you have charged us to do more. When you stood at
this podium on 14 February, addressing the nation, you reminded us that the
key task with which we are charged is ensuring a better life for all. You
said then:


  The Government must act to ensure that we reduce the number of people
  dependent on social welfare, increasing the numbers that rely for their
  livelihood on normal participation in the economy. This is also
  especially relevant to the accomplishment of the goal of enhancing the
  dignity of every South African.

The 2003 Budget extends and strengthens our growth and development strategy
and progressively realises the social and economic rights of our people. It
embodies a set of policies aimed at pushing back the frontiers of poverty
whilst supporting growth and creating opportunities. It seeks to empower
people by expanding their capabilities.

This Budget benefits from and contributes to the strong growth performance
of our economy. Despite a bleak global environment our economy registered
improved growth last year. Our projections indicate that over the next
three years we will continue to experience growth and see progress with
employment creation, providing the basis for more and more South Africans
to ``rely for their livelihood on normal participation in the economy''.

The 2003 Budget:

-     E beya pele go fokotsa bohloki le tshokolo;
-     e oketsa tshelete ya bana le ya phepo dikolong;

-     e oketsa tshelete ya batsofadi, dipuku t[s]a dikolo, meriana le
  maokelo; [Legowa.]

-     e matlafatsa magato kgahlanong le HIV/Aids;

-     e fa bommasepala tshelete ya ditirelo tsa mahala, le go oketsa
  infrastructure le go hlola mesomo; [Legowa.]

-     e oketsa tshelete ya go busetsa lefase go beng; [Legowa.]

-     e ema-nokeng diphetogo tsa diyunibesithi le diknikone; [Legowa.]

-     e beeletsa le go kaonefatsa bokgoni bja basomi;

-     e matlafatsa ntwa kgahlanong le bosenyi; [Legowa.]

-     e oketja tshelete ya botseta dinageng disele le go ema-nokeng lenaneo
  la Nepad; [Legowa.]
-     e theola metshelo.

We are saying, friends, that this Budget:

-     gives priority to reducing poverty and vulnerability;

-     extends the child support grant and increases spending on the primary
  school nutrition programme;

-     increases spending on social grants, textbooks, medicines, hospital
  buildings and equipment;

-     further reinforces the enhanced response to HIV and Aids;

-     gives municipalities additional resources for free basic services,
  investment in infrastructure and job creation;

-     accelerates spending on land restitution;

-     supports further restructuring of universities and technikons;

-     invests in skills development;

-     strengthens the fight against crime;

-     increases spending on foreign representation and support for Nepad;
  and - no surprise -

-     gives generous tax relief. [Applause.]

This Budget once again recognises that making the right choices is not just
about delivering a better quality of life for our people for a year or two.
It is about ensuring that the policy choices we make today are affordable
and sustainable 10 or 20 years from now.

But, as much as we have achieved, it is not enough.

Accountability for service delivery

There are a number of elements of the development equation that are often
hard to quantify, yet are fundamental to achieving the outcomes we seek.
The first of these is the quality of the services that Government delivers.
When people experience poor service delivery, or our projects fail, then
not only are citizens denied those services to which they are entitled, but
in turn their capacity to contribute further to the development process is
undermined. Unless our policies are implemented efficiently, courteously,
honestly and enthusiastically, we will achieve far less than we intend, and
than our people surely deserve.

Liphelile ixesha lokuba sinyamezelane nabasebenzi bakaRhulumente abamisa
ootat' omkhulu noomakhulu bethu ÿ.ÿ.ÿ. [Kwaqhwatywa.] ÿ.ÿ.ÿ. elangeni
ngokufika kade kumaziko enkam-nkam. Asinakumelana nabongikazi
abangenankathalo kwizigulane nezihlobo zazo.

Ixesha labaphathi bamaziko kaRhulumente nootitshala abangamavila
nabangawuthatheli ÿ.ÿ.ÿ. [Kwaqhwatywa.] ÿ.ÿ.ÿ. ngqalelo umsebenzi wabo
liphelile. Asinakumelana nezi zinto zilandelayo kumaziko kaRhulumente:

-     iimpompo ezivuzayo

-     iincwadi ezilahlekayo ezikolweni

-     abantu abalinda imini yonke bemele uncedo lukaRhulumente

-     izigulane ezinezilonda namanxeba angapholiyo

-     neencwadi zezicelo nezamatyala ezidukayo.

Abasebenzi abangazi bandakanyi nenkqubo kaBatho Pele sicela bakhululeke.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ukungananzi kwabo kusilelisa ilizwe lonke. Kuphazamisa amawaka abasebenzi
abazinikeleyo emsebenzini nabanomdla wokwakha uMzantsi Afrika ...
[Kwaqhwatywa.] ... okhululekileyo nosekelwe kwinkqubo yoBuntu. Umntu
ngumntu ngabantu. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Andinakuzigwagwisa ngenkululeko kukho
abantu abahluphekayo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The time is over for public servants who let our grandfathers and
grandmothers ... [Applause] ... stand in the sun by arriving late at the
pension paypoints. We cannot tolerate nurses that show no regard for the
patients and their relatives.

The time is over for administrators of public service centres and teachers
who are lazy and show ... [Applause] ... no regard for their work. We
cannot tolerate the following in the Public Service:

- leaking taps

- missing textbooks

- people waiting the whole day to be assisted by the Public Service

- patients with festering bedsores

- application forms and dockets that go missing.

Public servants that do not embrace the spirit of Batho Pele are requested
to leave. [Applause.] Their lack of commitment has a negative effect on the
whole country. It undermines the efforts of public servants who are
committed to their work and who are interested in building a free South
Africa ... [Applause] ... based on the principles of ubuntu, ``I am because
you are''. [Applause.] I cannot boast of freedom in the midst of poverty
among the people.]

We're saying that we simply cannot and must not tolerate those who make
pensioners wait for hours in the sun because they have not bothered to
arrive on time, or those who bring shame to their profession by treating
patients and their families callously, or those who abuse the children in
their care, or those who could not be bothered to ensure that hospitals
have medicines. We cannot tolerate the breakdown in elementary management
that results in run-down facilities, leaking pipes, missing textbooks, slow-
moving queues, festering bedsores, lost case files.

Those who do not embrace the spirit of Batho Pele should do the right thing
and leave the Public Service. [Applause.] Their lack of commitment and
accountability hinders our ability to deliver and hinders our country's
development. They also undermine the efforts of the many thousands of civil
servants who care and do work hard to deliver a meaningful service, who
have grasped with both hands the new challenge of freedom and whose actions
embody this nation's philosophy for living: Ubuntu. I am because you are. I
cannot be free unless you are free. [Applause.]

But ultimately, responsibility stops here. We, all of us in this House, in
provincial legislatures and in municipal councils, are charged with
ensuring that the funds we vote to departmental programmes and to
Government agencies are responsibly and effectively employed. I hope that
the information we table for the first time in our Estimates of National
Expenditure on the measurable objectives of our departments will help this
House in fulfilling that responsibility. The publication of the 2003
Intergovernmental Fiscal Review in April will provide all 10 legislatures
with comprehensive information to exercise their oversight
responsibilities. There can be no delivery without accountability, and no
accountability without oversight.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the many South Africans who
again responded to the ``Tips for Trevor'' campaign throughout the past
year and vigorously in the past two months. Many, I hope, will recognise
their contributions in the Budget we table today. Many have raised
important issues which we will continue to consider.

Thanks to an innovative and far-sighted project of the African General
Equity Foundation, we are joined today by four young people, Abongile
Zweni, Rashaad Sujee, Mandla Ngobeni and Timothy Keleketse. They are styled
the Ministers of Finance of Kwa-Bheki Langa High School in Alex, Nirvana
Secondary School in Lenasia, Klipspruit West Secondary in Eldorado Park and
Thabo Senior Secondary in Soweto. No relation, Mr President! [Laughter.]
Drawing on the valued contribution and advice of these young colleagues, I
will shortly outline proposals to spend more on education and health
services, to increase social grants and to reduce personal taxes. I have
noted in particular Mr Sujee's suggestion - and I know everyone in this
House will agree - that ``on taxes, in a perfect world, there wouldn't be
any, but we have to be more realistic''. Quite so. [Laughter.]

Economic outlook

In a perfect world there would not be recessions or economic uncertainty
either, but life is not like that.

Ten years ago, the Budget Review had to report that a recession, then in
its fourth year, had deepened further and that the economy had shrunk by
2,1% in the previous year. Employment fell by 61/2% between 1989 and 1993
and gross domestic fixed investment declined by 15%. Consumer prices
increased by 14% in 1992, and food price inflation averaged 25%. The then
Minister of Finance reported a budget deficit of 8,6% of GDP in 1992-93,
and proposed a 6,8% deficit for the following year.

Southern Africa has experienced hardship again this past year because of
drought, shortfalls in regional grain production and rising food prices. As
in the early 1990s, global conditions are unfavourable.

But unlike those years, our economy is growing strongly, jobs are being
created, the public finances are in a healthy state and investment is
accelerating. Government spending on social services has increased by 35%
in real terms over the past decade. Building on the expansionary stance of
the 2001 and 2002 Budgets, we are able to plan for real spending growth of
6,8% next year, and 41/2% a year over the forthcoming MTEF period. The
Budget deficit is expected to be between 2% and 21/2% of GDP.

International economic environment

The global economy has passed through a decade of turbulence with four
major international crises threatening financial stability. Across all
these episodes the resultant contagion has meant that capital flows to
emerging markets have declined and, at times, access to international
capital markets has been severely constrained.

Several other developments have increased uncertainty and impacted
negatively on capital markets and on global growth. The spectacular
failures in corporate governance in the United States in the past twelve
months, the collapse of the dot-com bubble and the massive write-down of
assets in Europe have left regulators, company boards, shareholders and
citizens searching for answers. Many painful lessons have been learnt. I am
pleased to report that the Ministerial Panel for the Review of the
Accounting Professions Bill has been established and has met, and that its
work programme is now under way.

Our economic performance is in marked contrast to the experience of the
rest of the world.

In the United States, Europe and Japan, the outlook for the years ahead
remains depressed.

The potential for war in Iraq raises uncertainty, not only for South
Africa, with respect to its inflation-raising effects, but for the global
economy.

Domestic growth, investment and inflation

The resilience of our economy in this global context is testimony to the
success of the reforms that we have implemented. Gross domestic product
grew by 3% last year. Growth for 2003 is expected to be 3,3%, rising to 4%
in 2005.

Investment grew by 6,3% last year and is expected to continue to grow at
around 6% a year over the medium term. The primary sector expanded by 3,7%,
driven by solid growth in platinum group metals and in the agricultural
sector. Buoyed by investment in the manufacturing sector and the strong
growth in construction spending, the secondary sector expanded steadily in
the first three quarters of last year, helping to create employment
opportunities.

The balance of payments remains healthy. The current account of the balance
of payments is expected to record a small surplus in 2002. With buoyant
economic growth, it is expected that the current account will move into a
moderate deficit of 0,5% of GDP in 2003.

The latest data indicates net capital flows of R21,4 billion for the year
to September. We have also made significant progress in reducing the Net
Open Forward Position from US$4,8 billion at the end of December 2001 to
US$11/2 billion at the end of January this year.

The depreciation of the rand towards the end of 2001 put upward pressure on
inflation. Consumer price inflation as measured by CPIX averaged 10% in
2002 and peaked at 12,7% for the year to November. Much of the increase was
due to rising food prices, housing and medical costs.

The Reserve Bank responded by raising interest rates by 400 basis points
over the course of the year. This has contributed to moderating the
inflation trend. The recovery of the exchange rate will also dampen prices
this year. We expect average CPIX inflation for the year to be 7,7%, and to
fall within the target range of 3% to 6% by early next year.

Re lemohile hore hajwale theko ya phofo e tshweu e theohile ho tloha ho
R2 000, ho ya ho R940 tone ka nngwe. Ka hoo, ke tshepa hore balemi le
barekisi ba tla theola ditheko tsa phofo; sepheo ele ho fa bareki monyetla
wa ho reka ka ditheko tse tlaase. Tlala e tlameha ho kena tsietsing!
[Mahofi.]

I think they've forgotten, Mr President, that I said, ``Tlala e tlameha ho
kena tsietsing!'' [Hunger must be in trouble!] [Laughter.]

Food price inflation has eased somewhat, but remains cause for concern.

We observe that the futures price of white maize has fallen from a peak of
R2000 a ton to R940 currently.

I trust that in the determination of prices by producers, distributors and
retailers we will see prompt corresponding downward adjustments, so that
the consumer benefits fully from this favourable trend. [Applause.]

I would have hoped that lowering food prices through the food chain from
producer to retailer would have warranted a better response. [Applause.]
Not even that works! England is playing India this afternoon. People must
be listening to that. [Laughter.]

We remain committed to inflation-targeting and believe that price stability
remains one of the cornerstones of sound economic management. The inflation
target of 3% to 6% will be retained for 2005. A target range for 2006 will
be considered at the time of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement in
October this year.

Employment and broadening development

According to the Survey of Employment and Earnings, annual employment
growth in the third quarter of 2002 was positive for the first time in six
years. Unemployment nonetheless remains a critical challenge.

Reducing unemployment and ensuring that the benefits of economic growth and
development are more evenly shared remain central policy challenges for
Government. Key economic policy initiatives in support of growth and broad-
based development include:

-     the skills development programme;

-     stepped up infrastructure investment and tax incentives to boost
  industrial growth and employment;
-     the redistribution of land, backed by agricultural support
  programmes;

-     widening access to financial services and the integration of small
  businesses into the formal economy; and

-     further easing of the tax burden on low- and middle-income
  households.

Black economic empowerment

A particular challenge for the decade ahead is the broadening of economic
participation. Black economic empowerment has a central role in sustaining
South Africa's growth trajectory and improving the distribution of income
and opportunities.

Alongside sectoral initiatives to deepen participation in the ownership and
management of South Africa's companies and the implementation of the
preferential procurement policy framework, Government proposes to set aside
R10 billion over the next five years to support the funding of new ventures
and business expansions that meet agreed empowerment criteria. This will in
part be financed from the extraordinary proceeds of the exchange control
measures which we will announce today.

A new mandate for the National Empowerment Fund, and a review of the roles
of other development finance and support institutions, to ensure that these
resources are effectively and efficiently employed, will be developed by
the National Treasury and Department of Trade and Industry.

The Budget framework

While economic growth provides us with the resources we require to meet our
development objective, sound fiscal management ensures that we will
continue to do so into the future. It is perhaps opportune to remind
ourselves of the journey we have travelled in our public finances since a
decade ago.

Following the deep recession of the early 1990s and a rapidly rising debt-
GDP ratio, a period of consolidation saw a moderation of expenditure,
steadily improving revenue performance and a marked reduction in the Budget
deficit.

Beginning with the 2001 Budget, a more expansionary fiscal stance has been
adopted, with a view to raising the long-term growth capacity of the
economy. It allows us to expand our freedoms more deliberately, providing
for the progressive realisation of the socioeconomic rights set out in our
Constitution and promoting broad-based development, employment creation and
redistribution of income and opportunities. Sound public finance
management, a sustainable deficit relative to GDP and prudent limits on
foreign borrowings remain key elements in protecting the public finances
against external risks.

The Main Budget provides for expenditure of R334 billion in 2003-04, rising
to R395,6 billion two years later. Revenue increases from R304,5 billion to
R361,2 billion over the same period, resulting in a budget deficit of 2,4%
of GDP next year, after an estimated 1,4% in the current year.

As in the past, the budget includes an unallocated contingency reserve,
rising from R3 billion next year to R8 billion in 2005-06. This allows for
unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure in-year and new policy priorities
in future years. The taxi recapitalisation programme, recapitalising the
Post Office and further critical infrastructure projects may be financed
from this reserve once operational business plans have been agreed.

Debt service costs are expected to fall from 4,2% of GDP in 2002-03 to 3,8%
by the third year of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. National
Government debt, which was 48,1% of GDP at the end of 1996-97, will decline
to a projected 36,8% by the end of the MTEF period. [Applause.] The lower
our interest bill, the more resources we have to spend on public services.
It is also important to note the contribution of reprioritisation to
strengthening our development effort. Spending on health, education,
welfare, housing and other social services now accounts for 58,3% of
noninterest expenditure, up from 52,9% a decade ago.

Division of revenue

Excluding debt service costs and the contingency reserve, the Budget
framework provides for expenditure of R280 billion in 2003-04, rising to
R332 billion in the year which ends on 31 March 2006, to be allocated
between the national, provincial and local spheres. Over the next three
years, this budget adds a further R105,4 billion to our spending plans. Of
this amount, national departments receive R30,5 billion, provinces receive
R69,3 billion and local governments receive R7,3 billion, signalling a
marked shift in favour of provinces and local government.

The additional allocations accommodate substantial policy adjustments for
all three spheres of government, and also provide for higher inflation than
anticipated in 2002.

Medium-term expenditure proposals

Betekenisvolle toevoegings tot die Mediumtermyn Begrotingsraamwerk sluit
die volgende in:

-     uitbreiding van die kinderonderhoudstoelaag na kinders tot hulle
  veertiende verjaardag en verhoogde besteding op die skoolvoedingsprogram
  vir laerskoolkinders - 'n verdere R11,9 miljard vir die behoeftes van
  kinders;

-     R38 miljard meer aan provinsies vir die verbetering van paaie,
  hospitaalvernuwing, die aankoop van medisyne en skoolboeke en 'n meer
  omvattende reaksie op MIV/Vigs;

-     'n verdere R6 miljard vir die uitbreiding van toegang tot gratis
  basiese dienste, belegging in munisipale infrastruktuur, landelike
  watervoorsiening en sanitasie en die uitbreiding van indiensneming in
  gemeenskapsdienste;

-     bykomende toekennings van R2,7 miljard vir howe en die Polisie ter
  verbetering van die regsproses en die beskerming van vroue en kinders;
  [Applous.]

-     R1,7 miljard vir hoër onderwys, en vir ekstra fondse vir
  vaardigheidsontwikkeling;

-     R1,9 miljard meer vir grondrestitusie en die grondhervormingsprogram;

-     R2,2 miljard meer vir die verbetering van Binnelandse Sake se diens
  aan burgers en vir die uitbreiding van kapasiteit by die SA
  Inkomstediens;

-     R1 miljard om die ontwikkeling van navorsing en tegnologie te
  bevorder;

-     R1,3 miljard ter ondersteuning van 'n toenemend internasionale rol,
  vredesendings en die Nuwe Inisiatief vir Afrika-ontwikkeling (Nepad); en

-     R1,2 miljard vir voedselhulpprojekte.

Significant additions to the MTEF plans include expenditure proposals such
as:

-     the extension of the child support grant to children up to the age of
  14 and stepped up allocations to the primary school nutrition programme,
  adding a further R11,9 billion to meeting the needs of children;
  [Applause.]

-     R38 billion more to provinces to improve roads, revitalise hospitals,
  purchase medicines and school books and enhance our response to HIV and
  Aids; [Applause.]

-     a further R61/2 billion for extending free basic services, investing
  in municipal infrastructure, rural water supply and sanitation and the
  expansion of employment in community services;

-     additional allocations of R2,7 billion for courts and police, to
  streamline the justice process and improve the protection of women and
  children;

-     R1,7 billion for higher education and increased development funding;

-     R1,9 billion more for land restitution and the land reform programme;

-     R2,2 billion more for administrative improvements to Home Affairs'
  services to citizens and for building the capacity of the SA Revenue
  Service;

-     R1 billion to supplement research and technology development;

-     R1,3 billion to support a growing international role, peace-keeping
  missions and Nepad; and

-     R1,2 billion for food relief projects.

The provincial and local government spheres are at the forefront of
delivering the social and economic services which this Budget supports. The
provincial share of nationally raised revenue is projected to rise by 6,1%
in real terms from 56% in the present fiscal year to 57,6%, while the share
going to municipalities rises by 12,2% in real terms and from 3,6% to 4,4%
of the total over the MTEF period.

The issue of the increasing share to provinces is, I'm told, very welcome
in Team Finance because previously I'd been accused by one of the MECs of
playing morabaraba.

Addressing poverty and vulnerability

Social assistance grants provide critical income support to vulnerable
groups - the elderly, young children and people with disabilities. This is
our largest and most effective redistribution programme. In keeping with
the advice of the Youth Minister of Kwa-Bheki Langa High School in
Alexandra, with effect from April 2003 the pension and disability grants
increase by R60 to R700 a month ... [Applause] ... and child support grants
will increase by 14% to R160 a month. [Applause.] Once again we are able to
give real increases in these grants. The cost of the adjustments is
provided for in the provincial equitable share.
Over the next three years, we will also extend the means-tested child
support grant to children up to their 14th birthday, raising the total
number of social assistance beneficiaries to more than eight million in
2005. We do this ever mindful, Mr President, of your injunction that we
``reduce the number of people dependent on social welfare''.

This Budget sets aside R1,1 billion, R3,4 billion and R6,4 billion over the
next three years to phase in the extension of the grants. This means that
seven- and eight-year-olds will qualify for grants in April this year, nine-
 and ten-year-olds in April next year and 11- to 13-year olds the following
year. The funding will be directed to provinces through conditional grants.
The national Department of Social Development gets additional funds to
improve the capacity of the grants payments system.

Children receive further priority in the expansion of the integrated
nutrition programme. This grant-funded programme increases from R592
million this year to R809 million in the first year and further to R1,042
billion in 2005-06, more than offsetting the impact of food inflation. The
programme will be extended to Grade R pupils and to a larger number of
schools.

Investing in health and education

Our future is in the hands of our children. Education expands abilities and
opportunities. It is a great freedom in itself, and opens the doors to
other freedoms.

We recognise this. That is why, at 23,2% of noninterest expenditure,
investment in education and deepening of the skills base of the economy
remains our largest expenditure area.

Spending on school education at the provincial level is budgeted to grow
from R59 billion in the first year of the MTEF to R67 billion two years
later. Raising the level of funding for learner support materials tops
education priorities this year. More money will be spent on school
buildings and maintenance as well as textbooks, stationery, mathematical
sets and science kits, supporting effective teaching and learning in
schools. [Applause.]

At the national level, R800 million is directed towards the restructuring
of the higher education system over the next three years. These allocations
will contribute towards recapitalisation and facilitate the restructuring
of higher education institutions. A further R280 million replenishes the
National Student Financial Aid Scheme, making tertiary education a reality
for poorer students. [Applause.]

In preparing the 2003 Budget, we have given special emphasis to the
critical requirements for improving the quality of provincial health
services - supplies of medicines, hospital and clinic management and, Sis'
Manto, staffing. [Laughter.] We also ensure that over the next three years
18 additional hospitals will be upgraded and refurbished through the
hospital revitalisation programme. [Applause.] But then the challenge is to
maintain what has been revitalised, of course.
The Budget provides for a substantial reinforcement of our response to the
health care challenges we face. Over the next three years, an additional
R3,3 billion has been added to the provincial equitable share and
conditional grants to extend the preventative programme and finance
medically appropriate treatment for HIV and Aids.

This Budget provides additional funds for land restitution. Recognising the
critical role that it plays in restoring what rightfully belongs to those
formerly dispossessed, R1,9 billion is provided to accelerate this
programme, together with enhanced agricultural development support. It's
the right thing to do. Ho a tshwanela! [Applause.] And, as we say in Nama:
Sieda kee kghanoe goena ra die.

Investment in infrastructure and technology advancement

We are setting aside a further R1 billion to increase expenditure on the
National Research and Development Strategy for programmes relating to
health, industrial biotechnology, food security and agricultural
production. Dr Ngubane, you may say: Yes, thank you very much. [Laughter.]

Investment in infrastructure allows us to expand the provision of basic
service, contributes towards economic growth and strongly supports job
creation.

Over the next three years Government will spend over R105 billion on
physical assets and capital transfers.

Further allocations to national departments are made for office
accommodation and technology investment by Home Affairs, maintenance and
general repair of buildings - please, please, please! - forensic laboratory
equipment in Health, further upgrading of court buildings and security in
our courts, investment by the SA Police Service in buildings, vehicles,
computer equipment and a new radio communications system in Gauteng, and
additional investment in rail commuter stock.

Infrastructure grants to local governments grow strongly over the MTEF
period and include a further R1 billion for labour-intensive community
development programmes, as part of the consolidated municipal
infrastructure programme. Mr President, I really hope that some of this
money will be spent on labour-intensive projects, like the fencing in rural
areas, so that Mr Cunningham Ngcukana no longer needs to raise that with
us. [Laughter.]

Partnerships with local government

Real development happens largely at a local level. Strengthening
partnerships in our communities helps us to listen to people's different
needs and work together to improve access to services and opportunities at
the local level.

We know that access to basic services - electricity, water and sanitation -
advances local development. The Budget sets aside more than R23,7 billion
over the next three years to assist municipalities to extend basic service
delivery to poor households. This Budget provides R4,1 billion for free
basic services over the next three years, including for electricity. Other
allocations are directed towards community infrastructure investment and
rehabilitation, including water schemes, electricity and sanitation
facilities, roads and community facilities. Since 1997, the municipal
infrastructure programme has benefited some 2,5 million people.

And this year, for the first time, we are publishing all transfers to local
government by municipality on Budget day, four months ahead of the next
municipal financial year. [Applause.] We ask that municipalities take hold
of this opportunity and plan their budget and spending activities early so
that the moneys are spent timeously, improving community service delivery,
all in the spirit of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
Bill currently before Parliament. I know that the Rev Mkhatshwa is here and
that he will take care of this matter.

Enhancing safety and security

The criminal justice sector receives a further R2,7 billion to fight crime
and ensure the safety of our communities. Colleagues, we have to build
communities that do not live in fear, where we can reclaim the streets from
criminals, where our magistrates feel safe in our courts. Safety and
Security receives additional funding to hire more police and further expand
the sector policing strategy ... [Applause] ... and improve communications.
Recognising the debt we all owe to police officers who lose their lives in
the course of duty, provision is made for a supplementary death benefit of
R200 000 in each case. [Applause.]

Justice and Constitutional Development receives resources to improve court
performance, upgrade the Master's Office and improve the protection of
women and children in the court process. [Applause.] Correctional Services
receives money to expand accommodation for the growing prisoner population,
to fight corruption and to address repair and maintenance requirements.
[Applause.]

Additional allocations to the SA National Defence Force provide for the
acquisition of four maritime helicopters and R200 million a year to
contribute to the costs of peace support operations. [Applause.]

The Budget also provides for an enhancement of capacity in the intelligence
agencies and for the establishment of the Financial Intelligence Centre,
aimed at combating money-laundering.

Regional development and Nepad

South Africa remains at the forefront of multilateral initiatives aimed at
promoting a more equitable international order and ensuring a better future
for Africa's people. The 2003 Budget accommodates a phased expansion of
missions in African countries, funding for the African Union and the Nepad
secretariat and increased contributions to regional development through the
African Renaissance Fund administered by the Department of Foreign Affairs.

Total expenditure

This brings total expenditure on the national Budget to R334 billion next
year, rising to R395,6 billion two years later - which, of course, is the
right thing to do. Kumele kube njalo! [Applause.]

Tax proposals

Madam Speaker, let me turn to our proposals for financing our spending
plans.

Buoyant revenue collections over the past year again reflect improvements
in tax administration and the longer-term benefits of sound tax policy
reforms.

Main Budget revenue is now expected to be R275,7 billion in the present
year, or 4% higher than the original estimate. Higher personal income tax
receipts, robust company tax trends and higher VAT receipts are the main
sources of higher than anticipated revenue.

The 2003 Budget tax proposals again provide relief for individuals and also
several stimulus measures aimed at encouraging business investment.

Tax relief for individuals - personal income tax rates and brackets

The personal income tax remains South Africa's most important revenue
source, contributing nearly 34% of the Main Budget revenue in the new
fiscal year.

Taking into account the marked improvements in tax collection efforts and
supported by sound base-broadening initiatives, we propose this year to
reduce income taxes on individuals by R13,3 billion. The personal income
tax reductions primarily benefit lower- and middle-income households. The
adjustment again compensates fully for inflation, and provides real relief
to all taxpayers.

-     The primary rebate is raised to R5 400, increasing the threshold
  below which no tax is paid by 11,1% to R30 000 a year. [Applause.] So
  anybody earning below R30 000 doesn't pay any personal income tax.
  [Applause.]

-     The tax threshold for taxpayers aged 65 and over is raised to
  R47 222, or 10,7% more than the current level. By the time Dr Essop Pahad
  gets to that age, it will be even higher. [Applause.]

-     Brackets are adjusted to provide relief across the entire income
  spectrum.

-     Of the total relief, 56% accrues to taxpayers earning less than
  R150 000 a year, and 23% to those earning between R150 000 and R250 000 a
  year.

Since 2000, the minimum tax threshold has been increased by over 50% for
individuals below the age of 65 and by 40% for those over 65. This means
that over a million people, ordinary workers and pensioners, who would
otherwise have had to transfer part of their monthly pay to the fiscus, pay
no income tax at all. I believe, Madam Speaker, that we can take some pride
in the fact that we are able to raise progressively this elementary measure
of solidarity on which our tax structure is built. [Applause.]

Interest and dividend exemption

As in 2002, we propose to complement this personal income tax relief by
increasing the domestic interest and dividend exemption thresholds. The
exemption is increased from the current R6 000 to R10 000 for taxpayers
under the age of 65 and from R10 000 to R15 000 for senior citizens.

This proposal will encourage savings and assist those who rely on interest
income. The change will take effect on 1 March this year, at a cost to the
fiscus of R227 million.

Stamp duty and transfer duty

As a further step in tax simplification and to reduce costs of financial
services this year, stamp duty on insurance policies and fixed deposit
receipts will be eliminated. This proposal will come into effect from 1
April 2003 year at an estimated cost of R200 million.

Again this year, we are able to contribute to making home ownership more
affordable by amending further the graduated transfer duty rate structure
in respect of the acquisition of fixed property. The duty exempt level will
be increased from the current R100 000 to R140 000.

The average duty on property with a value of R200 000 will fall from 21/2%
to 11/2%; the duty on property with a value of R400 000 falls from 41/2% to
3,9%. These duty adjustments will apply to property acquired from 1 March
this year and will cost the fiscus R435 million. [Applause.]

Tax on retirement funds

The tax treatment of retirement savings is currently under review by a task
group that includes representatives from the National Treasury, Sars and
the Financial Services Board. As part of this review, an open three-day
conference was held in September last year, including representatives of
the retirement industry and other stakeholders as well as South African and
international experts.

During the course of this year, a second discussion document will be
released and further consultations will be held with a view to ensuring
that the final proposals and legislation represent a fully deliberated
product. We hope to include the reform of the tax treatment of retirement
savings in next year's Budget proposals.

Members of the House will recall that the tax on retirement funds was first
introduced at a 17% rate in 1996, and then increased to 25% in 1998. At
that time, our thinking was primarily motivated by concern about neutrality
between retirement funds and other savings vehicles. It remains,
nonetheless, an important objective of public policy that all individuals
should be encouraged to provide adequately for retirement. Many members of
contractual savings plans that are subject to the 25% retirement fund tax
would ordinarily be subject to an 18% rate on their income from savings.
Added to this has been the increase over time in the domestic interest and
dividend exemption threshold, which does not apply to savings held in
retirement plans.

Against this background, it is proposed that the retirement fund tax rate
be reduced from 25% to 18%. [Applause.] This change will take effect from 1
March at an estimated cost of R1,85 billion. But having said that, I want
to ask every pensioner, every contributor to a pension fund, to ensure that
the benefits of this change accrue to them. It's fundamental. We cannot
leave this additional resource in the institutions. It has to be for the
benefit of members. That would be the litmus test.

Encouraging business investment

There are also several proposals set out in the Budget Review aimed at
encouraging business investment.

-     The accelerated depreciation arrangements for manufacturing assets,
  introduced as a temporary measure, will be retained as a fixed element in
  our tax policy.

-     In keeping with practice in many other jurisdictions, relief will be
  provided where business asset sale proceeds are reinvested within 18
  months.

-     Taxpayers will be allowed to claim losses from ordinary revenue on
  the sale of devalued depreciable business assets with short economic
  lives.

-     An accelerated four-year write-off period is proposed for capital
  expenditure relating to research and development in the field of natural
  and applied science.

-     A double deduction is proposed for the first R20 000 of costs
  incurred in the start-up of new businesses.

-     The turnover limit for small businesses qualifying for a lower
  company tax rate will be increased from the current R3 million, to which
  it was raised last year from R1 million, to R5 million. [Applause.]

These general business tax stimuli will be effective from the date
promulgated into law and will cost approximately R80 million in the first
year.

Encouraging urban development and support for public benefit organisations

Many urban areas in South Africa suffer from inadequate infrastructure
maintenance and environmental decay. Urban renewal requires greater
business investment in the regeneration of inner city areas. With this in
mind, it is proposed that investment in the refurbishment or construction
of buildings in certain urban areas receive special treatment. Taxpayers
refurbishing a building within designated zones will receive a 20% straight-
line depreciation allowance over a five-year period. Construction of new
buildings within such a zone will receive a 20% write-off in the first year
and 5% a year for a further 16 years. [Applause.] This benefit will be
available to owners as users of the building and as lessors and financiers
of these investments.

Relevant criteria, to be included in legislation, are noted in the Budget
Review. Clearly this kind of initiative must help us deal with those inner-
city areas where people live, areas that are in very serious decline and
decay. I think we must rid this country of what Hillbrow looks like now.
[Applause.] We must get owners to take responsibility and we must assist
them in this process. The incentive will last for four years, and is
allocated R1,3 billion of tax revenue foregone over the period.

A complementary proposal extends tax advantages to public benefit
organisations that provide affordable housing to low-income households in
underdeveloped urban areas, as part of a more comprehensive broadening of
the list of activities qualifying for tax-deductible donations.

Tax treatment of foreign dividends and related tax preferences

South African taxpayers became subject to tax when receiving foreign
dividends from 23 February 2000, and since January 2001 they are taxed on
their worldwide income.

The current system of taxing foreign dividends has the unintended effect of
discouraging dividend inflows. In order to eliminate this disincentive, the
tax on foreign dividends will be removed where a South African taxpayer has
a meaningful interest in the foreign subsidiary paying the dividend. This
removal necessitates a number of collateral changes, which are set out in
the Budget Review.

The Budget Review also contains details of the removal of some tax
preferences. The tax exemption for a foreign-owned gold share company will
be removed with effect from 1 January next year.
These changes, together with amendments ensuring consistency, will simplify
administration and compliance significantly.

Indirect taxes - alcohol and tobacco duties

I turn now to the indirect tax proposals. I received at least 20 ``Tips for
Trevor'' pleading that I should not call these ``sin taxes'', so I won't
call them that. [Laughter.]

The following adjustments to taxes on alcohol and tobacco are proposed:

-     Beer and ciders are raised by 10%, bringing the proposed excise duty
  to 48 cents per 340 ml can or an average increase of 4,4 cents per can.

-     Sorghum beer and sorghum flour duties, Minister Buthelezi, will not
  be increased for a second year running ... [Laughter.] [Applause.] ...
  thereby reducing the indirect tax burden in real terms.

-     Duties on unfortified and sparkling wine are raised by 11%.

-     Duties on fortified wine are raised by 10%.

-     In respect of izinyembezi zika-Victoria [whiskey], duties on spirits
  are raised by 10% ... [Laughter.] ... bringing the average total duty to
  R13 per bottle.

-     Taxes on tobacco products are raised by an average of 11%, increasing
  the excise tax to R3,89 per packet of 20 cigarettes. [Applause.]

Colleagues will note that I haven't raised a special excise on cigars, and
that is in the interest of my friend the Governor of the Reserve Bank.
[Laughter.]

But these taxes too are the right thing to do. Ke tshwanelo!

These excise measures will raise additional revenue of about R907 million.
Taxes on fuel

There were no increases in the general fuel levy on diesel and petrol last
year. The tax burden on fuel has now fallen from an average of 45% of the
pump price in 1998 to approximately 31,4% in the present year.

Taking into account the current strength of the rand and the adoption of a
more streamlined approach to fuel pricing, the following adjustments are
proposed:

-     The general fuel levy on both leaded and unleaded petrol will
  increase to 101 cents per litre - an increase of 3 cents per litre on
  leaded petrol and between 6,2 and 9,2 cents per litre on unleaded petrol.

-     The general fuel levy on diesel will increase by 4 cents to 85 cents
  per litre.

-     The Road Accident Fund levy will increase by 3 cents from 181/2 cents
  per litre to 211/2 cents per litre.

The proposals will raise approximately R642 million in 2003-04 for the
National Revenue Fund and an additional R474 million for the Road Accident
Fund. These adjustments will take effect from 2 April this year.

Air passenger tax and other excises

The air passenger departure tax has not been adjusted for inflation since
its introduction in 2001. It is proposed that this tax be increased by R5
to R55 per passenger departing to Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland
and by R10 to R110 per passenger departing for all other international
destinations. This increase will raise approximately R30 million in
additional revenues in 2003-04 and will take effect from 1 July this year.

After consultation with the motor vehicle manufacturing industry, it is
proposed that the graduated formula for ad valorem excise duties on new
motor vehicles be adjusted to address the inflationary element. This will
cost the fiscus approximately R243 million in revenue foregone next year.

It is also proposed that with effect from 1 April this year the ad valorem
excise duty on computer equipment be abolished. [Applause.] Those
applauding are clearly computer-literate. [Laughter.] This will benefit
both businesses and consumers investing in information technology
equipment, contributing to technology advancement and improved
competitiveness. This measure will cost the fiscus R572 million in 2003-04.

Total Main Budget revenue

These proposals, taken together, amount to aggregate tax relief of R15,1
billion in 2003-04, bringing the projected total tax revenue estimate for
the year to R310 billion. After taking into account departmental receipts
of R4,2 billion and payments of R9,7 billion to our Southern African
Customs Union partners, Main Budget revenue of R304,5 billion is projected.

Aspects of tax administration

In noting this target for the next financial year, it is perhaps
appropriate to record also the contribution that enhanced administration
plays in sustaining the robust revenue trend we have seen in recent years.
Key initiatives include the launch of a Service Monitoring Office in
October last year, the strengthening of enforcement powers, creating a
mechanism for resolving past noncompliance and ongoing reorganisation of
the Sars revenue structure. The Siyakha administrative reforms and systems
modernisation of tax offices were implemented in KwaZulu-Natal last year
and will be rolled out in the Western Cape and Gauteng during this year.
The Budget Review details a range of revenue activation measures that will
be prioritised over the year ahead, contributing further to reducing the
outstanding tax debt and securing improved compliance with the tax laws.

I have described a number of steps directed at meeting the challenge of
broadening the base and improving the tax compliance culture of South
Africans. Members of the House will agree that the complexity of compliance
challenges faced by Sars requires that serious consideration must be given
to further steps to broaden the tax base and improve compliance. Surely
this too is the right thing to do.

Further steps in exchange control liberalisation

Government remains committed to a gradual approach to exchange control
liberalisation.

Part of this process of gradual exchange control liberalisation and
financial sector strengthening is the shift to a system of prudential
regulation.

Institutional investors will be allowed to invest, on approval, up to
existing foreign asset limits. These foreign asset limits are 15% of total
assets for long-term insurers, pension funds and fund managers, and 20% of
total assets for unit trust companies. The previous restriction based on
10% of the prior year's net inflow of funds will no longer apply. The
Exchange Control Department of the SA Reserve Bank reserves the right to
stagger the transfer of such funds in the interests of overall financial
stability. The new dispensation will become operational on 1 May this year,
once revised reporting requirements are in place as part of the shift to
prudential regulation.

The global expansion by South African firms holds significant benefits for
our economy - expanded market access, increased exports and improved
competitiveness. In October last year, the exchange control allowance for
foreign direct investment into Africa was increased from R750 million to R2
billion, in line with South Africa's commitment to Nepad. The exchange
control allowance for direct investment outside of Africa is increased from
R500 million to R1 billion.

The global expansion by South African firms should result in inflows from
dividends and other income earned. It is proposed that dividends
repatriated from foreign subsidiaries should be eligible for an exchange
control credit, which will allow them to be re-exported, upon application,
for approved foreign direct investment. This change will be synchronised
with the removal of the foreign dividends tax, where the taxpayer has a
meaningful say in the foreign subsidiary paying the dividend.

Foreign exchange control amnesty and accommodating tax treatment

Exchange controls are designed to protect the growth and development
objectives of the nation. As such, contravention of exchange control
regulations by individuals at the expense of society as a whole cannot be
condoned. However, Government also recognises that exchange control
contravention may have taken place in the past for a variety of reasons. At
the same time, many South Africans with funds held illegally offshore are
realising that foreign markets do not present the nirvana they sought and
that South Africa offers both higher returns and lower risks than many had
perceived. [Applause.] They wish to bring these funds back to South Africa,
but are unable to do so without risk of prosecution. It is thus appropriate
at this point, marking almost 10 years of democracy and thriving growth,
that we are able to announce plans to assist individuals in repatriating
these funds and to regularise their tax affairs in respect of foreign
assets. [Applause.]

An amnesty will be offered with respect to foreign assets in terms of the
Exchange Control Regulations, together with supporting relief measures in
terms of the Income Tax Act. The window period for filing for amnesty
relief will run from 1 May to 31 October this year. Individuals filing for
exchange control amnesty are released from all civil penalties and criminal
liabilities stemming from the illegal shifting of funds offshore in
contravention of exchange controls on or before 28 February last year.
Individuals filing for income tax relief are released from all income
taxes, interest, civil penalty and criminal penalties stemming from their
failure to disclose gross income or capital gains from foreign sources
arising on or before 28 February 2002. In return, individuals filing for
exchange control amnesty are subject to a 5% exchange control charge on
funds repatriated back to South Africa, or a 10% charge on any foreign
assets remaining offshore. A 0% charge will apply for all assets that can
be held legally offshore under the normal exchange control limits.

Any individual can apply for relief unless an enforcement investigation has
been initiated against him or her.

Going forward, there is no excuse for individuals to be in contravention of
exchange controls or taxation on foreign income and assets.

A system of exchange control allowances for the export of funds when
persons emigrate has been in place in South Africa for a number of decades.
Emigrants' funds in excess of the emigration allowance were placed in
emigrants' blocked accounts in order to preserve foreign reserves.
Reflecting the improved strength and resilience of the South African
economy, these blocked assets will now be unwound. The following
dispensation will apply with immediate effect:

-     The distinction between the settling-in allowance for emigrants and
  the private individual foreign investment allowance for residents is to
  fall away and there will now be a common foreign allowance for both
  residents and emigrants of R750 000 per person (or R1,5 million in
  respect of family units).

-     Amounts up to R750 000 (inclusive of amounts already exited) will be
  eligible for exiting without charge.

Holders of blocked assets wishing to exit more than R750 000 (inclusive of
amounts already exited) must apply to the Exchange Control Department of
the SA Reserve Bank to do so. Approval will be subject to an exiting
schedule and an exit charge of 10% of that amount. The same dispensation
will apply for new emigrants.

Various other limits pertaining to travel, study, gift, maintenance and
alimony allowances will be adjusted by the SA Reserve Bank.

Towards the Growth and Development Summit

Against a background of faltering growth and uncertain prospects
internationally, South Africa enters 2003 with a strengthening currency,
robust investment growth, rising business confidence and a moderate
recovery in the employment trend.

Measures to ensure that broad-based development accompanies this growth
will be the subject of a Growth and Development Summit later this year. Our
approach places freedoms - political, social and economic freedoms - at the
centre of our development strategy. Key elements include:

-     first, progressive broadening of the income security net, revitalised
  health services and targeted poverty reduction initiatives;

-     second, a national skills development strategy, focused on
  productivity enhancement and learning opportunities for the unemployed;

-     third, redistribution and restitution of land, coupled with
  investment in rural development and agricultural support services;

-     fourth, public administration reform, founded on respect for
  citizens' rights, courteous and efficient service delivery, the
  modernisation of systems and honest, accountable governance;

-     sixth, strengthening the fight against crime and combating corruption

-     seventh, widening access to financial services, the integration of
  small businesses into the formal economy and the further easing of the
  tax burden on low- and middle-income households;

-     eighth, a sustainable, broad-based and transparent approach to black
  economic empowerment; and
-     ninth, the deepening of democracy, promoting peace and security and
  expanding investment and trade as principles of international co-
  operation and Nepad.

That is the basis of the social contract that the President spoke about
when he addressed the nation in February last year.

Madam Speaker, allow me firstly to place upon the Table:

(1)   Budget Speech - 26 February 2003 [RP 22-2003].

(2)   Estimate of National Revenue, 2003 [RP 19-2003].

(3)   Taxation proposals: Income Tax.

(4)   Division of Revenue Bill [B 9 - 2003], tabled in terms of section
     10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
     1997).

(5)   Budget Review 2003 [RP 21-2003], including:


     (a)    Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties
         [tabled at 15:18]; and


     (b)    ``Annexure E: Memorandum to accompany the Division of Revenue
         Bill'' tabled in terms of section 10(5) of the Intergovernmental
         Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).

(6)   Appropriation Bill [B 8 - 2003].

(7)   Estimates of National Expenditure, 2003 [RP 20-2003].

Lots of paper, lots of work for committee members. Perhaps not very
environmentally friendly, but exceedingly important in the construction of
accountable governance.

Madam Speaker, allow me to express my profound appreciation to:

-     President Mbeki for his leadership and support and the manner in
  which he challenges us to be bold and to ensure that our democracy
  delivers the freedoms we fought for; [Applause.]

-     Deputy President Zuma and my Cabinet colleagues, in particular
  members of the Ministers' Committee on the Budget for the commitment,
  support and camaraderie;

-     Deputy Minister Mandisi Mpahlwa for sharing the load and for
  friendship;

-     my Team Finance colleagues, the MECs for finance, for the courage and
  professionalism with which they have tackled the enormous task of keeping
  provincial finances healthy; and

-     a special colleague, comrade and friend who is not here today, but
  who I know is watching at home, Dullah Omar, whom I want to wish a speedy
  recovery so that we can see him take his place with us again. [Applause.]

Our task is always facilitated by many others:

-     Governor Tito Mboweni and the team at the SA Reserve Bank, and I
  would like to welcome Deputy Governor Mr Ian Plendeleith, on his first
  visit to Parliament, sitting alongside Gill Marcus, an old hand here;

-     Mr Murphy Morobe and the members of the Financial and Fiscal
  Commission;

-     Philip Dexter and everybody from Nedlac; and

-     Ms Barbara Hogan and Ms Qedani Mahlangu, as chairpersons of the
  Portfolio and Select Committees on Finance respectively, and Mr Nhlanhla
  Nene and Mr Tutu Ralane, chairpersons of the newly established Joint
  Budget Committee. [Applause.]

We have had an overwhelming response to the ``Tips for Trevor'' campaign. I
want to thank the many South Africans who took time and made the effort to
respond. Your inputs are much valued and we have tried to accommodate as
many of the ideas and suggestions as possible.

The Budget is put together by a group of dedicated, hard-working
professionals at the National Treasury and the Revenue Service. Special
thanks are due to Maria Ramos and Pravin Gordhan for the leadership they
have given, and to everybody in their teams. [Applause.]

Thanks are also due to the staff of the Ministry, who tolerate us with good
cheer.

Last but not least, I'd like to thank my family for their support.

This Budget makes an important contribution to the extension of our
freedoms and the unlocking of our capabilities. We remain true to the
spirit, courage, passion, commitment and values that drove our historical
struggle for freedom. Something of this spirit is captured in a pamphlet
written in January 1955 to the volunteers who collected together those
priorities that were chosen for the Freedom Charter. In it is written:
``This is a great task,'' and it concludes:


  But freedom is not easily won! It is won through hard persistent work,
  organising the people, mobilising them and leading them forward. Let's
  get down to it ...

Let's do it together, without delay. Let's do it because it's the right
thing to do. Kufanele!

Oh, and before I go, the plums - we should explain the plums. You may
recall that we started the Budget Speech in 2001 with three important
questions. After quoting from a poem by David Diop, we said:


  The bitter taste of liberty? Does the lemon always ripen before the sweet
  plum? Or do we have it in our power to determine for ourselves the
  quality of the liberty we earn from struggle?

Colleagues, do enjoy the sweet plums. They've ripened, but remember that we
must work together to ensure that all South Africans share in the sweet
fruits of liberty. Kumele kubenjalo! [Applause.]

Bill, together with the introductory speech and papers tabled, referred to
the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and report.

The House adjourned at 15:24.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Finance:


         (i)     Appropriation Bill [B 8 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec
               77).


         (ii)    Division of Revenue Bill [B 9 - 2003] (National Assembly -
               sec 76).


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         26 February 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


         (i)     Compulsory HIV Testing of Alleged Sexual Offenders Bill [B
              10 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary
              of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 25029 of 21 February 2003.]


         Introduction, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 26
         February 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

National Assembly:

1.    Referrals to committees of tabled papers:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Joint Standing
         Committee on Defence and to the Working Group on the African Union
         for consideration. The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs must
         confer with the above-mentioned committees and the Portfolio
         Committee on Foreign Affairs to report:


         (a)     Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace and
              Security Council of the African Union, tabled in terms of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance - 26 February 2003
         [RP 22-2003].
     (2)    Estimate of National Revenue for 2003 [RP 19-2003].


     (3)    Taxation Proposals: Income Tax.


     (4)    Division of Revenue Bill [B 9 - 2003], tabled in terms of
         section 10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997
         (Act No 97 of 1997).


     (5)    Budget Review 2003 [RP 21-2003], including:


         (a)     Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise
              duties; [tabled at 15:18] and


         (b)     "Annexure E: Memorandum to accompany the Division of
              Revenue Bill", tabled in terms of section 10(5) of the
              Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
              1997).


     (6)    Appropriation Bill [B 8 - 2003].


     (7)    Estimate of National Expenditure 2003 [RP 20-2003], which
         includes:


         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;


         2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2003-
              2004;


         3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;


         4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2003-
              2004;


         5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government",
              Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2003-
              2004;


         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
              Information System", Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;


         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;


         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service and
              Administration", Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Public Service Commission",
              Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Arts and Culture", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Education", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;


         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2003-
              2004;


         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2003-
              2004;


         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Science and Technology", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Social Development", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Sport and Recreation South
              Africa", Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Correctional Services", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2003-
              2004;


         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Safety and Security", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;


         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Communications", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Main Estimates, 2003-2004;


         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2003-
              2004;


         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;


         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main
              Estimates, 2003-2004;


         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
              2003-2004;.


         34.     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Main Estimates, 2003-2004.

2.    The Minister of Public Works:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
         Development Board for 2001-2002, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
         Trust for 2001-2002, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002.


