---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 February 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-02-25
---

TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a  moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Deputy Speaker announced that the vacancy that had arisen  as  a  result
of Dr N O Mndende losing her seat had been filled, in accordance  with  item
6(3) of Schedule 6 to  the  Constitution,  1996,  by  the  nomination,  with
effect from 17 February 2003, of Mr G T Madikiza.

                                    OATH

Mr G T Madikiza, accompanied by Mr D G Mkono and Ms Anneliz√© van  Wyk,  made
and subscribed the oath and took his seat.

                     INTRODUCTION OF MEMBERS' STATEMENTS

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members,  the  Rules  Committee  agreed  last
year to introduce a new procedure in the  House,  namely  that  of  members'
statements.  The  committee  agreed  further  that  opportunities  to   make
statements would  follow  the  same  sequence  that  previously  applied  to
notices of motion. The practice that  had  developed  for  members  to  make
comments and statements by way of notices of motion  therefore  falls  away.
Notices of motion will still be  called  for  but  should  now  be  strictly
limited to motions which members expressly intend should  be  placed  before
the House for debate or decision.

The Chief Whip's Forum agreed on  guidelines  for  members'  statements  and
notices of motion which would assist in clarifying the different  processes.
These were published in the ATC of 13 February 2003. I appeal to members  to
familiarise themselves with  the  guidelines  and  abide  by  them.  On  the
proposal  of  the  Chief  Whip's  Forum,  members'  statements   are   being
implemented during this first term of 2003 on a  trial  basis.  The  process
will be continuously monitored by a monitoring committee of the forum.

Members' statements are to be taken on Tuesdays and Thursdays  and  also  on
Fridays when the House sits on a Friday. The Chair will call for notices  of
motion, motions without notice  and  then  members'  statements  -  in  that
order. I hope it is clear and I hope that we will all  co-operate  with  one
another so that we do not use the time for notices  of  motion  to  actually
make political statements. We should differentiate between the two, so  that
notices of motion are really about giving notice when you do intend that  an
issue should be on the agenda for discussion and decision by  the  House.  I
hope that that will be clear. Please do look at the ATC of 13  February,  as
I pointed out earlier.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Adv D M BAKKER: Deputy Speaker, I want to give notice of a motion:


  That the House discusses the high incidence of  police  murders  and  the
  working conditions of members of the South African Police Service.

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP will move on  the  next  sitting
day of the House:


  That the House discusses the illegal land  grab  of  Abraham  Duvenhage's
  farm in Modderkiep in terms of the ruling passed by Judge De Villiers.


                  PASSING AWAY OF BANOO NUFSERWANJI GINWALA


                             (Draft Resolution)


  The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
  notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with sadness that Ms Banoo Nufserwanji  Ginwala,  mother  to  Dr
           Frene Ginwala, the Speaker of the National Assembly, passed away
           on Sunday, 23 February 2003, at the age of 94;


       (b)  that  this  patriot  spent  decades  of  her  life  without  her
           daughter, Dr Frene Ginwala, who went into exile to contribute to
           the fight against white minority rule; and


       (c)   that  the  life  of  Ms  Banoo  Ginwala  represents  a  shining
           embodiment of the courage and vision of the majority of women of
           our country, who under extremely inhuman political and  economic
           conditions, were able to  generate  enough  strength  and  moral
           stamina to groom and guide the future leaders of  this  country;
           and


  (2) expresses  its  heartfelt  condolences  to  the  Ginwala  family  and
       friends.

Agreed to.

                            ICC CRICKET WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Deputy  Speaker,  I  move  without
notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the International Cricket Council's Cricket World Cup started on
           Saturday, 8 February 2003, with a joyous  ceremonial  launch  at
           the Newlands Cricket Ground in Cape Town; and


       (b)  a cricket competition of this magnitude takes place for the very
           first  time  on  the  African  continent  and  South  Africa  in
           particular;


  (2) believes that the hosting of a sporting event of this stature  serves
       as an indication of the confidence that the  international  community
       has  in  our  country  and  acts  directly  to  promote   friendship,
       understanding and harmony amongst the people of the world;


  (3) joins our United Cricket Board, our country and people, in  welcoming
       to our country and our continent all  sporting  enthusiasts,  players
       and administrators from all corners of the world; and


  (4) conveys its best wishes to all the cricketers, cricket officials  and
       authorities  for  a  successful,  entertaining  and   joyful   sports
       competition.

Agreed to.

                     RESIGNATION OF MINISTER OF HOUSING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move  without
notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)   the  resignation  of  the  hon  Sankie  Mthembi-Mahanyele  from
           Parliament;


       (b)  the hon Mthembi-Mahanyele served the nation with dedication  and
           distinction since 1994 as a Member  of  this  House,  as  Deputy
           Minister of Social Development and since June 1995, as  Minister
           of Housing; and


       (c)  the hon Mthembi-Mahanyele  will  continue  contributing  to  the
           transformation of our country  into  a  truly  democratic,  non-
           racial, non-sexist and prosperous country in her  new  capacity;
           and


  (2) wishes to  express  its  deep-felt  gratitude  to  the  hon  Mthembi-
       Mahanyele for her loyal and outstanding service in the executive  and
       in Parliament, and wishes her well in her future endeavours.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Deputy Speaker, if we are being asked  whether  we  object,
then we have no objection to that motion but we do have an objection to  the
speakers' list. If you want to put the motion we will support  it  and  move
on to the next item on the Order Paper. If you  want  to  have  a  speakers'
list, then we are objecting.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Whips really were expected to  have  processed  this
issue so that it does not come to House and become a disagreement. I  really
wish the Whips would communicate, consult and make sure that  they  make  it
easy for the House  to  go  smoothly  through  items  of  this  nature.  The
opposition is objecting to the notion of a  speakers'  list.  However,  they
are not opposed to the motion as such. I thought this  issue  was  discussed
by the Whips.

Mr F BHENGU: Deputy Speaker, it was indeed discussed and further  I  may  as
well mention the hon Ellis. We discussed the  matter  intensively  yesterday
and we agreed on the speakers' list, and  I  do  not  understand  this.  All
other parties do know and have the list. They received  the  speakers'  list
yesterday.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, are you saying that your  name  is  on  this
speakers' list without the agreement of  the  DP?  Is  that  what  am  I  to
understand?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Deputy Speaker, the DP, from last Thursday,  said  that  it
was inappropriate to have this debate We wrote to the Speaker, we  wrote  to
the Chief Whip of the ANC, and we wrote to the chief whips of all the  other
parties. The representations which were made were ignored and  we  now  have
this embarrassment for the hon Minister because the ANC  used  its  majority
or its power in order to force a debate which we say  is  inappropriate.  If
they wish to put the motion, we will vote in favour of it. If they wish  the
debate to proceed, we are going to oppose it.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We think this issue  does  not  belong
to this Chamber. It actually contributes towards wasting the  precious  time
at our disposal. The issue  is  that  agreement  has  been  reached  by  all
parties outside. There are structures that are in place to  deal  with  such
matters. We are asking for your ruling on this particular  matter  and  that
we may proceed.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, because there is a  motion  without  notice
on the Table and no agreement on  how  to  prosecute  the  content  of  that
motion without notice, I am not able to  agree  that  we  proceed  with  the
debate as is supposed to be facilitated by the speakers'  list.  However,  I
am going to put the motion without notice as put by the Chief Whip and  hear
whether there are any objections. Are there any  objections  to  the  motion
without notice?

HON MEMBERS: No!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are no objections to the motion without notice.

Hon members will be free to speak and say whatever  they  would  have  said,
had we agreed on this debate, during the time that  they  have  in  whatever
subsequent debate, to the extent that they are involved  in  the  subsequent
debates. The Chair will make sure that in fact we make it possible and  give
them the latitude to make the necessary comments.

                             MEMBERS' STATEMENTS

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now wish  to  remind  members  that  their  statements
should not exceed one and a half minutes and  we  will  take  14  statements
from members, should there be that  number  of  members  who  wish  to  make
statements on any matter under the sun.

I also want to point out that Ministers, to the extent that issues might  be
raised that relate to the work under their portfolios, are allowed  to  take
two minutes to respond to any of the issues, should  they  wish  to  do  so,
because, of course, they will not have had any notice. Should they  wish  to
do so, they have two minutes to respond to any  statements  or  issues  that
have come up in the statements.

                              CHOLERA OUTBREAK

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms B P SONJICA:(ANC) Deputy Speaker, recently the Eastern Cape and  KwaZulu-
Natal  were  struck  by  a  cholera  epidemic.  Both  these  provinces   are
characterised by abject poverty and a  lack  of  infrastructure.  These  are
provinces that are populated mainly by black people and have been under  the
homeland  system.  The  cholera  outbreak  is  one  of  the  incidents  that
demonstrates very  acutely  the  challenges  faced  by  this  Government  in
improving the lives of our people.

As this has been declared the International Year for Fresh  Water,  we  need
to direct more funding for the provision of clean water and  sanitation  and
to the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  to  ensure  the  funds  are
optimally utilised. In the  state  of  the  nation  address,  the  President
alludes to the reduction of 50% of the backlog of people  who  do  not  have
fresh  water  and  sanitation  and  we  hope  that  the  allocation  to  the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry will realise that objective.  There
is a huge amount of backlog  in  sanitation  and  the  department  needs  to
increase the pace and meet  its  annual  delivery  targets.  The  department
would need to deal closely with the bureaucratic-related delays that  hamper
delivery on the  ground,  for  example  the  approving  of  business  plans,
transfer of funds, processing of tenders ... [Time expired.]

                       PHASING OUT OF COMMANDO SYSTEM

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr A J BOTHA (DP): Adjunkspeaker, die uitfasering van  die  kommandostelsel
soos aangekondig deur  Pres  Mbeki  wek  die  indruk  van  vergelding,  soos
bevestig word deur Minister Lekota se verwysing  na  die  misbruik  van  wit
kommando's om swartmense te onderdruk. Daar bestaan nie  die  minste  twyfel
dat sulke misbruik tydens die apartheidsjare wel plaasgevind het  nie,  maar
net  so  was  die  polisie  misbruik  en  daar  is  geen  voorstel  dat  die
polisiediens uitgefaseer word nie. Inteendeel,  ons  is  ten  midde  van  'n
dramatiese transformasieproses van di√© diens. Dit sal  sekerlik  beter  wees
om te werk aan die transformasie van die kommando's waar  daar  wel  tekorte
bestaan, sodat diegene ook kan aansluit by die vele wat  reeds  omvorm  het.
Instede  hiervan,  word  in  die  jaar  van  Letsema,  die  jaar   van   die
vrywilliger, die oudste bestaande  vrywillige  organisasie  gestig  in  1715
uitgefaseer. Om voorspoed in die land te bevorder is dit nodig om die  mense
veilig te laat voel, ook op die platteland.  Huidiglik  voel  hierdie  mense
nie veilig nie, en hierdie aangekondigde  uitfasering  sonder  'n  duidelike
plan van aksie om hulle  te  vervang,  suggereer  politieke  oorwegings,  in
plaas  van  praktiese  oorwegings.  [Applous.]  (Translation  of   Afrikaans
member's statement follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA (DP): Deputy Speaker, the phasing out of the  commando  system
as announced by President Mbeki creates the impression  of  retribution,  as
confirmed by Minister Lekota's referral to the misuse of white commandos  to
oppress black people. There is not the slightest doubt that such misuse  did
occur during the apartheid years, but the police were misused  in  the  same
way and there is no suggestion that the  police  service  should  be  phased
out. On the contrary, we are in the  middle  of  a  dramatic  transformation
process of  this  service.  It  would  surely  be  better  to  work  on  the
transformation of the commandos where there are indeed  shortages,  so  that
these people can also join the  many  who  have  already  reformed.  Instead
thereof, in the year of Letsema, the  year  of  the  volunteer,  the  oldest
existing voluntary organisation established in 1715 is being phased out.  In
order to promote prosperity in our country, it is necessary to  make  people
feel safe, including people in the rural areas. At present these  people  do
not feel safe and this announced phasing-out without a clear plan of  action
to replace them, suggests  political  considerations  instead  of  practical
considerations. [Applause.]]

                               ENERGY SOURCES

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Deputy Speaker, over the last century  or  so,  much  of
South Africa's economic development  had  been  made  possible  by  abundant
mineral wealth and accompanying investment  and  technological  advances  to
exploit these resources in an economically viable manner.  When  one  thinks
of South Africa's minerals, invariably gold, diamonds and platinum make  the
headlines, but the economic role played by coal has  often  been  downplayed
to some extent. Coal  mining  employs  a  large  number  of  workers,  earns
valuable foreign exchange and,  most  importantly,  provides  a  basic  feed
store for Eskom power stations to generate  an  abundance  of  comparatively
cheap electricity. It is exactly this cheap  electricity  that  has  allowed
rapid expansion in heavy industry, manufacturing and also mining.  Coal  has
its problems. It is dirty, it pollutes and reserves are being depleted  fast
so that, at some point in the future, we will not be able to  rely  on  coal
for electricity generation.

The IFP therefore welcomes the Government's commitment  in  the  1998  White
Paper on Energy Policy to  develop  alternative  and  renewable  sources  of
energy. On Friday 21 February 2003, the first experimental wind energy  farm
was  launched  in  the  Western  Cape.  We  welcome   this   Eskom-sponsored
initiative as wind energy is predicted to lead in the long term  to  reduced
pollution, lower prices for electricity and a better energy  mix  for  South
Africa. [Applause.]
                 DISMANTLING OF WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr L ZITA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, we wish to reiterate  our  opposition
to all weapons of mass destruction irrespective of which  state  or  country
possesses them. We would like to use this occasion also  to  call  upon  all
states that have developed such weapons to follow South Africa's example  by
totally dismantling them.

Today it was announced that the United States of  America  and  Britain  are
placing a new resolution before the UN Security Council which they  hope  to
employ to trigger a war against  Iraq.  South  Africa,  and  we  assume  all
parties in this august  House,  fully  supports  the  existing  UN  Security
Council resolution demanding that Iraq  destroy  all  the  weapons  of  mass
destruction it has developed  and  that  the  Iraqi  government  proactively
assist  the  United  Nations   weapons   inspectors   in   verifying   their
destruction.

South Africa's commitment to a peaceful resolution  of  the  current  crisis
was once again demonstrated by our President's initiative to send a team  of
South African experts to Iraq. This team will assist and advise  the  Iraqis
on the speedy destruction of such weapons. While  South  Africa  values  its
cordial relations with the  USA  and  Britain,  we  are,  however,  steadily
opposed to the unilateral use of force  by  these  countries  acting  either
separately or in alliance with other states to forcibly disarm  Iraq  and/or
impose a change of government on that country. I thank you. [Applause.]

                       PHASING OUT OF COMMANDO SYSTEM

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr A BLAAS (NNP): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die NNP  het  met  spyt  kennis
geneem dat die kommandostelsel as 'n  belangrike  element  van  die  Weermag
klaarblyklik uitgefaseer gaan word. Daar is begrip vir die argument dat  die
milit√™re strukture nie polisi√´ringswerk behoort te doen nie.
Voordat hierdie funksie egter oorgedra kan  word  aan  die  SA  Polisiediens
moet  laasgenoemde  oor  die  infrastruktuur  en  die   vermo√´   beskik   om
magsontplooiing en magsvermenigvuldiging effektief te  doen  om  die  nodige
beskerming van veral die boere en die plaaswerkers in die landelike  gebiede
te verseker. Dit beteken nie dat  kommando's  as  sodanig  uitgefaseer  moet
word nie.

Die kommando's is nie geoormerk om net ter ondersteuning van die polisie  op
te tree nie. Hulle is ook milit√™r opgelei om agterhoedeverdediging  te  doen
indien die Republiek in 'n  staat  van  oorlog  is.  In  di√©  proses  is  'n
effektiewe kommandostelsel 'n belangrike afskrikmiddel. Kommando's vorm  ook
'n territoriale komponent van die  reserwemag  wat  as  magsvermenigvuldiger
oor 'n vinnige reaksievermo√´ beskik. Hulle is ook 'n  baie  belangrike  bron
van inligting.

Die NNP glo dat die hele kommandostelsel deeglik  ge√´valueer  moet  word  en
dat al die implikasies in aanmerking geneem  moet  word  voordat  'n  finale
besluit  geneem  word  rakende  die  toekoms  van  die  kommando's.  Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans member's statement follows.)

[Mr A BLAAS (NNP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the NNP has noted with regret  that
the commando system, as an  important  element  of  the  defence  force,  is
evidently going to be phased out. There is understanding  for  the  argument
that the military structures are not supposed to be doing police work.

However, before this function  can  be  transferred  to  the  South  African
Police Service the aforementioned has to have  the  infrastructure  and  the
ability  effectively  to  undertake   the   force   deployment   and   force
multiplication in order to ensure the  necessary  protection  of  especially
the farmers and the farmworkers in the rural areas. This does not mean  that
the commandos as such should be phased out.

The commandos are not earmarked only to act in support of the  police.  They
are also trained in the military to  provide  rearguard  protection  if  the
Republic is in a state of war. In this process an effective commando  system
is an important deterrent. Commandos also form a  territorial  component  of
the reserve force  that,  as  a  force  multiplier,  has  a  quick  reaction
capability. They are also a very important source of information.

The NNP believes that  the  entire  commando  system  should  be  thoroughly
evaluated and all the implications must be taken into  consideration  before
a final decision is made concerning  the  future  of  the  commandos.  Thank
you.]

                    THREAT OF IMPORTS TO POULTRY INDUSTRY

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr S ABRAM (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker, the poultry industry in our  country
provides opportunities and employment to approximately  74¬†000  people.  The
total investment in infrastructure in this industry is of the  order  of  R2
billion.

However, the industry is facing a very grim period. The majority  of  frozen
chicken is imported from Brazil, which accounts for 54%  of  total  imports.
The declared free on board price is  R5,31  a  kilogram;  the  27%  duty  is
approximately R1,43, and freight, clearance and insurance amount  to  R1,30,
making it a total landed price of  R8,04.  However,  South  African  broiler
producers cannot produce chickens for under R10 a kilogram.

There are retailers who  are  profiteering  while  the  country  bleeds  and
poverty reigns. Those that claim to be the champions of the consumer  do  so
at the expense  and  on  the  account  of  the  supplier.  We  are  calling,
therefore, on the hon Minister of Trade and Industry to implement  emergency
measures on tariff adjustments. To go through the normal route would mean  a
four to five-month delay. One takes  exception  that  in  dollar  terms  ...
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank  you,  Madam,  I
would like to just give a short response to the hon Abram.  Isn't  it  right
...
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Du Toit, we will take responses at  the  end.
[Interjections.] Yes, I saw that the  hon  Erwin  also  is  quite  eager  to
respond.

                     SUCCESS OF PROGRAMMES IN EDUCATION

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Since 1994  we
have been seized with  the  transformation  of  the  education  system.  The
programmes which were introduced by  the  Department  of  Education,  namely
COLT and Tirisano, have started bearing fruit.

This  success  has  manifested  itself  through  the  matric  results.   The
achievement was reached through joint  efforts  between  parents,  educators
and school communities. During constituency work, we held education  summits
with different stakeholders.

I am pleased to  inform  the  House  that  in  Botshabelo  a  school  called
Setjhaba-se-Maketse obtained a 100% pass rate. In Mariusdal, a  farm  school
obtained a 100% pass rate. In Soweto, Moletsane Secondary  obtained  an  85%
pass rate with 34 distinctions. All these  schools  achieved  these  results
with meagre resources.

I wish to congratulate  the  Minister,  the  MECs,  the  educators  and  the
learners on these achievements and on showing commitment to  the  government
programmes, and I would like to appeal to the Minister for  more  allocation
of resources ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

         VOTE OF CONFIDENCE IN PRESIDENT OF ZIMBABWE BY NAM LEADERS

                            (Member's Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Deputy Speaker, many believe that it was a sad  day
for Africa when the leaders of the Non-Aligned Movement decided in  Malaysia
to give the Zimbabwean president a unanimous vote of confidence in spite  of
the human rights abuses his government  is  perpetrating  in  that  country.
[Interjections.] The fact  that  a  draft  resolution  to  that  effect  was
accepted without debate has cast a dark cloud over hopes  that  Africa  will
eventually rid itself of rogues, corrupt leaders, dictators and  thieves  in
government.

This House must remember that at the height of the rule of the  late  Mobutu
Sese Seko, former president of the  then  Za√Øre,  his  personal  wealth  was
estimated at US$6  billion,  while  his  country's  debt  amounted  to  US$9
billion. He stole his country's wealth and there was  no  condemnation  from
African leaders. Africans must not allow  the  existence  of  a  brotherhood
that protects, defends and closes ranks around corrupt  leaders  who  should
be exposed and penalised for their greed and cruelty. [Interjections.]

On the contrary, those honest leaders of integrity are expected to  confront
evil wherever it raises its ugly head, even if it is within its  own  ranks.
Africa desperately needs leaders who will defend the rights of the poor  and
vulnerable, and not their colleagues who are motivated by  greed  and  self-
aggrandizement. The ACDP believes that it  is  wrong  to  equate  a  protest
against human rights abuse and the  death  of  democracy  in  Zimbabwe  with
support for the  British  and  American  governments.  Democracy  and  human
rights are universal norms. [Applause.]

                        ABOLITION OF COMMANDO SYSTEM

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr P W  A  MULDER  (VF):  Mevrou  die  Adjunkspeaker,  in  Suid-Afrika  word
ongeveer 55 uit elke 100¬†000 mense vermoor. Dis 'n ho√´ syfer. In Amerika  is
dit ses uit 100¬†000. As die moorde op Suid-Afrikaanse plase -  dis  nou  van
swart en wit mense - in isolasie beskou word, is die syfer ongeveer 280  uit
100¬†000. Ons het duidelik 'n probleem met beveiliging op die platteland.

Die VF het verlede jaar hierdie saak met die Regering  bespreek.  AgriSA  en
die Transvaalse Landbou-unie het dit met die Regering  bespreek.  Kommando's
speel 'n belangrike rol in  die  beveiliging  van  die  platteland.  Skielik
verlede week kondig president Mbeki in die Raad aan dat die  kommandostelsel
afgeskaf gaan word. Daar was geen  vooraf  konsultasie  met  enige  van  die
landbou-organisasies nie. Die VF se versoeke is duidelik ge√Øgnoreer.

Die besluit stuur net een boodskap aan die boere en die  gemeenskap  op  die
platteland: julle veiligheid is nie  vir  ons  belangrik  nie.  Wat  is  die
Regering se redes?

``Kommando's is  wit  strukture  wat  teen  swart  mense  optree,''  s√™  die
Minister. Wat is die feite? Agt en veertig persent  van  die  reserwemag  en
40% van die kommando's is nie wit nie. Dit is meer as 20¬†000 van  die  sowat
52¬†000 kommandolede. 'n Ander rede wat aangevoer  word,  is  dat  kommando's
krimineel optree teenoor  die  bevolking.  Sedert  1996  was  daar  ongeveer
260¬†000 optredes deur kommando's sonder probleme. Sedert 1996 was  daar  net
drie gevalle waar kommandolede aan wanoptrede skuldig bevind is.

Dit lyk my dat die Regering n√° die bomme oorreageer het  en  op  ondeurdagte
wyse  'n  oorhaastige  en  verkeerde  besluit  geneem  het  sonder  om   die
betrokkenes te konsulteer. Dit stuur 'n verkeerde  boodskap  uit.  Ons  moet
die stelsel behou of die tyd gebruik wat die Minister ges√™ het ons  gaan  h√™
om 'n beter stelsel  te  kry,  en  nie  dinge  oorhaastig  aankondig  en  'n
verkeerde boodskap uitstuur nie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of  Afrikaans
member's statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF): Madam Deputy Speaker, in South  Africa  approximately
55 people of every 100 000 are being murdered. This is  a  high  figure.  In
America it is 6 out of every 100  000.  Considering  the  murders  on  South
African farms in isolation - that is of black and white people - the  figure
is approximately 280 out  of  100  000.  We  clearly  have  a  problem  with
security in the rural areas.

Last year the FF discussed this issue with the Government.  AgriSA  and  the
Transvaal Agricultural Union discussed it  with  the  Government.  Commandos
play an important role in  the  security  of  the  rural  areas.  Last  week
President Mbeki all of a sudden announced in the  House  that  the  commando
system was going to be abolished. There was no prior consultation  with  any
of the agricultural organisations. The requests from  the  FF  have  clearly
been ignored.

This  decision  only  sends  out  one  message  to  the  farmers  and  rural
community: Your safety is not important to us.  What  are  the  Government's
reasons?

``Commandos are white  structures  that  act  against  black  people'',  the
Minister is saying. What are the facts? Forty-eight percent of  the  reserve
force, and 40% of the commandos are not white. This is more than 20  000  of
the 52 000 or so commando members. Another reason that  has  been  given  is
that commandos carry out acts of crime against the  population.  Since  1996
there have been about 260 000 actions carried out by commandos  without  any
problems. Since 1996 there have only been three cases in  which  members  of
commandos have been found guilty of misconduct.

It appears to me as if the Government has overreacted after the  bombs,  and
it has taken a rash and wrong decision in an ill-considered  manner  without
consulting those involved. This sends out a wrong message. We must keep  the
system or use the time that the Minister  said  we  are  going  to  have  to
develop an improved system, and not hastily announce things and send  out  a
wrong message. [Time expired.]]

                  TRANSFORMATION AT LOCAL GOVERNMENT LEVEL

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms M C LOBE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, to  achieve  the  notion  that  the
people shall govern  as  set  out  in  the  Freedom  Charter,  the  ANC  has
developed a people-centred and people-driven planning process at  the  local
government level. From 5 December 2000, municipalities  have  been  involved
in a protracted, difficult  and  challenging  transformation  process  that,
amongst others, included the development of an integrated development plan.
Notwithstanding the lack  of  capacity  and  resources,  our  municipalities
managed  to  produce  good  IDPs  through  their  commitment  to   producing
sustainable service delivery. A few rural municipalities can  be  mentioned,
for  example  the  Tzaneen   local   municipality,   the   Umhlatuzi   local
municipality, etc. IDPs are important tools for  accelerating  delivery  and
ensuring that our people take their destinies firmly into their  own  hands.
It is therefore  important  to  align  and  co-ordinate  development  plans,
especially between provincial and local government,  for  efficient  service
delivery.

We want to call on all communities to  exercise  their  right  and  actively
participate in the process of developing and monitoring IDPs as  a  tool  to
push back the frontiers of poverty. We  also  hope  that  the  national  and
provincial  spheres  of  government  will  allocate  adequate  resources  to
strengthen their support towards the local government sphere. I  thank  you.
[Applause.]

   INVOLVEMENT OF NEW NP IN CONTROVERSIAL WESTERN CAPE DEVELOPMENT SCHEMES

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DP):  Deputy  Speaker,  following  the  arrests  on  corruption
charges of New  NP  politicians  Peter  Marais  and  David  Malatsi  in  the
R300¬†000 Roodefontein bribery  scandal,  New  NP  Western  Cape  MECs  Johan
Gelderblom and Andr√© Gaum are reported to have joined Malatsi in  soliciting
a  donation  from  another  developer  awaiting  provincial  permission  for
another controversial development at Suiderstrand in  the  Agulhas  National
Park. [Interjections.]

Marais  stated  that  Marthinus  van  Schalkwyk  knew  about  the   R300¬†000
solicited before the golf estate development  was  irregularly  approved  by
the then Minister Malatsi last year. [Interjections.]

There is increasing evidence that the New NP, on  direct  instructions  from
Van Schalkwyk to his provincial  cabinet  to  raise  money  for  the  party,
targeted every developer  with  matters  pending  before  the  Western  Cape
government. By his own admission Malatsi estimated the number of  developers
at more than 100.

Van Schalkwyk must have known, or should have known, about these  activities
at the heart of his government, and his attempt to deflect  the  scandal  is
rapidly  unravelling.  These  four  MECs,  acting  at  the  behest  of   Van
Schalkwyk, symbolise the New NP's betrayal of the Western Cape  voters,  and
the corruption of democracy in the province.

In his pursuit of power, Mr Van Schalkwyk is clearly the man behind  it.  In
dumping the principles of the DA for  the  patronage  of  the  ANC,  he  has
forgotten the people of the Western Cape. [Interjections.]

                          HIV STATUS OF PLAYWRIGHT

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr U ROOPNARAIN (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, Gibson Kente, the famous  South
African playwright, whose first production, Manana, The  Jazz  Prophet,  was
arguably the first black play to have become a hit, has disclosed that  he's
HIV-positive. We should all applaud him  for  his  honesty  and  courage  in
disclosing his status and not denying it or trying to conceal it.

Hopefully this will be a turning point in  the  fight  against  HIV/Aids  in
South Africa as a result of which people, especially  those  in  the  public
eye, will come out and reveal their status. It is hoped that this will  help
break the silence and the stigma concerning HIV/Aids.

We hope that Gibson receives all the support he needs and that  his  actions
will encourage other people to  follow  his  lead.  We  as  political  power
brokers need to ensure that people who are  HIV-positive  come  forward  and
declare their status by supporting them.

                    INEQUITIES IN PROVINCIAL HEALTH CARE
                            (Member's Statement)

Mr L V J NGCULU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, while a  solid  foundation  has
been laid to  promote  equity  and  equality,  the  ultimate  challenge  for
Government remains that of implementation. Nowhere is this  more  pronounced
than in the area of health, which is the bedrock of  a  productive  society.
In  terms  of  health  care  provision,  we  continue  to  observe   glaring
interprovincial and intraprovincial inequities.

There is an urgent need, therefore, to intensify the  transformation  agenda
and identify  areas  in  which  there  is  greater  poverty,  ensuring  that
services and resources reach the people  who  need  them  most.  Facing  the
challenge of HIV/Aids and  other  communicable  diseases  requires  that  we
intensify our integrated and multisectoral  interventions  characterised  by
partnerships between Government and the communities.

We acknowledge the role played by  our  health  providers  who  are  working
tirelessly to expand our  250  Prevention  of  Mother-to-Child  Transmission
programmes even further. We must, however, be concerned about  the  slowness
in the expansion of the PMTCT programmes in three provinces.  We  hope  that
the Minister will inform this House on plans  to  address  the  slowness  in
provinces. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                       TAXATION OF RETIREMENT SAVINGS

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr P J RABIE (New NP): Speaker, the New NP appeals to the  hon  Minister  of
Finance to make reference to the investigation and  relaxation  of  taxation
of retirement savings in his forthcoming Budget Speech. The New NP  requests
the Minister to give an indication of how  to  encourage  long-term  savings
that would create post-retirement income security.

The material plight of some of the aged is reason for serious  concern.  The
present  high  levels  of  inflation  and  the  large  disparities  in   the
distribution  of  income  have  eroded  household  income.  An  announcement
regarding a substantial reduction in taxation on retirement savings  due  to
be implemented in 2004 will strengthen  business  and  investor  confidence,
and lessen the dependence of the aged on financial  assistance  provided  by
Government. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I will try ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I just say this to  Ministers:  If  three  different
issues were raised by members, we will give you  two  minutes  for  each  of
these issues. If there is one issue, you have only two minutes.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: What happens if you  raise  three  parts
of the chicken? Can you get two minutes for each? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No! I will give you two minutes for the chicken.

                    THREAT OF IMPORTS TO POULTRY INDUSTRY
                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: It is relevant in my answer, because  in
an attempt previously to find some degree  of  protection  for  the  poultry
industry, we initiated a fairly unique antidumping action which  dealt  with
the different parts of a chicken. I could spend a lot more than two  minutes
telling you about that action and the different parts of the chicken, but  I
think the position is absolutely crystal clear. The  industry  is  aware  of
these vagaries in the  international  market.  It  must  apply  through  the
normal processes which it has already initiated - an antidumping action.

There is no other recourse that we can put in of sudden emergency  measures.
This is not a countervailing action and the industry is very  familiar  with
this. They have been very  much  part  and  parcel  of  the  action  against
certain producers in the United States  where  we  took  on  an  antidumping
action. I think this is a challenge to the industry which we have spoken  to
them about many times, in that this is one of those industries in the  world
where prices vary considerably, and we have to take those actions  that  are
open to us if it is justified. But there are aspects that  I  would  put  to
the industry, which means that they should be a little  bit  more  efficient
in some aspects of their production.

Now, we have worked with the industry on many occasions to protect them  and
I do not think that there is cause for them to say they  have  not  received
the correct attention timeously. They have.

An HON MEMBER: That is a headless chicken.

                              CHOLERA OUTBREAK

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Speaker, I would like  to  thank
the hon Sonjica for her support and also for the way she is focused  on  the
crisis.

The current outbreak of cholera in the Eastern Cape, following  the  one  in
KwaZulu-Natal, is the seventh or eighth such outbreak since  the  1970s.  It
is indeed ironic that, at a time when we are  succeeding  in  providing  the
vast majority of our people who  never  had  clean  water  before  with  the
service, we are faced with this kind of problem, one which  virtually  every
African country on the east coast has been  facing  for  many  decades,  and
other countries throughout the world.

One would have expected a far greater casualty  list  but  for  the  immense
work of government departments and the Health Department. The fact  is  that
in terms of progress, we will now be providing 37  million  South  Africans,
out of a population of 42 million, with  safe,  clean  water,  and  in  five
years' time we will reach all our people.

We are providing approximately R1 billion a  year  and  reaching  a  million
people as we spend that money. So, the year 2008 sees our entire  population
covered. But, as the hon Sonjica has pointed  out,  there  is  a  tremendous
backlog with regard to sanitation  and  if  we  are  going  to  defeat  this
cholera problem, and all waterborne diseases, it is  not  only  clean,  safe
water that is required, but it is adequate sanitation,  and  it  is  hygiene
awareness. She has called on us to involve the local communities  and  their
local governments, which we are doing through our Wash  campaign,  which  is
water, sanitation and hygiene awareness.

At the current rate of expenditure, we are  expecting  to  provide  all  our
people with adequate sanitation by the year 2010, but we  really  are  going
to have to rely for all our service programmes  on  local  government  which
increasingly,  in  terms  of  our   Constitution,   is   given   roles   and
responsibilities as well as capital expenditure to ensure  that  our  people
everywhere receive the kind of services required. [Time expired.]

                          PHASING OUT OF COMMANDOS

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, first of all,  I  would  like
to appeal to members  of  the  House  to  recall,  when  dealing  with  this
question of commandos, the historic mission which we chose, as a nation,  in
order to transform our society from the old order to a new one. One  of  the
reasons we chose to go to negotiations was so that we  could  systematically
transform our society, instead of landing ourselves in confusion.  Now,  the
Constitution prescribes that particular institutions will play a  particular
role. So, in this case, the police and SA Police Service have  the  task  of
policing society all round.

We could not have acted  at  once.  It  was  important  that  we  study  the
situation and as we move  on,  proceed  to  implement,  step  by  step,  the
transformation process.

The moment for the commandos to cease to play the role they  played  in  the
old order and change into this order, has come, because we must  not  forget
that the commandos came into being in order to  beef  up  the  old  regime's
struggle against the liberation  movements.  That  really  was  the  reason.
[Interjections.] That was the reason! I know that on the different sides  of
the colour line we see things differently, but  people  must  listen  to  my
perspective. That was how it was. That  is  why  they  were  not  black  and
white. Only whites were given the weapons, only  whites  played  this  role,
and only whites had the right to stop Africans on the  road  and  ask  them:
``Waarvandan kom jy? Waar gaan jy?'' ens. [``Where do you come  from?  Where
are you going?'' etc.]

That was the reason. Today we need a situation in which  those  who  enforce
the law must be properly trained. They must have  the  powers  according  to
the Constitution to arrest and they must be accountable. Therefore, we  have
said here that we want to phase them out so that we are able  to  strengthen
the SA Police Service. We are mustering some of the people  out  of  the  SA
National Defence Force and others into  the  policing  services,  reclaiming
them so that we strengthen the Police Service. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, your time has expired.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: We are proceeding with this issue. There can be  no
stopping, I am sorry. We must go on now. [Applause.]

                          PHASING OUT OF COMMANDOS

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Of course, it is clear to  us  what  we
mean by phasing  out.  We  mean  exactly  that.  We  are  not  stopping  the
commandos  from  operating  tomorrow  and  the  day  after.  We  have  given
ourselves a period of six years within which to phase out the commandos.

In discussing the matter, Cabinet said: Even at that point, we must be  able
to look back and check if indeed we have everything in  place  in  terms  of
resources of both the human and material kind  which  will  then  take  over
this function.

We are going to replace the commandos with the  police.  It  is  clear.  Our
Constitution enjoins us to use the police for policing and arresting. It  is
quite clear, and this is not the only area in which we are phasing out  some
of the structures. We have already phased out a number of structures in  the
Police Service itself.

I am sure you will remember that we used to have, in the  olden  days,  what
were referred to as the murder and robbery squads. Those  have  been  phased
out and we have something else in their place. It is a continuous process.

Now, if you are painting the commandos in the way that you are, just  go  to
Northern KwaZulu-Natal, to Mpumalanga and to Limpopo and  ask  those  people
there about their experiences vis-√†-vis  the  commandos.  Do  not  come  and
speak here as if commandos have been angels through the work that they  have
been doing. Do not come here and do that.

We are going to phase out this structure and there will be police  officials
who will take responsibility for all crimes  that  happen  in  our  country,
including in the rural areas as well as the farming communities.

We have been discussing rural safety with the farming communities. The  fact
that we should have gone on a broad consultation process in order for us  to
implement a decision of this kind would be a case  of  taking  democracy  to
extremes. We are communicating with people and they understand  the  reasons
why we are moving in this direction. One of them is that  we  are  following
the Constitution. The Police Service is the only structure  in  the  country
that has responsibility for crime-combating and arresting.

The Army itself is phasing out ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon Asmal is the last Minister in  this  round.  Hon
Aucamp, why are you rising?

Mnr C AUCAMP: A  point  of  order!  According  to  the  rules  of  this  new
statement time, when a Minister has two minutes to reply,  is  it  in  order
that different  Ministers  each  use  two  minutes  to  reply  to  the  same
question?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is up to the Ministers what they want to respond  to,
hon member. I now call upon the hon Asmal to take his two-minute slot.

                     SUCCESS OF PROGRAMMES IN EDUCATION

                            (Minister's Response)

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, I thank Comrade Dorothy  Motubatse
for the intervention.

At lunchtime, I met the South Africa-European Union  delegation.  The  first
point that was raised was that the reason why there is no direct  investment
in South Africa is the lack of trained, educated blacks. I had to spend  the
rest of the morning telling them how skills  were  acquired  so  quickly  at
Mercedes  Benz  and  Volkswagen  that  we  are  selling  highly  specialised
motorcars built by people who were previously virtually illiterate.

Capacity-building and skills acquisition can be so quickly done if there  is
a political desire, movement and intention. So, I am very  pleased  that  in
reference to the poorest schools in the Free State and Soweto, we  can  talk
about enormous pass rates and enormous exemption rates. These  are  not  the
schools that  catch  the  headlines.  These  are  not  the  schools  at  the
foothills of Table Mountain, the private schools that  advertise  themselves
and that charge R25 000 - R30 000 fees a year. I am pleased,  therefore,  to
announce to this House and to Comrade Dorothy that on Tuesday  next  week  I
will be announcing the  results  of  a  major  study  on  the  costings  and
financing of education in Pretoria.

We already account for 24% of the budget, nearly 5,7% of the gross  national
product. I do not think that it is necessary for us to ask for  more  money,
but it is how the money is spent that is important. On  Tuesday  next  week,
we will work out how that money is spent, and how there  would  have  to  be
intervention to ensure that the poorest of the poor schools in  rural  areas
and townships get better intervention in terms of  resources  so  that  they
can carry out the kinds of things they are doing.

I should add, in conclusion, that the results here  are  a  triumph  of  the
human spirit. They show  the  resilience  and  the  capacity  of  people  to
overcome  very  bad  working  conditions,  with  additional  teachers  being
absent, and they are still able to motivate children to get results of  this
type. I think we should be proud  of  these  developments  that  are  taking
place in the schools, because we do not tend to remark on how excellent  the
progress has been over the last few years. [Applause.]

                         FINANCIAL COMMITTEE REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

USOSWEBHU OMKHULU WEQEMBU LENINGI: Phini  likaSomlomo,  ngazisa  njengalokho
kubhalwe ngaphansi kwegama lami oHlwini lweziHloko ukuthi:


  Kuyothi emuva  kokwethulwa  koMthethosivivinywa  weSabiwomali  kule  Ndlu
  iKomidi LezeziMali, ngaphandle kokubalula koMthetho 290(3), libuyele kule
  Ndlu kungakapheli izinsuku eziyi-14 ukuze lizobika.
(Translation of Zulu draft resolution follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY:  Madam  Speaker,  I  move  the  draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, upon the introduction of the main appropriation bill, the Portfolio
  Committee on Finance, notwithstanding Rule 290 (3), report to  the  House
  within fourteen consecutive days.]

Agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
   CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
                         AFRICA THIRD AMENDMENT BILL

Report adopted without debate.
    CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA THIRD AMENDMENT BILL AND
     CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA FOURTH AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER  FOR  JUSTICE  AND  CONSTITUTIONAL  DEVELOPMENT:  Madam  Deputy
Speaker, Deputy President, colleagues and hon members, I have been given  to
understand that, in this debate, we are dealing with  both  Bills  that  are
before this House by means of which we seek to  amend  the  Constitution  of
the Republic of South Africa.

Allow me, first and foremost, to deal with the Constitution of the  Republic
of South Africa Fourth Amendment Bill. It's in fact  unusual  and  yet,  for
reasons that will soon become apparent, quite apposite today  to  start  the
debate on a Bill before this august  House  by  quoting  from  the  Book  of
books. For this purpose, I have  selected  the  gospel  according  to  Luke,
Chapter 7, verses 31 to 34, where it is written that our Lord  Jesus  Christ
once said the following:
  Now to what can I compare the people of this day?  What  are  they  like?
  They are like children sitting in the marketplace. One  group  shouts  to
  the other, ``We played wedding music for you but you wouldn't  dance.  We
  sang funeral songs, but you wouldn't cry''. John the Baptist came, and he
  fasted and drank no wine and you said, ``He has a demon on him''. The Son
  of Man came and he ate and drank, and you said, ``Look at this man, He is
  a glutton and drinker, a friend of tax collectors and other outcasts''.

The Bill before the House this afternoon seeks to address an anomaly of  our
membership of legislatures system. As a consequence of the decision  of  the
Constitutional Court in United Democratic Movement v President  of  the  RSA
and Others, floor-crossing, while legally not possible in the  national  and
provincial legislatures, is allowed and has happened already  in  the  local
government sphere. None of us would be right  in  advocating  that,  largely
due to our experience in the local government sphere, things should be  left
as they are.
To be where we are today, we  have  indeed  taken  a  long,  circuitous  and
tortuous route. We have come all the way from the time  when,  for  example,
the IFP through its legal counsel, Peter Hodes SC, David Unterh√§lter  and  R
F  van  Rooyen,  argued  before  the   Constitutional   Court   during   the
certification proceedings that the  retention  of  the  bar  against  floor-
crossing, that is the antidefection clause, was in violation of some of  the
constitutional principles that were contained in  the  interim  constitution
which the new Constitution was required to be predicated  upon.  As  can  be
gleaned from its judgment, in In Re: Certification of  the  Constitution  of
the Republic of South Africa, 1996, the Constitutional Court,  arguably  for
the right reasons, rejected such contentions.

Lest we all forget, while there has always been  and  there  will  no  doubt
always be a diversity of views within Parliament and in society at large  as
to whether or not floor-crossing is appropriate for our  country,  a  number
of representatives of political parties including the DP, New  NP,  PAC  and
ACDP have in the past argued for an absolute freedom  to  cross  the  floor.
The IFP, presumably after reflecting carefully on the question, changed  its
position and temporarily sided  with  the  ANC  in  its  opposition  to  the
removal of the antidefection provision.

It may also be useful to remind  this  House  of  the  DP's  motivation  and
submission to the ad hoc committee on membership of legislatures  which  was
delivered on 16 October 1997  by  the  hon  Mr  Colin  Eglin,  who  declared
passionately that item 23A of Annexure A to Schedule 6 to the  Constitution,
the antidefection provision, should be deleted in its entirety as it,  among
others, placed extraordinary coercive powers in the hands of  party  leaders
and/or those who control the party machines and reduced the  status  of  all
members of the National Assembly from that of representatives of the  people
to that of agents of a political party.  To  their  eternal  credit,  albeit
uncharacteristically, the leaders and representatives  of  the  DP  in  this
House stuck consistently to this perspective and  voted  together  with  the
rest of us, the ANC - their archenemy and nemesis - thus  ensuring  that  we
had 280 out of 324, that is 86%, of the  members  of  this  House  who  were
present and voted in favour of the removal of the antidefection provision.

In its editorial, The Argus had earlier  on  declared  on  9  February  1995
that, as the first post-apartheid constitution of  the  republic  was  still
being made, the provision that members of Parliament who  quit  their  party
should automatically resign their  seats  made  individual  parliamentarians
too beholden to party discipline; that it  turned  them  into  caucus-voting
fodder and effete pawns in  the  political  chess  game  which,  apart  from
making for boring politics, was simply not in the public interest; and  that
historically and in South African politics, crossing the floor or taking  to
the cross benches had been an accepted component of dynamic democracy.

As what I have already said clearly and amply  demonstrates,  virtually  all
opposition parties at  one  time  or  another  wanted  the  removal  of  the
antidefection provision in order to ensure that, in the words of the hon  Mr
Eglin, ``South African politics will be healthier and that  Parliament  will
be able to develop to its full potential as the custodian of  representative
democracy  in  our  country.''  The  ANC,  virtually  the  only  party  that
consistently advocated caution as far  as  this  issue  was  concerned,  was
placed under so much political pressure that  a  compromise  was  eventually
reached. The Constitutional Assembly, in its wisdom, left it  to  Parliament
to pass an Act within  reasonable  time  after  the  new  Constitution  took
effect in order to permit the  retention  of  membership  of  a  legislature
despite the loss of party membership. Needless to say, a  few  years  later,
the  ANC  -  the  last  reliable  bastion  against  the   removal   of   the
antidefection provision - after a lot of persuasion  and  pressure,  changed
its view. As a result, Bills seeking to address this issue were  debated  in
and passed by  this  House  and  the  NCOP  with  more  than  the  requisite
majorities.

Some of us really thought that opposition  parties  would  sing,  dance  and
gyrate as the ANC eventually played the wedding  music  that  they  hitherto
had insisted upon. Much to our chagrin, a small minority of members of  this
House took us to court and sought to stop the implementation  of  what  most
of them had clamoured for for so long. From then on, strange things  started
to happen. The whole polity was thrown into  a  state  of  utter  confusion.
Dollops of untruths and insults such as that the ANC sought thereby  to  use
inducements to steal seats from minority parties and take political  control
of every square inch of our country were  peddled  around  by  some  in  the
media as well as by those  who,  only  yesteryear,  had  clamoured  for  the
removal of the bar against floor-crossing.

Judges of the High Court in the Western Cape, who obviously  knew  or  ought
to have known that under section 167(4)(c)  read  with  section  80  of  the
Constitution, only the Constitutional Court may  decide  on  an  application
such as the one that had been brought by that small minority of  members  of
this House, nonetheless granted them an  order  freezing  the  operation  of
duly enacted, assented to, signed and promulgated Acts  of  Parliament.  The
Constitutional Court too, for some unfathomable reasons,  entertained  their
application  without  ascertaining  whether,  as  required   under   section
80(2)(a) of the Constitution, their application was supported  by  at  least
one third of the members of the National Assembly,  that  is,  whether  they
had locus standi.

A simple calculation suggests that 70% of the  400  members  of  this  House
voted in favour of the Bills and therefore the small minority,  led  by  the
hon Bantubonke Holomisa, would not have been able to find one  third  of  us
to support him in his bid to frustrate the will of the majority. Be that  as
it may, the Constitutional Court ruled  that  but  for  the  fact  that  the
relevant transitional  provisions  of  the  Constitution  were  not  amended
within a reasonable time after the Constitution  came  into  effect,  floor-
crossing would have started happening legally in all spheres of  government,
not only in the local sphere.

This Bill is a reflection of our earnest collective effort  to  address  the
existing anomaly and appropriately do away with the antidefection  provision
so that, to paraphrase the hon Mr Eglin, members  of  all  legislatures  are
liberated from the clutches of party bosses  and  those  who  control  party
machines. I unreservedly commend it  to  this  House.  For  those  who  have
always badgered the ANC to collaborate with them in order to  have  the  bar
removed, this, surely, is a wedding song. To them I say: Rise and dance.  To
the rest it may be a funeral song, a dirge. To them I say: The Members'  bar
is open for the after-tears party.

I wish to ask this House to turn its attention to the  Constitution  of  the
Republic of South Africa  Third  Amendment  Bill.  It  may  be  stated  that
although this Bill might not  be  as  controversial  as  the  floor-crossing
amendment, it addresses some very important issues. The main  objectives  of
the Bill are  the  following:  it  provides  for  Bills  regulating  certain
financial matters to be dealt with in accordance with the procedure set  out
in section 76(1) of the Constitution; it changes the name  of  the  Northern
Province  to  Limpopo;  it  regulates  provincial  intervention   in   local
government; and it simplifies the process of review by the National  Council
of Provinces in the case of national executive  intervention  in  provincial
government.

The  amendments  to  section  139  of  the  Constitution,  which   regulates
interventions by provincial executives and local government, form  the  crux
of  the  Bill.  Those  amendments  provide  a   comprehensive   scheme   for
interventions  by  provincial  executives  in  municipalities.  This  scheme
recognises and preserves the role  of  a  democratically  elected  municipal
council, and at the same time assures all residents  and  stakeholders  that
serious or prolonged failures of governance will be dealt with in  order  to
ensure that each municipality has the ability  to  meet  its  obligation  to
provide basic services or to meet its financial commitments.

The  amendments  to  section  139  will  also  help  to  assure  that  local
government meets its constitutional objectives that include,  among  others,
providing  services  to   communities,   promoting   social   and   economic
development, and promoting a safe and  healthy  environment.  It  will  also
give investors the confidence to lend to municipalities,  and  will  improve
governance in the local sphere, helping South Africans to gain  more  access
to affordable and quality services.

Furthermore, the amendments to section 139  assure  our  people  that  local
government will be effective and that financial or governance failures  will
be corrected and help make private investment capital available to  well-run
municipalities  at  the  lowest  possible  cost.  It  thus  gives  me  great
pleasure, Madam Deputy Speaker, to commend this Bill to this House.

With the minute or two left, I wish to say the following  to  our  colleague
that is departing from  the  executive  and  from  this  House:  We  started
working for the Government and the people of the Republic  of  South  Africa
together as Deputy Ministers. And those of us who have known you,  Minister,
for long enough, have enjoyed working with  you.  It  saddens  us  that  for
reasons, which we will never understand,  we  were  never,  as  this  House,
given an opportunity to bid you farewell, but I do think it behoves  all  of
us to say thank you very much. You, and through you, we,  reached  those  of
our people that  live  in  hovels,  who  had  no  hope,  before  you  became
Minister, of having a roof above their heads.  And  together  with  you,  we
were able to deliver electricity, water, things which some of the people  to
my left had been taking for granted for decades,  having  become  accustomed
to the fact that as long as there was white minority rule in  this  country,
they were a preserve of whites. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: What about Joe Slovo?

Indeed, Joe Slovo had a few months before he  died.  Please  remember  that.
Yes, please remember that.

So, she took over and she delivered. Some of our  kith  and  kin  -  because
some of  us  still  have  people  living  in  hovels  -  are  proud  of  the
contribution that you  made,  and  we  as  members  of  the  executive  here
present, and led by the hon the Deputy President,  say  ``Farewell,  sister,
perform even better where you are  now  being  deployed''.  Thank  you  very
much.
Mnr  J   T   DELPORT:   Geagte   Adjunkspeaker,   die   reg   van   openbare
verteenwoordigers om van party te verander bring  'n  totaal  nuwe  dimensie
tot die politieke speelveld in Suid-Afrika. Waaroor dit  gaan,  is  oor  die
verhoogde toetse aan moraliteit en integriteit wat gestel gaan word.

Politici  kon  nog  altyd  hul  kiesers  teleurstel.  Daar  was  nog   altyd
voorbeelde gewees van korrupsie en selfverryking.  Daar  was  altyd  gevalle
waar integriteit ontbreek het. Daar was ook nog altyd  gevalle  waar  partye
wat in die regeringsbanke beland, nalaat om hul beloftes na te kom. Ek  noem
nie name nie, volg net  my  o√´.  Maar  die  verkose  politikus  is  nie  net
verteenwoordiger van sy mense nie, hy is ook  verkose  leier.  Hy  moet  ook
binne die bre√´ mandaat wat hy kry, rigting gee aan sy kiesers.

Hierdie nuwe wetgewing  bring  twee  gevalle  na  vore  waar  ek  praat  van
verhoogde integriteitseise. Eerste is gewoon: wat maak hy met sy reg om  van
party te verander. Watter redes hou hy voor om dit te doen.
Aan die einde van verlede jaar het die kieserspubliek baie erg di√©  situasie
ervaar met gevolglike frustrasie, woede, selfs  veragting  by  die  kiesers.
Tereg, want soveel stadsraadslede wat onder 'n bepaalde beleid en  vlag,  'n
bepaalde posisionering in  die  politiek,  verkies  is,  het  daardie  party
verlaat wat hulle daar gebring het om op 'n ander vlak  te  gaan  staan.  En
tog besluit diegene, nadat die kiesers  so  verkies  het,  om  sogenaamd  te
herposisioneer, om ondersteuners van die ANC te word onder die naam en  vlag
van die Nuwe NP en om stadsrade in ANC beheer oor te gee - goeie  stadsrade.
Hulle noem dit herposisionering, en ander mense noem dit sommer verraad.

Maar, daar is ook 'n teenkant: wat maak die openbare verteenwoordiger as  sy
partyleiding ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Agb lid, ek  het  bedank  en  t√≥√©  na  'n
ander  party  gegaan.  Wat  maak  die  openbare   verteenwoordiger   as   sy
partyleiding 'n koers inslaan waarvoor daar geen mandaat van sy  kiesers  is
nie, √©n waarmee hy nie  kan  saamstem  nie?  Ook  dan  word  sy  integriteit
getoets.

D√≠t  is  die  situasie  wat  nou  ook   in   hierdie   Huis   deur   hierdie
Grondwetwysiging veroorsaak gaan word. Daardie agb lede in die Nuwe  NP  sal
nie kan ontsnap aan 'n enkele vraag wat  hul  elkeen  self  moet  beantwoord
nie. Die enkele vraag is: het ons  partyleiding  werklik  herposisioneer  of
het ons partyleiding uitverkoop? En, as daardie  agb  lede  sukkel  met  die
vraag, vra 'n paar van die ou staatmakers  wat  hulle  doen,  en  wat  hulle
dink. Vra hulle wat eersdaags weer 'n kruisie moet  gaan  maak.  Vra  vir  u
partystrukture, as u het, en as u nie het nie, dan is die  vraag  mos  klaar
beantwoord. Of kyk wat in tussenverkiesings gebeur - as u nie  'n  kandidaat
het nie, dan is die vraag mos klaar beantwoord.

Daar rus 'n dure plig op politici om  eerbaar  teenoor  hul  kiesers  op  te
tree. In die algemeen, by almal van ons, want soveel politici  tree  nie  in
algemene belang op nie. Soveel  werk  vir  selfbelang,  vir  die  behoud  of
verkryging van 'n pos, vir 'n pot lensiesop. Nou  ja,  sommiges  se  sop  is
dikker as ander, en smaakliker as ander, maar oppas die bitter  nasmaak  sal
nie uitbly nie.
Die DA steun hierdie wetgewing wetende dat dit 'n  nuwe  bedeling  met  nuwe
integriteitseise inlui. Die DA was van oordeel dat die tydperke vir  oorloop
aanvanklik verminder moet word, en wou nou graag die oorlooptydperk  verkort
sien. Die DA glo  ook,  en  dit  is  deel  van  wat  ons  glo,  dat  dit  'n
moraliteitseis moet word in die politiek - 'n eerbaarheidstoets. Die DA  glo
dat as oorloop in 'n bepaalde raad of liggaam die drastiese gevolg  het  dat
daar  'n  verandering  in  die  politieke  beheer  kom,  moet  daardie  nuwe
meerderheid dan die eerbare weg volg om 'n verkiesing  uit  te  skryf.  Laat
die kiesers dan oordeel wat hulle wil h√™.

Daar word ges√™ 'n week is 'n lang tyd in  die  politiek.  Dit  is  so.  Maar
terselfdertyd is vyf jaar in die politiek kort, want  oor  net  meer  as  'n
jaar gaan die kiesers alweer kans kry om oor die gebeure van hierdie  termyn
hul oordeel uit te spreek.  Gaan  hulle  weer  die  geleentheid  kry  om  te
oorweeg waar hulle die kruisie gaan maak. Daarin l√™  die  antwoord  vir  die
kieserspubliek wat miskien nou gefrustreerd is. Die balansskaal, op  die  ou
end, is in die hande van die kiesers. Dit is nie, agb lede, in hierdie  Huis
se hande nie. Ons toekoms, as politici, is in die hande van die kiesers  wat
moet oordeel. Die kieserspubliek het die mag van  die  kruisie,  en  daardie
mag kan goedkeur of afkeur.

Die DA sien daarna uit dat Suid-Afrika moet stembus toe gaan.  Ons  nooi  u,
kom loop saam. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J T DELPORT: Hon Deputy Speaker, the right of public representatives  to
change parties brings a totally  new  dimension  to  the  political  playing
field in South Africa. At issue here are the elevated tests of morality  and
integrity which are going to be set.

Politicians have always been capable of disappointing  their  voters.  There
have always been examples of  corruption  and  self-enrichment.  There  have
always been instances when integrity  has  been  lacking.  There  have  also
always  been  instances  when  parties  who  have  ended  up  in  government
neglected to fulfil their promises. I am not naming names,  just  follow  my
eyes. But the elected  politician  is  not  just  a  representative  of  his
people, he is also an elected leader. He must also offer  direction  to  his
voters within the broad mandate he receives.

This new legislation brings to the fore two instances in which I am  talking
about increased integrity requirements. The first is simply:  What  does  he
do with his right to change parties? What reasons does he present to do so?

At the end of last year the voting public experienced  this  situation  very
badly with concomitant frustration, rage, even contempt on the part  of  the
voters.

Rightly so, because so many  city  councillors  who  were  elected  under  a
particular policy and flag and a particular position in politics,  left  the
party which got them there to stand at another level. And yet  these  people
decided, after the voters had elected, to supposedly reposition  themselves,
to become supporters of the ANC under the name and flag of the  New  NP  and
to hand city councils over to ANC control - good city  councils.  They  call
it repositioning and other people simply call it betrayal.

But, there is also another side: What does the public representative  do  if
his party leadership ... [Interjections.] Hon member, I  resigned  and  then
went to another party. What does the public representative do if  his  party
leadership takes a direction for which there is no mandate from his  voters,
and with which he cannot agree? Then his integrity is also tested.

This is the situation which will also  be  caused  in  this  House  by  this
amendment of the Constitution. Those hon members in the New NP will  not  be
able to escape a single question which each of them  will  have  to  answer.
The single question is: Has our party leadership really repositioned or  has
our party leadership sold out? And, if those hon members struggle  with  the
question, ask a few of the old stalwarts what they are doing, and what  they
think. Ask those who will have to vote again one of  these  days.  Ask  your
party structures, if you have them,  and  if  do  not  have  them  then  the
question has surely already been answered. Or look at what  happens  in  by-
elections - if you do not have a candidate the question has  surely  already
been answered.

A heavy duty  rests  on  politicians  to  behave  honourably  towards  their
voters. Generally this applies to all of us, because so many politicians  do
not act in the public interest. So many  work  for  self-interest,  for  the
retention or attainment of a  post,  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  Well,  some
people's pottage is thicker than others',  and  tastier  than  others',  but
beware - the bitter aftertaste will not be avoided.

The DA supports this legislation knowing that it heralds a new  dispensation
with new integrity requirements. The DA was of the opinion that  the  period
for crossing the floor initially should  be  reduced,  and  would  now  have
liked to see the crossing-over period reduced. The  DA  also  believes,  and
this is  part  of  what  we  believe,  that  it  should  become  a  morality
requirement in politics - a  test  of  honesty.  The  DA  believes  that  if
crossing the floor in a specific council  or  body  will  have  the  drastic
consequence that a  change  in  political  control  comes  about,  that  new
majority should then follow the honourable path of  declaring  an  election.
Let the voters then decide what they want.

It is said that a week is a long time in politics. This is true. But at  the
same time, five years in politics is short, because  in  just  more  than  a
year the voters will  once  again  have  an  opportunity  to  express  their
opinion about the events of  this  term.  They  will  once  again  have  the
opportunity to consider where they will make their mark.  Therein  lies  the
answer for the voting public which is perhaps frustrated now. The scale,  in
the end, is in the hands of the voters. It is  not,  hon  members,  in  this
House's hands. Our future, as politicians, is in the  hands  of  the  voters
who must judge. The voting public has the power  of  the  ballot,  and  that
power can endorse or censure.

The DA looks forward to South Africa going to the polls. We  invite  you  to
come with us.]
Adv J H DE LANGE: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy  President,  hon  members,  ladies
and gentlemen, I rise on behalf of the ANC in unconditional support  of  the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Third Amendment Bill,  referred
to as the Third Amendment Bill, and the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of
South Africa Fourth Amendment Bill, referred  to  as  the  Fourth  Amendment
Bill, being placed before this House today for debate and decision.

I, firstly, want to make a few general remarks about  the  Fourth  Amendment
Bill dealing with floor crossing. As hon  members  are  aware,  the  justice
committee, during June 2002, recommended to this House the adoption of  four
pieces of legislation which had the effect of introducing the  principle  of
crossing the floor into our law at national, provincial  and  local  spheres
of government. After a court challenge by the  UDM  and  others,  all  these
Bills  were  held  to  be  constitutional  in  terms  of  their  substantive
provisions, but the membership  Bill  was  held  not  to  be  constitutional
because of a procedural defect during the passing of this Bill.  The  Fourth
Amendment Bill before us today  is  the  Government's  and  the  committee's
response to deal with this  procedural  defect.  To  contextualise  for  the
first time in this  House  the  Constitutional  Court's  approach  to  these
pieces of legislation, I will spend some time in  this  debate  on  a  brief
analysis of the judgments given.

During early October  2002,  the  Constitutional  Court  handed  down  three
related judgments dealing with floor crossing. The main judgment  considered
the constitutional validity of four Acts of Parliament passed in  June  2002
providing for members to be able to cross the floor at the three  levels  of
government and to retain their seats  despite  defecting  from  the  parties
under whose banner they were elected. The  second  judgment  dealt  with  an
appeal by Government against interim orders issued by the  Cape  High  Court
suspending the operation of  the  legislation  dealing  with  constitutional
amendments contrary to section 80 of the Constitution.  The  third  judgment
gave reasons for an interim order made by the Constitutional Court  when  it
convened on 3 and 4 July 2002 and heard  argument  on  behalf  of  the  UDM,
Government  and  others,  which  also  had  the  effect  of  suspending  the
operation of these constitutional amendments, possibly contrary to the  said
section 80.

When the Constitutional Court  considered  the  constitutional  validity  of
these four pieces of legislation, it did so by looking at  this  legislation
in two packages. The first, concerned with  local  government,  consists  of
Act 18 of 2002, which  amends  the  Constitution  to  permit  limited  floor
crossing in municipal councils, and Act 20 of 2002, which amends  the  Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act. The second set consists of Act  22  of
2002, the membership Act, which removes the existing  prohibition  on  floor
crossing in the National Assembly and the nine provincial legislatures,  and
Act 21 of 2002, referred to as  the  Second  Amendment  Act,  which  further
amends  the  Constitution  to  cater  for  corresponding  changes   to   the
composition of the National Council of Provinces.

The court stressed that the merits or demerits of the  disputed  legislation
were not in issue. That was a  political  question  of  no  concern  to  the
court. What was to be decided was not whether the disputed  provisions  were
appropriate, but whether they were constitutional. It held  that  amendments
to the Constitution duly passed in accordance with the requirements  of  the
Constitution became part of the  Constitution  and  that  there  was  little
scope for challenging constitutional amendments passed  in  accordance  with
these prescribed procedures and majorities.

The  UDM  and  others  contended  in  court  that  the  right  to  vote  and
proportional  representation  are  part  of  the  basic  structure  of   the
Constitution and as such are not subject to amendment at all. But the  court
held that the electoral system adopted in our Constitution is  one  of  many
that are consistent with democracy; some containing  antidefection  clauses,
others not; some proportional, others not. Proportional  representation  and
the antidefection provisions which support it are not so fundamental to  our
constitutional order as to preclude any amendment.

The UDM  and  others  also  contended  that  the  disputed  legislation  was
inconsistent with the founding values of  the  Constitution,  in  particular
the value of multiparty democracy and the rule of law. The court  held  that
a prohibition on floor crossing is not an essential component of  multiparty
democracy, nor of proportional representation, nor of the rule of  law.  The
Constitution does not demand an antidefection provision. It provided for  an
antidefection clause in the case of members of  the  National  Assembly  and
provincial legislatures only, and  then  only  for  a  limited  transitional
period, and specifically allows that it be amended during the transition  by
an Act of Parliament.

The general conclusion  the  court  arrived  at  was,  therefore,  that  the
substantive part of floor-crossing legislation for national, provincial  and
local government was not,  as  such,  inconsistent  with  the  Constitution.
There was, however, a procedural objection which the court  held  was  fatal
to the legislation pertaining to national and  provincial  legislatures.  In
adopting  the  membership  Act,  Parliament  chose  to   use   the   special
transitional mechanism allowing for the introduction of  floor  crossing  by
ordinary legislation in accordance with  section  76  of  the  Constitution.
This mechanism was, however, part of the  transitional  provisions  and  was
expressly to be  exercisable  within  a  reasonable  period  after  the  new
Constitution took effect. As we all know, that date was 4 February 1997.

The court concluded that in the context of the transitional provisions  that
apply only until the next elections in 2004, the period of  more  than  five
years that had elapsed since the Constitution came into force can hardly  be
said to be a reasonable  period.  This  conclusion  was  reinforced  by  the
circumstance  that  in  June  1998  this  Parliament,  in  a  committee   of
Parliament, found that the floor crossing should  not  be  introduced.  This
issue was only revived after the break-up of  the  Democratic  Alliance  and
consequential political re-alignments since 2001.
Therefore, although Parliament could have done away with  the  antidefection
provision entirely, the  method  decided  upon  was  no  longer  valid.  The
membership Act was inconsistent with the Constitution  and  invalid  because
of this procedural defect of passing the Bill with an ordinary  majority  in
terms of the said section 76, instead of a two-thirds majority in  terms  of
section 74(3). This despite the fact that the National Assembly  passed  the
Bill with more than an 80% majority.

This is a typical example of ``damned if you do, damned if you don't''.  The
committee and the National Assembly had the choice of  using  the  procedure
in item 23A, which was and  is  still  part  of  our  Constitution,  or  the
procedure prescribed for ordinary  constitutional  amendments  in  terms  of
section 74(3). When the choice was presented, if we  were  not  to  use  the
procedure that is today still in item 23A,  the  argument  could  have  been
that  we  did  not  use  that  procedure,  we  shouldn't   have   used   the
constitutional amendment. If we did it the other  way  around,  as  we  did,
then, equally, the court could have found the way they did.  And  until  the
court actually made  a  value  judgment  on  which  procedure  to  use,  the
committee and this House clearly were not clear on where we should  go  with
it, and that is the way we went.

In the result, the challenge to the floor-crossing  legislation  was  upheld
insofar as it pertains to the national and provincial  legislatures  because
of that procedural defect and dismissed in  terms  of  national,  provincial
and local government  in  respect  of  the  substantive  objections  and  in
relation to local  government  in  respect  of  the  procedural  objections.
Accordingly,  floor  crossing  was  not  permitted  in  the   national   and
provincial legislatures,  as  we  all  know,  but  was  permitted  at  local
government level.

As we know, because of  the  interim  court  orders,  members  of  municipal
councils were not able to cross the floor during the initial 15-day  period.
The court held that the will of Parliament had  been  blocked,  despite  the
fact that that law was constitutional, and therefore the  court  decided  it
would be just and equitable to allow a 15-day period, to run from 8  October
2002, during which floor crossing could take place in the  local  government
sphere. All that is now history.

Of course, what is not well known is  the  following.  With  regard  to  all
those parties that opposed this legislation - and they told us they  did  so
on the basis of principle - of course, when  people  crossed  the  floor  to
them, the principles flew out the window and they accepted the  people  that
crossed the floor. In fact, it will be very interesting when  we  see  today
whether they vote against this legislation and whether,  if  people  try  to
cross the floor again, the principles will go out the window and  they  will
accept the people that cross the floor to them.  I  wonder  what  one  calls
that. The last time I looked it was called ``hypocrisy'', but  I'm  not  too
sure.

The  second  judgment  held  that  the  High  Court  orders  suspending  the
operation of the legislation contained in constitutional amendments  pending
determination of its validity by the Constitutional Court were too wide  and
should not have been made. This is a very important judgment and we have  to
emphasise this. The court held that even if it assumed but  did  not  decide
that High Courts do have the power to make  such  orders,  it  would  be  an
interference with the legislative and executive functions of Government  and
may negate the separation of powers and should be used only  in  exceptional
circumstances to prevent serious irreparable harm. The court  held  that  no
such case was made out in the High Court to show irreparable harm. Also,  as
appeared at the urgent hearing of the Constitutional  Court,  less  invasive
relief would have preserved the interests  of  all  concerned.  Government's
appeal in this  regard  was  upheld.  And  it  is  very  important  that  we
emphasise this, because the court had pointed out, as we did in  our  public
statements, that if there was any confusion before the High Court  gave  the
judgment, there was absolute pandemonium once they gave the judgment.

The question then remains: What are we proposing  as  a  committee  in  this
fourth  amendment  to  rectify  the  procedural  defect  identified  by  the
Constitutional Court in respect of the membership Bill?

Provision is firstly made for the deletion of the  bulk  of  item  23A  from
Schedule 6 in  the  Constitution,  in  accordance  with  the  constitutional
decision. That  is  no  longer  operative  as  a  transitional  arrangement.
Secondly, section 43(3) in the national sphere and  section  106(3)  in  the
provincial sphere have been added to the Constitution to make provision  for
a  further  ground  upon  which  the  member  may  lose  membership   of   a
legislature, namely if he or she changes their membership of a party,  other
than in accordance with the new Schedule 6A. Thirdly, a new Schedule  6A  is
added to the Constitution, the contents  being  very  similar  to  the  same
schedule applicable for the local government sphere, which  has  been  found
by the Constitutional Court to be constitutional.

The Constitutional Court also expressed certain views without  deciding  the
issue in respect of item 9 of Schedule 6, a clause similar to item 23A,  but
relating to the local sphere of government. To avoid  any  further  disputes
in this regard, this provision is being  deleted,  relying  on  the  court's
negative views expressed in relation to this item 9 and the said item 23.

Special mention also needs to be made of item 6(3) of  Schedule  6A  in  the
Bill, as originally introduced, but now  being  deleted.  This  is  the  so-
called clause on retrospectivity, restoring the membership of a  member  who
had allegedly  lost  their  membership  of  a  legislature  because  of  the
provision of the four  pieces  of  legislation  passed  in  June  2002.  The
committee is fully supportive of the removal of this provision, as prior  to
its removal the committee already questioned both the constitutionality  and
the desirability of such a provision.

With regard to the second amendment Bill  before  us,  which  is  the  Third
Amendment Bill, the bulk thereof is going to be dealt with by my  colleagues
from finance and local government. It is just left to  me  to  say  that  we
went through an exhaustive process of dealing with this  matter.  This  Bill
has already previously  been  before  this  Parliament  in  the  form  of  a
constitutional amendment, was referred back  for  further  consultation  and
then came back to Parliament. From the inputs we received,  there  has  been
enormous consensus around what is being proposed.

On the substantive provisions  of  these  amendments,  specifically  section
139, there are now three forms of intervention being provided for. There  is
the one that is in the Constitution  now,  where  you  can  intervene  where
executive obligations are not  being  performed  by  local  government.  The
provincial government can then intervene and assume responsibility. We  have
also added that if it is very serious,  and  in  exceptional  circumstances,
they can take even more drastic steps  in  this  regard.  Secondly,  if  the
local government does not pass  certain  legislative  measures,  then  we've
provided  that  the  provincial  government  can  take  appropriate   steps,
including  dissolving  the  council.  Thirdly,  where  there  are  financial
problems, there is firstly provision made that local government can adopt  a
recovery plan. If that recovery plan  is  not  being  implemented  by  local
government,  then  provincial  government  can  dissolve,  in  the  case  of
legislative measures not being complied with, and assume  responsibility  in
the case of executive powers not being applied.

I just finally want to say that I would  like  to  echo  the  words  of  our
Minister in terms of  the  congratulations  and  the  tremendous  work  that
Comrade Sankie Mthembi-Mahanyele has been able to perform in front  of  this
Parliament. I have always, in my dealings  with  her,  found  her  to  be  a
person of incredible integrity and dignity and there is  always  an  air  of
mutual respect when one deals with you. May we all wish  you  well  in  your
endeavours and thank you very much for what  you've  done,  particularly  in
the area of housing policy for this Parliament. Thank you very much.

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon  Ministers  and  colleagues,  for
nine years we have been working together to build a new republic  which  can
bring our country social stability and economic prosperity. We have  pledged
our efforts to build the type of governance which can be an example  to  the
whole of Africa and indeed, the whole world.

The passing today of the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa
Fourth Amendment Bill marks one of the darkest moments and lowest points  in
the history of our new-found republic. This Bill is one of the  worst  cases
of tampering with the Constitution I have ever heard of and  represents  one
of the lowest levels of morality  in  politics.  Amending  the  Constitution
should be a serious, momentous and well-conducted  exercise  undertaken  for
important reasons of public and national interest.

For this reason, during the negotiation process, the IFP sought to  entrench
a provision  requiring  a  cooling-off  period  to  avoid  exactly  what  is
happening in this House today, namely the amendment of the  Constitution  to
accommodate short-term sectoral interests. I cannot see  what  the  pressing
matter of public or national interest is which prompts this amendment.  From
a public policy viewpoint, there is just no reason for it.
We are in the process of drafting a new electoral  law  which,  after  2004,
could have allowed for the crossing of the floor. If this matter was  deemed
urgent, the urgency could have been attached to the  work  of  the  Van  Zyl
Slabbert task team and to the finalisation of the new electoral law in  time
for the 2004 elections.

There was no need for a constitutional amendment, unless  provision  had  to
be made for the crossing of the floor between now and 2004. In  law  and  in
politics the only purpose of this piece of  legislation  is  to  enable  the
crossing of the floor in the next 14 months. There is  no  reason  to  bring
about this change to our electoral system which  unilaterally  modifies  the
fundamental contract between the voters and their elected representatives.

Political parties chose candidates knowing that they  could  not  cross  the
floor. Voters chose political parties knowing that  their  candidates  could
not cross the floor. After votes were cast, the rules of  the  mandate  have
changed and the electoral will has been  altered,  not  through  the  ballot
box, but by means of legislative edict. We must ask ourselves, ``Why?''.

The appointment of the Van Zyl Slabbert task team was delayed in  Parliament
for over a year. When responding to questions in this House,  the  President
justified this delay, claiming that certain matters had first to be  brought
into operation before the task team could be given the green light. It  then
emerged that no such matters existed and the proposal left  Cabinet  without
changes, but one year behind schedule.

Within the task team, the ruling party did its  best  to  boycott  the  task
team's mandate, that of drafting a new electoral law in time  for  the  2004
elections. They opted to leave the present electoral law  unchanged  and  to
shift any  change  to  the  electoral  system  to  2009  only.  That  was  a
reasonable venue in which the entire debate on the  crossing  of  the  floor
should have taken place.

The present piece of legislation has nothing to do with the break-up of  the
DA either, as it  relates  only  to  national  and  provincial  legislatures
elected when the DA did not  exist.  The  real  purpose  of  this  piece  of
legislation is different.

Throughout the decades, our continent has been torn apart  by  coups  d'√©tat
and the subversion of the rule of law. Over and over again the rule  of  law
and constitutionalism have been warped to prevent people from  losing  power
or to enable them to seize power. I cannot help  but  think  that  the  real
purpose of this piece of legislation is to bring  about  a  coup  d'√©tat  by
edict in KwaZulu-Natal. I suspect that  this  Bill  is  about  shifting  the
premiership of KwaZulu-Natal from the IFP to  the  ANC  ...  [Interjections]
... not by means of an election, but by  tampering  with  the  Constitution.
[Interjections.]

It may be important to state that no  one  is  against  anyone's  democratic
right to change their minds, but that is not what is  happening.  Both  last
year and now, this was done through chequebook politics.  Members  of  other
parties were  offered  large  sums  of  money  to  join  the  ruling  party.
[Interjections.] As I speak, an intense campaign of  recruitment  is  taking
place in KwaZulu-Natal. IFP members have been approached by  representatives
of the ruling party with  promises  of  high  office  and  substantial  cash
payments if they cross the floor to the ANC. [Interjections.]

This piece of legislation is about enabling chequebook politics  to  support
a coup d'√©tat in KwaZulu-Natal. It has got nothing  whatsoever  to  do  with
any matter of principle. It is not about enabling people  to  express  their
political  conscience  freely,  but  about  enabling  them  to  sell   their
political soul. One needs to go no further than  this  House  to  prove  the
point, as one  of  those  who  defected  from  the  IFP  last  year  did  so
ostensibly on the grounds of resisting his redeployment to  Cape  Town.  And
where is he now? He is now a member of this very House. [Interjections.]

We oppose this Bill because we uphold the Constitution  and  our  democracy.
The Constitution is being amended merely for the sake of expediency  and  to
accommodate a political  plot.  The  Constitution  is  being  undermined  to
consummate the consolidation of a  one-party  state  in  South  Africa.  The
imminent coup d'√©tat in KwaZulu-Natal will consolidate  a  one-party  state,
and will begin creating the  conditions  in  which  real  democracy,  robust
debate, a plurality of viewpoints and policies, and real freedom  of  speech
and action can no longer flourish.

We must be aware of what we are doing in this House today because  it  could
be the beginning of the end of all the  dreams  of  freedom,  democracy  and
progress, which we have all held so dear for so long. [Interjections.]

On a lighter note, with regard to the Constitution of the Republic of  South
Africa Third Amendment Bill, the IFP supports it. It is understandable  that
it seeks to put in place measures to assist the  local  municipalities  when
they encounter serious problems, such as the approval of  budgets,  revenue-
raising mechanisms and others. In the event that that happens, the  relevant
provincial  executives  must  intervene  by  taking  appropriate  steps  and
measures that will ensure that the budget and revenue-raising  measures  are
adopted to enable the smooth functioning of the local authorities.

Finally, on behalf of the IFP, we want to thank the Minister of Housing  for
her contribution to this Parliament and to South Africa.

Uhambe kahle, Mama. [Go well, Mama]

Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Chairperson, I would  have  thought  that  one  of  the
benefits to the IFP has been that they have found in the DP a  very  salient
partner in KwaZulu-Natal. We  have  heard  from  the  previous  speaker  the
suggestions of unconstitutionality and the undermining of democracy. I  just
find that outrageous. In dealing with these kinds of claims,  one  only  has
to look at the Constitutional Court judgment in  the  UDM  case  in  October
2002, which we all know the UDM lost hopelessly. In its judgment, the  court
held  very  simply  that  floor  crossing  is  not  inconsistent  with   our
Constitution.

The court  also  indicated  that  our  Constitution,  in  its  very  design,
provided for an antidefection clause in the case of members of the  National
Assembly and provincial legislatures only,  and  then  only  for  a  limited
period, and specifically allowed for it to be amended during the  transition
by  Parliament.  That  must  take  care  of  the  claim  that  crossing   is
unconstitutional and undermines democracy.

As to the claim, further, that it undermines  our  freedom  in  that  it  is
inconsistent with the founding values of  the  Constitution,  in  particular
the value of multiparty democracy, the  Constitutional  Court  had  this  to
say: ``A prohibition on floor crossing is not an essential  component  of  a
multiparty democracy, nor of proportional  representation.''  The  defection
regime  exists  in  many  democracies  around  the  world  and   exists   in
constituency-based systems, as well as in PR systems.

That there may be concerns amongst ourselves and  the  broader  public  that
the defection regime may  be  abused,  or  that  political  instability  may
result, is of course pertinent. Limiting floor crossing as we have  done  to
two window periods in the life of the legislature, and the  introduction  of
a 10% threshold is directed at addressing these  and  other  concerns.  That
these measures themselves are not foolproof, and that they do favour  bigger
parties, is ultimately true. Ultimately though, a defection regime  is  only
one part of a broader political system, and will only be as good or  as  bad
as that system is.

It must be  true  that  if  the  political  system  itself  is  flawed,  the
defection regime will only reflect this deficiency, such  as  was  the  case
during the tricameral Parliament of the mid  to  late  80s.  Where  we  find
ourselves now as a country surely is a far cry from there.
It is not often in this House, Chairperson, that one can praise the  DP  for
anything at all, let  alone  for  being  principled.  This  is,  of  course,
because they really are principled, and  when  they  are  principled,  their
principles are wrong. I am pleased to say that, after nearly eight years  in
this House, I am in the pleasant position of praising  them  for  the  first
time. Despite some opposition from populists  within  their  ranks,  despite
the loss of hordes and hordes and hordes  and  hordes  of  members,  despite
nearly  being  obliterated  in  some  municipalities,  not  to  mention  the
province of the Western Cape - where, incidentally  if  you  listen  really,
really carefully, you can still hear the echoes of the  collective  sigh  of
relief of Capetonians - and despite all that  trauma,  they  will  still  be
voting for this amendment, and I for one think that it  is  the  height  of,
not stupidity, but courage. It is the same courage displayed by the  soldier
who, when he fights back when his side is completely  beaten  and  battered,
stands up and gets shot in the leg, and because he is a committed  fighting-
back player, he struggles once again and stands up and is shot in the  other
leg, and then, for the third time he rises, having forgotten of course  that
he only has two legs, and then raises his head.  That  can't  be  stupidity;
that is obviously, you know, courage.

Of course, I can't shower enormous amounts of praise on people like the  UDM
who say that they are, in principle, against  floor  crossing,  so  much  so
that they put all they have into taking the  matter  to  the  Constitutional
Court. Why? Because they say they are protecting the principle of  democracy
on behalf the electorate. Well, the electorate should know  that  they  have
benefited from this law, and that they have welcomed, with open arms,  those
who  have  crossed  the  floor  from  other  parties.  So  much  for   being
principled!

Before I get carried away with, of course, praising the DP, as I  have,  for
remaining principled and before they start asking for a group  hug,  let  me
point to the sour experience of today. When this House said goodbye  to  hon
members Jannie Momberg, the most Reverend Stofile and Max  Sisulu,  we  said
goodbye to these members in a rather befitting and, I  thought,  respectable
manner. This very principled DP never raised any  objection  then.  But  for
some reason, they have a problem, in  principle,  with  according  the  same
befitting farewell to the hon Minister of Housing.

Minister, who knows what you have done to irk this very  principled  DP?  It
must have been something in principle. Let me please add my voice  to  those
who have thanked you  before  for  your  immeasurable  contribution  towards
improving the lives of our  people.  And  thank  you  for  showing  enormous
amounts of courage and bigness in the face of some very small  human  beings
in the past. At least you know you won't have to suffer  them  again.  Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Chairperson. If I  may  also  make  use  of  the
concession that has been afforded to us, on behalf of the New  NP,  I  would
like to take the opportunity to wish the Minister of  Housing  well  in  her
new incarnation as Deputy Secretary-General  of  the  ANC.  The  hon  Sankie
Mthembi-Mahanyele is the first woman in South Africa  to  hold  the  Housing
portfolio, and she has filled the  post  in  a  male-dominated  domain  with
dignity and competence. [Applause.]

I believe she was also the first woman to act as President of  the  Republic
of South Africa. [Applause.]  Here,  she  missed  a  golden  opportunity  to
reshuffle the Cabinet to get to that 50/50 gender balance, or  even  better,
that we would all have liked to see. We  believe  the  hon  Minister  did  a
sterling job in providing the poor people of our country with  housing,  and
our best wishes go with her.

Chairperson, the New NP supports both the Third and Fourth Amendment  Bills,
in numerical order. The Third Amendment Bill has had a  long  and  slow  and
tortuous gestation period and birth. The main  focus  of  the  Bill  was  to
regulate, through provincial or national intervention, a situation  where  a
municipality failed to manage its affairs or is  plunged  into  a  financial
crisis. After a false start over a year ago, where  our  Treasury  tabled  a
Bill that was extremely problematic constitutionally speaking and had to  be
sent back, an enormous amount of work has been done by the  two  departments
and their  corresponding  committees  of  Parliament,  namely,  Finance  and
Justice.

A product is now on the Table that we can all  support.  The  New  NP  would
like to express its appreciation to all concerned  for  all  the  hard  work
involved.  Clearly,  some  mechanism  is  needed  to  allow  provincial  and
national government to supervise  and  intervene  where  a  municipality  is
tottering on the brink of collapse, and to inspire confidence  in  municipal
administration by investors.

The circumstances under which supervision or intervention  may  take  place,
its parameters and purposes are all spelt out in some detail in the Bill.  A
pecking order is established so that  the  supervisory  role  of  provincial
government in relation to local government is preserved  and  endorsed.  The
process of review by the NCOP is spelt out and  procedures  are  simplified,
and the parameters for intervention by national Government,  in  both  local
and provincial governments, is closely defined.

As far as the Fourth Amendment Bill is concerned, it  is  hardly  surprising
that all participants in this debate have a sense of d√©j√† vu.  We  have  all
been here before quite recently, on 11 June last year, to be  precise.  What
has changed is form, not content, and of course now we have the  benefit  of
the guidance of the Constitutional Court to ensure that this  floor-crossing
legislation for national and provincial levels of  government  will  not  be
technically deficient. We believe this time we have it right.

The necessity for this legislation has not diminished in  the  interim  and,
as before, the New NP supports this legislation. The New NP believes  it  is
necessary for the purposes  of  a  bigger  process  of  realignment  in  our
politics - away from the stereotypes of  black  and  white.  Without  floor-
crossing legislation which  allows  elected  representatives  at  all  three
levels of government to  find  a  new  political  home  in  between  general
elections, this realignment process would  be  inhibited.  Local  government
realignment has been successfully  completed.  It  would  be  illogical  and
inconsistent not to complete the intended process and allow  floor  crossing
at national and provincial levels of government as well.  In  the  New  NP's
view,  there  should  be  uniformity  for  all  political  parties'   public
representatives. The governing party has committed itself  to  putting  this
legislation in place and we support the governing party in this instance.

There is a lot of fallacious thinking and argument around  this  issue.  The
main argument against  floor  crossing  is  the  hostage  theory  of  public
representation, namely that having been given a mandate as a  representative
of one political party, that representative  should  feel  bound  into  that
mandate for five years between  elections.  This  is  particularly  strongly
argued in the case of politicians who have been elected, as we  have,  on  a
list system - namely proportional representation. According to this  theory,
public representatives are or should be held  hostage  by  the  party  under
whose banner they were elected no matter what, but  that  theory  ignores  a
number of factors.

Firstly, a member has or should have a conscience and should on serious  and
important  issues  be  entitled  to  follow  the  dictates  of  his  or  her
conscience, hopefully not chequebook, as was alleged earlier.

Secondly, things change - public sentiment and changes  around  issues.  The
majority of party representatives may feel differently about  an  issue.  So
the policy of a party may change even radically.

If a week is a long time in politics, five years is a lifetime and may  well
be a political lifetime for a  politician  or  even  a  party.  The  hostage
theory ignores voter realignments between elections. A case in point is  the
rise and fall of the DA at local government level where New  NP  councillors
were, until floor-crossing  Bills  became  law  for  local  government  last
October, held hostage in a party they wished to leave.
Thirdly, in many democracies worldwide, even where  they  have  proportional
representation,  provision  is  made  for  crossing  the  floor.  It  cannot
therefore  be  argued  that  an  antidefection  clause  is  inherent  in   a
proportional system. In the light of  the  Constitutional  Court's  judgment
last October, it can also no longer be argued  that  the  scrapping  of  the
antidefection clause is incompatible with our  Constitution,  as  the  court
has specifically endorsed the principle of floor crossing. Therefore,  while
it is a fact that floor-crossing legislation endorsed by the  Constitutional
Court for local government was a force  for  political  realignment,  it  is
clearly appropriate that the same measure of flexibility and  potential  for
change should be introduced at other levels of government.

Questions may be raised about the timing of this legislation.  Firstly,  why
now? The answer must be that outside the possibility of  a  costly,  special
emergency session, this was in fact the first opportunity for  the  Bill  to
come before the House after the Constitutional Court  delivered  its  ruling
in October. The Government published and tabled its proposed amendment  Bill
very shortly after the court had ruled the crossing package  of  legislation
to be technically defective as far as the  first  two  tiers  of  government
were concerned. The prescribed waiting period had not been completed by  the
time Parliament was in recess and, to give the Government its due, today  is
the first legislative day of the new parliamentary year.

Secondly, why make changes to our electoral system now piecemeal when a  new
system is to be announced in  terms  of  the  Van  Zyl  Slabbert  commission
recommendations? The truth is that the system seems unlikely to  change  for
the 2004 election, as has indeed been confirmed by the  hon  leader  of  the
Inkatha Freedom Party. It is argued that the lack  of  a  constituency-based
system takes away any independence for MPs. MPs on a  list  are  totally  in
thrall to the party bosses who  wield  disproportionate  power.  However,  a
managed system of crossing  would  mitigate  against  that  system  to  some
extent until any new electoral system is put in place. The New  NP  supports
both Bills. Thank you, Chairman. [Applause.]

Mr J T MASEKA: Chairperson, hon members, I would just  like  to  respond  to
the speech by the hon Adv de Lange and hon Chohan-Khota that the  UDM  is  a
disciplined and well-principled party. [Interjections.] I will say  that  if
the referee has given you a goal, even if it was  an  offside  goal,  if  he
said it was a goal, then it is a goal. [Interjections.]  The  Constitutional
Court has given a ruling, and the UDM respects that ruling.

The Constitution of the Republic  of  South  Africa  Fourth  Amendment  Bill
amends the Constitution of the Republic of  South  Africa,  1996  so  as  to
enable members of the National  Assembly  or  a  provincial  legislature  to
become members of another party whilst retaining their seat in the  National
Assembly  or  that  of  the  provincial  legislature.  In  June  2002,  this
Parliament passed four Acts that aimed to allow  members  of  the  national,
provincial and local government to cross  the  floor  without  losing  their
seats, and this was amending the antidefection clause in the Constitution.

It is a known fact that the UDM challenged the four  pieces  of  legislation
passed by this Parliament in the  Constitutional  Court  to  have  all  Acts
declared unconstitutional and invalid. The UDM argued that the  four  pieces
of legislation would undermine the basic structure of the Constitution;  are
inconsistent with the founding values of the Constitution; and lastly,  that
they are inconsistent with the voters' rights and that voters voted for  the
party and not individuals. The UDM contends that, in 1999, voters voted  for
the  parties  under  the   proportional   representation   system   and   an
antidefection clause was then in force. The wish and the will of the  voters
was to vote for the party because of its policies and this was part  of  the
basic structure of the South African  Constitution  and  it  is  immoral  to
change the electoral system in midterm.

At present, the proportional representation system is an  integral  part  of
the Constitution  and  therefore  members  cannot  change  party  membership
midterm.  However,  the  Constitutional  Court  ordered  that  it  was   not
unconstitutional for members to  change  their  party  membership  at  local
government  level,  but  that  the  Acts  enabling  loss  or  retention   of
membership of national and provincial legislature are inconsistent with  the
Constitution and were declared invalid.

The Van Zyl Slabbert commission is to come up with a proposal  as  to  which
electoral system is to be  followed  in  South  Africa  and  this  piece  of
legislation should not be passed until Parliament decides  on  the  proposal
by the commission. So the UDM is not supporting this Bill.

The  Constitution  of  South  Africa  Third  Amendment   Bill   amends   the
Constitution of South Africa to regulate certain  financial  matters  to  be
dealt with in terms of section 76(1) of the Constitution. The name  Northern
Province is changed  to  Limpopo.  The  Bill  further  intends  to  regulate
provincial intervention in local government  and  to  further  regulate  the
process of review by the National Council of Provinces where there has  been
national executive intervention  in  provincial  government  and  provincial
executive intervention in local government.

The national executive may intervene where the province does not fulfil  its
obligations in terms of the Constitution  by  taking  appropriate  steps  to
make it possible that  obligations  are  fulfilled.  However,  the  national
executive must submit a written notice of the intervention to  the  National
Council of Provinces within 14 days after the intervention  began,  and  the
intervention must end  within  180  days  if  the  Council  disapproves  the
intervention. The provincial executive may intervene  where  a  municipality
cannot or does  not  fulfil  its  executive  obligations  in  terms  of  the
Constitution by taking any appropriate action  deemed  necessary  to  ensure
the fulfilment of the obligation by the particular municipality.

I would like to take the few seconds that remain to say these few  words  to
the Minister of Housing: The UDM really appreciates  your  contributions  in
this House and in this Government. We  say:  Good  luck,  wherever  you  go.
Thank you very much.

Ms B A HOGAN: Mr Chair, I am speaking on the Constitution  of  South  Africa
Third Amendment Bill which deals  with  the  powers  of  an  MEC  for  Local
Government to intervene in local government affairs.

Before I start, I just want to give some background for  this  intervention,
lest we see this as a completely arbitrary  matter  unrelated  to  a  sphere
that could be used politically and also unrelated to serious concerns  in  a
municipality. I want to give just a background to some of the  issues  which
have arisen in some municipalities. I won't give names.

For instance, in one municipality -  for  lack  of  clarity  about  a  legal
situation - a gridlock developed. Municipal workers went  on  strike,  there
were payment boycotts, political  in-fighting,  lawsuits  and  near-complete
service breakdown.

In  another   municipality,   chaos   resulted   from   both   council   and
administrative problems. Three of the seven councillors resigned.  A  fourth
was in ill health and there could not be a quorum. Wages and benefits  could
not be paid to workers.

In another municipality, provincial intervention was slow, three  short-term
approaches did not work, and there was a complete breakdown in services.

In another one, a chronic and unsustainable  imbalance  between  income  and
expenditure led to basic services being interrupted and  workers  not  being
paid.

These interventions are focused on situations when there is a  crisis  in  a
municipality. It is not focused on those municipalities  that  are  managing
well.

Yes, in terms of this Constitution, in section 139(1), there is a  provision
for the MEC, as has always been in this Constitution, to intervene  when  an
executive obligation is not being met, and that the  MEC  can  use  whatever
appropriate measures are available, including a letter stating an  executive
obligation that has  been  made  and  what  should  be  done  to  meet  that
obligation.

But these powers were insufficient,  and  too  imprecise  to  allow  for  an
effective intervention. This Bill provides  for  more  effective  powers  of
intervention; it provides for more decisive intervention; it provides for  a
greater range of interventions and it also provides  for  the  interests  of
stakeholders such as  citizens  of  a  municipality  and  for  lenders'  and
creditors' interests to be met.

Let us go into the provisions of this Bill.  This  Bill,  as  I  have  said,
allows for intervention by an MEC when an executive obligation is not  being
met. It allows for the MEC to actually  take  over  the  functions  of  that
executive obligation. But what remains completely imprecise and unclear  is:
What happens when the scale of the problem  is  so  enormous  that  the  MEC
would effectively have to take over the whole running of  the  municipality?
What happens when there is a legislative breakdown in a  municipality,  when
a budget is not passed, and when a  council  has  not  met  for  months  and
months?

An MEC is not entitled, in terms  of  the  Constitution  as  it  stands,  to
intervene because the MEC can only intervene for an executive breakdown.

So, it's for those two concerns that we are bringing in these  changes,  and
these concerns are also prompted by creditors  of  a  municipality  and  the
residents of a municipality. A creditor who lends money  to  a  municipality
can find himself locked in a bureaucratic nightmare  when  the  municipality
breaks down.

Very briefly, these are the steps which an MEC can now take: An MEC  is  now
obliged to intervene, and must intervene if a municipality fails to  pass  a
budget. Once a municipality has reached the  stage  of  a  crisis  where  it
cannot pass a budget, an MEC must take whatever steps necessary  to  try  to
reach the municipality for it  to  change  its  budget,  so,  if  there  are
political problems, they have to try and resolve those  political  problems.
The MEC must try to get that budget  passed,  failing  which  the  MEC  must
dissolve the council, call for new elections and install  an  administrator.
The MEC is required to  do  that  now,  because  the  MEC  can't  force  the
legislature to pass the budget. The MEC must  simply  dissolve  the  council
and call for new elections. This is so because if a budget is not passed,  a
municipality cannot spend  money.  So,  you  are  faced  with  an  immediate
crisis. That is the first major intervention.

The  second  major  intervention  is  for  financial  reasons   or,   if   a
municipality is in a  crisis,  and  this  leads  to  a  basic  breakdown  in
services, that is,  a  chronic  and  serious  and  persistent  breakdown  in
services, or if the municipality admits that it cannot  meet  its  financial
obligations, then the MEC is bound to intervene,  and  must  intervene.  The
MEC - and this is the very innovative part of the Constitution -  must  then
impose a financial recovery plan which will bring that council  out  of  the
financial crisis in which it finds itself. Obviously,  the  MEC  would  seek
the co-operation of the council. If that  co-operation  is  not  forthcoming
and the council refuses to pass that financial recovery plan,  the  MEC  can
then dissolve that council and call  for  new  elections.  If  however  that
council is not dissolved but does not have the capacity or  the  ability  to
implement that financial recovery plan, even though it has the  goodwill  to
do so, that MEC can then take over those functions of the council  which  it
is not able to meet.

This might appear drastic to some, but for those who are  on  the  receiving
end of councils who have continued to flounder, who have  continued  not  to
provide basic services, who do not provide certainty to creditors who  would
want to invest in infrastructural programmes  in  that  municipality,  these
mechanisms are absolutely essential to restore confidence in our local  area
of government.

Let me say that this is not designed to  allow  manipulative  MECs  to  shut
down councils that might be dominated by political parties of  a  persuasion
other than  that  of  the  MEC.  It  would  be  mischievous  to  make  those
statements. All along the line, there are  checks  and  balances  built  in,
from supervision and oversight from the  NCOP  and  other  parties  and  the
Cabinet Ministers. The courts can also be resorted to at any stage  of  this
process. This cannot be manipulated for political measures, and it would  be
at the political cost of an MEC to engage in anything as reckless as that.

This amendment to our Constitution is to give decisiveness to an MEC,  to  a
council, to residents, and to lenders and creditors of what can be  expected
if there is a fundamental breakdown in our councils. And let us not  pretend
as if this does not exist.

I would like to  take  this  opportunity,  too,  of,  firstly  mourning  the
departure of our Minister of Housing and  congratulating  her  too  for  the
position which she is going to occupy. Comrade  Sankie  has  always  been  a
Minister who has never sought the limelight but sought to be in  the  engine
room of hard work. And we have seen, by golly,  the  results  of  that  hard
work. As an ordinary MP who sits in this House, you have  been  one  of  the
members who has always been so approachable and so  open  to  discussion.  I
have often been able to stop you in the corridors here  and  say:  ``Comrade
Sankie, this is an issue'', and you have been responsive and open  to  that.
I want to thank you for that. Your  approach  and  the  way  that  you  have
managed your portfolio has given us all enormous confidence in  this  House,
and I really do wish you well in your new  and  demanding  post.  Thank  you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairman, hon Minister, at the outset I would like to say  the
ACDP supports the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  Third
Amendment Bill relating to municipal interventions.

As far as the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Fourth  Amendment
Bill's concerned, which refers to the floor crossing, the ACDP  was  one  of
the parties that opposed the package of legislative  amendments  seeking  to
allow floor crossing, both in Parliament and in  the  Constitutional  Court.
We remain opposed to elected representatives crossing the  floor,  believing
that this negates the will of the voters, particularly as  far  as  national
and provincial tiers are concerned.

We do however accept that there is a mixed  PR  and  ward  system  on  local
government level and that a stronger argument can be made permitting a  ward
or independent councillor to cross the floor, as  opposed  to  the  national
and provincial spheres which are solely proportional.  We  believe  that  as
far as the national and provincial spheres are concerned,  an  antidefection
clause is essential in order to defend a  most  fundamental  principle  that
parliamentary laws must be made by representatives who are  elected  by  and
consequently reflect the will of the voters.

We remain in agreement  with  the  Electoral  Task  Team's  submission  that
citizens voted primarily for the party of their choice and its  leader,  and
not so much for the candidates on the party list whom the vast  majority  of
voters did not know.

A lot of attention was given to the Constitutional Court's decision, and  we
are in agreement that, in the October  2002  judgment,  the  merits  or  the
demerits of  floor-crossing  were  not  the  issue.  That  was  a  political
decision of no concern to the court. What the court had to  decide  was  not
whether  the  disputed  floor-crossing  provisions   were   appropriate   or
inappropriate, but whether they were constitutional.

We  also  appreciate  that  the   Constitutional   Court   said   that   the
Constitution, constitutionally, does not  demand  an  antidefection  clause.
However, the previous comments made by the Constitutional Court in its  1996
certification judgment do indicate its comments on  the  desirability,  seen
then in the context  of  a  transitional  arrangement  until  2004.  And  we
believe that those views warrant repeating as they reflect the  views  of  a
large number of voters  who  feel  totally  disenfranchised  by  the  floor-
crossing provisions.

The Constitutional Court in 1996 at that time, and in  the  context  of  the
transitional arrangement, stated  that  an  antidefection  clause,  firstly,
promotes accountability of members to the electorate. I would like to  quote
the court. It said:


  It obliges members of a party, who are elected by virtue of the inclusion
  of their names on the party's list, to remain loyal to that  party.  That
  meets the expectation of voters who gave their support to the party.

Secondly, the court said:


  It can act as an additional check on legislators who are accountable  not
  only to the electorate and the legislature, but also to their parties.

And thirdly, it said it is supportive of multiparty democracy, and I quote:


  It also prevents parties in power from enticing members of small  parties
  to defect from the party upon whose list they were elected  to  join  the
  governing party. If this were permitted, it could  enable  the  governing
  party to obtain a special majority which it might not otherwise  be  able
  to muster and which is not a reflection of the views of the electorate.

The court accepted that the main reasons for the  inclusion  of  the  clause
are  to  secure  a  more  stable  government  and  to  avoid  corruption  in
legislatures - again, said in the context of a transitional provision  until
2004.

The ACDP believes that floor crossing can lead, and has led to a  change  in
the balance of power in elected structures such as municipal councils. On  a
provincial level, the result can be  that  a  province  can  be  subject  to
minority rule by a government  not  elected  by  the  voters.  It  was  this
possibility that caused the political instability in  KwaZulu-Natal  earlier
this year,  and  almost  resulted  in  the  dissolution  of  the  provincial
legislature.

It is significant that  each  of  us  MPs  represent  approximately  40  000
voters.  The  consequences  of  defection  taking  place  at  national   and
provincial levels are therefore far greater than at  a  municipal  level  as
the will of a far larger number of voters would be negated.

Whilst,  therefore,  we  welcome  the  removal  of  the   clause   providing
retrospective protection to  those  MPs  and  MPLs  who  crossed  the  floor
prematurely, we are, for the reasons I have  mentioned,  unable  to  support
the constitutional amendments permitting floor crossing at  a  national  and
provincial level.

May I in conclusion, on behalf of the ACDP, also give  our  best  wishes  to
the outgoing Minister of Housing and wish her  the  very  best  in  her  new
portfolio. Under her leadership,  she  has  tried  to  change  the  lack  of
administrative  capacity  in  provincial  and   municipal   government.   We
recognise her difficult task and commend her on her past efforts.

I thank you, and may God bless you. [Applause.]

Mr M T MASUTHA: Chairperson, hon members and colleagues, allow me  to  start
by echoing the sentiments of many before me in expressing our  most  sincere
gratitude - and I am sure that we are doing so on behalf of the majority  of
the poor of our country -  to  the  hon  Minister  Sankie  Inkondo  for  the
excellent contribution she has made, not only in the  fight  to  get  people
houses and roofs over their heads, but also in  the  fight  against  poverty
and destitution. I think that  in  both  her  previous  capacity  as  Deputy
Minister of Social Development, the department previously known  as  Welfare
and Population Development, as well as in her current position  as  Minister
of Housing, she has made an excellent contribution to the ANC's struggle  to
fight poverty and to empower the most disempowered. We express  our  sincere
gratitude to you, hon Minister. [Applause.]

Allow me to proceed to deal with the subject before us  which  involves  two
Bills proposing amendments to our Constitution, namely, the Constitution  of
the Republic of South Africa Third Amendment Bill and  the  Constitution  of
the Republic of South Africa Fourth Amendment Bill, respectively. It is  the
latter which deals with the floor-crossing  question  that  I  now  wish  to
address you on.
During June last year, Parliament passed four pieces  of  legislation  aimed
at allowing the possibility for crossing the political floor  at  all  three
levels  of  government.  Although  this   legislation   was   challenged   -
unsuccessfully, I wish to emphasise - before  the  Constitutional  Court,  a
technical flaw in the legislation identified by the court  necessitated  the
introduction of this constitutional  amendment  to  complete  the  purported
constitutional reform.

Whilst the constitutionality  debate  was  finally  put  to  rest  when  the
Constitutional  Court  delivered  its  judgment  on  the  matter,  it   also
triggered an extensive and vibrant public debate in the media and  elsewhere
about the desirability, or otherwise, of permitting floor crossing.

In its judgment, the Court alludes  to  the  fact  that  the  floor-crossing
debate has  been  with  us  since  the  days  of  Codesa  when  the  interim
constitution was being negotiated. Although South  Africa  prohibited  floor
crossing under the interim constitution, provision  was  made  at  the  same
time for the possibility of such a  ban  on  floor  crossing  to  be  lifted
through legislation to that effect, which legislation is now before us.

The Constitutional Court also alluded to the fact that,  already,  within  a
week of the current Constitution coming into operation, that  is,  in  1997,
Parliament  had  appointed  a  committee  to  consider   the   drafting   of
legislation on floor crossing. After a year of deliberation  on  the  issue,
the committee recommended that the ban on defection be revisited  after  the
1999 elections and, in this regard, the committee, amongst others,  had  the
following to say:


  The basic argument for this approach is  that  during  the  term  of  the
  legislature there can be significant shifts in public  opinion  which  do
  not warrant fresh elections, but which have  to  be  represented  in  the
  legislature. By allowing groups of MPs  to  ``cross  the  floor'',  these
  shifts of opinion may be reflected  in  the  legislature.  Also,  genuine
  differences of interpretation on  what  mandate  the  electorate  gave  a
  party, and how to implement it, can lead to splits in the party, and this
  should be allowed expression by way of ``crossing  of  the  floor''.  The
  ability to cross the floor also curtails the power of ...


To use the words of the committee ...


  ... ``party bosses'' and makes for a more vibrant  political  atmosphere.
  In short, greater democracy and representivity is more possible through a
  qualified freedom to ``cross the floor''.

The applicants in the Constitutional Court argued that the intention  behind
the legislation is to enable the ANC and the New NP  to  take  advantage  of
the breaking up of the DA, and that this is inconsistent with  the  rule  of
law doctrine, which  is  entrenched  in  our  Constitution.  This  principle
requires that legislation  must  be  rationally  linked  to  a  ``legitimate
government purpose''. If it is not, it is inconsistent with the rule of  law
and invalid.

The Court, on this point, found that the  argument  put  forward  sought  to
equate purpose with motive, and that courts are not concerned  with  motives
of members of legislatures who vote in particular legislation nor  with  the
consequence of legislation unless it infringes rights  in  the  Constitution
or is otherwise inconsistent with the Constitution.

The court thus stuck to the  generally  accepted  democratic  value  of  the
separation of  powers  which  entitles  lawmakers  to  make  the  laws,  and
reserves to courts the power to interpret the law, and not to  make  it,  as
neatly captured in an old Roman law maxim ius dicere non facere.

During debates on this issue over the  past  year,  criticism  was  levelled
against the ANC's initial rejection of floor crossing on the one  hand,  and
its subsequent introduction of floor-crossing legislation on the other as  a
sign of lack of consistency in our policies.

Well, let me respond by saying that the ANC which led the struggle to  bring
about political change in South Africa knows enough about the importance  of
embracing change  when  its  time  has  arrived  and  allowing  it  to  find
expression rather than resist it. Equally, the New NP knows more  about  the
significance of embracing political change than some of the younger  parties
represented  in  this  House,  having  had  first-hand  experience  of   the
devastating  consequences  of  resisting  change  over  a  half  century  of
apartheid rule.

In this regard, I think it is useful to note the words of the famous  former
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who had something  to  say  about  the
importance of embracing political change  in  his  famous  speech  delivered
during a joint sitting of Parliament in 1960  on  3  February.  He  had  the
following to say:


  The most striking of all the impressions  I  have  formed  since  I  left
  London  a  month  ago  is  of  the  strength  of  this  African  national
  consciousness. In different places, it may take different forms.  But  it
  is happening everywhere. The wind  of  change  is  blowing  through  this
  continent.  Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  this  growth   of   national
  consciousness is a political fact. We must all accept it as a  fact.  Our
  national policies must take account of it.

I must say that it is most encouraging to have seen political  parties  such
as the New NP come to the realisation that to  be  embroiled  in  an  unholy
marriage such as the one they were embroiled in  with  the  DA  was  leading
nowhere and that it was time for them to  embrace  change.  [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

We, nevertheless,  embrace  and  support  the  DP's  position  of  taking  a
principled stance in supporting this legislation. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, om die grondwet van 'n land te wysig,  is
'n ingrypende saak. Dit word nie ligtelik  gedoen  nie.  Die  Grondwet  word
vandag hier gewysig om dit moontlik te maak vir lede van  die  Parlement  en
van provinsiale wetgewers om van een party na 'n ander party  oor  te  loop.
Lede kan selfs oorloop na politieke partye wat nie eers aan  die  verkiesing
deelgeneem het nie of wat nog nie eens bestaan nie. Is  ons  regtig  ernstig
oor demokrasie as ons dit toelaat?

Die vraag is: Hoe het 'n lid hier gekom? Hy of sy  het  hier  gekom  deurdat
vir elke lid ongeveer 40 000 kiesers daar buite  vir  daardie  party  gestem
het. So verteenwoordig hy die wil en wense van  40  000  kiesers.  Nou  word
daardie individuele lid toegelaat om hul  wil  en  wense  te  ignoreer.  Hul
keuse word uitgekanselleer en die individu besluit vir hulle dat hy  liewers
na 'n ander party wil oorloop met hulle stemme en  hulle  setel.  Die  vraag
is: Is dit reg? Die VF s√™, onomwonde, nee. Dit is nie reg nie. Dit  is  baie
verkeerd. Daarom is hierdie 'n slegte stuk wetgewing  wat  vandag  voor  die
Parlement is. Lede in politieke partye moet die demokrasie en die wense  van
die kiesers respekteer.

Daarom wil die VF 'n beroep op die publiek  doen  om  politieke  partye  wat
hierdie wetgewing steun by die stembus te straf. Ons wil ook  'n  beroep  op
hulle doen om partye soos die VF wat ten sterkste teen die wetgewing is,  by
die stembus te ondersteun. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, amending the constitution of  a  country  is  a
drastic measure. It is not done lightly. The Constitution is  being  amended
here today to enable members of Parliament and  of  provincial  legislatures
to defect from one  party  to  another.  Members  may  even  cross  over  to
political parties that did not even participate in the elections or that  do
not even exist. Are we really serious about democracy if we allow that?

The question is: How did a member manage to get here? He  or  she  got  here
because approximately 40 000 voters out there voted for his  or  her  party.
Thus he  represents  the  will  and  wishes  of  40  000  voters.  Now  that
individual member is allowed to ignore their will and wishes.  Their  choice
is cancelled out and the individual decides on their behalf  that  he  would
rather cross to another party with their votes and their seat. The  question
is: Is that right? The FF says unequivocally, no! It is  not  right.  It  is
very  wrong.  Therefore,  this  is  a  poor  piece  of  legislation   before
Parliament today. Members of political parties should respect democracy  and
the wishes of the voters.

The FF therefore wants to call on members of  the  public  to  punish  those
political parties who support this legislation at the polls.  We  also  want
to call on them to support parties at  the  polls  who,  like  the  FF,  are
strongly opposed to this legislation.]

The Minister began his speech by reading from The Bible. I want  to  do  the
same. I read from Exodus 20, the eighth commandment:


  You shall not steal.

[Interjections.]

Dit is skokkend, maar waar ons vandag staan, is daar agb  lede  van  hierdie
Parlement wat hierdie wetgewing wil gebruik om die stemme  van  die  kiesers
daar buite te steel en te kanselleer. Dit is 'n  skande.  [It  is  shocking,
but where we stand today, there are hon members of this Parliament who  want
to use this legislation to steal and to  cancel  the  votes  of  voters  out
there. It is a shame.]

How can  we  allow  members  of  this  House  to  steal  the  votes  of  the
electorate? What kind of example are we setting to the public?

Ons  sal  teen  hierdie  wetgewing  stem.  [We  shall  vote   against   this
legislation.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, there is a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I think Dr  Mulder
knows that what he has just said is  unparliamentary,  and  he  should  know
that he should withdraw it.

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek is nie bereid om  dit  terug  te  trek
nie. Dit is my oortuiging dat as ons dit toelaat,  mense  dit  kan  doen  om
stemme van die kiesers te steel. Ek sal nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]  (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairman, I am not willing to withdraw  that.  It  is  my
conviction that if we allow that, people will be able to  steal  votes  from
the voters. I will not. [Interjections.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, order! The process  normally  is
that if the  integrity  or  the  character  of  a  member  is  brought  into
question, the Chair would intervene and then give a ruling.  In  this  case,
it is basically a general comment in terms of  what  parties  are  doing.  I
would then say that we release the hon  Mulder  to  go  back  to  his  seat.
[Interjections.]

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson, your Excellency the  Deputy  President,  Ministers
and hon members, it is now almost two years since the new  system  of  local
government has been introduced. This new democratic system has shown  a  lot
of clarity on various matters, processes and  procedures  that  seem  to  be
vague. Of course as it is  a  new  system,  the  implementation  might  have
glitches and hitches, sometimes we would call  them  teething  problems.  It
therefore becomes the task of the legislators to tie up the loose ends.

It is in this context that the constitutional amendments  before  us  should
be understood. The constitutional  amendments  would  contribute  to  making
municipalities effective in meeting  constitutional  obligations.  As  such,
the amendment of section 139 attempts to do just that. The  new  clause  (c)
of section 139 of the Bill clearly states what has  to  be  done  to  ensure
that  constitutional  obligations  are  carried  out.  Clear  processes  and
procedures are listed in section 2, particularly  clause  2(a),(b)  and  (c)
and clause 3 of the Bill. Municipalities have a very important role  in  our
system of government - to provide services to  communities  and  to  promote
social and economic development.  Changes  to  the  Constitution  that  will
assist local government in meeting these objectives need to be  welcomed  by
all of us. Overall, the amendment to section 139 has succeeded in  balancing
the need for supervision and monitoring in the national interest,  with  the
imperative to ensure that the integrity of the local  government  sphere  is
not undermined.

The previous section 139 empowered the provincial executive to intervene  in
local government should this be  deemed  necessary,  but  it  was  under  no
obligation to do  so.  In  the  past,  interventions  were  unsuccessful  in
financially  rehabilitating  municipalities  because  interventions   mainly
happened too late. The  new  section  139  identified  three  categories  of
intervention. I think they have been mentioned here, so I am  not  going  to
repeat them. Also,  the  revised  section  139  is  an  improvement  on  the
previous  version  for  the  following   reasons:   both   the   legislative
responsibilities of a municipal council to adopt a budget and the  executive
responsibilities of municipalities  to  provide  services  to  citizens  are
covered. The provincial executive has an enhanced role to monitor  and  also
to support and intervene in local  government  in  that  it  is  obliged  to
intervene in budget-related and financial failures.

The obligation of  the  national  executive  to  intervene  instead  of  the
provincial  executive  in  certain  instances  will  ensure  that   national
Government assists where a province may not have the  will  or  capacity  to
intervene in these instances. More options for provincial interventions  are
created, for instance, in terms of Government's  failures.  It  begins  with
the issuing of  directives  to  municipality  councils,  the  assumption  of
responsibilities for an  executive  obligation  and  the  dissolution  of  a
municipality council  in  exceptional  circumstances.  Timeframes  are  more
realistic. For instance, interventions for service  delivery  or  governance
reasons  must  be  terminated  unless  approved  by   the   cabinet   member
responsible for local government within 28 days.

Overall, the current amendment seeks to expedite the  process  considerably,
creating more certainty for all  relevant  stakeholders  and  ensuring  that
problems do not degenerate into financial collapse or a collapse of  service
delivery. They will also be complemented by the Local Government:  Municipal
Finance Management Bill, which will be put  in  place  with  clear  remedial
processes through which investors and other stakeholders  can  reliably  and
predictably deal with defaults  by  municipalities  in  the  instance  of  a
financial crisis.

An important implication of the amendment is that capacity must be built  in
provincial and national Government to monitor, support and  supervise  local
government  timeously  and   effectively.   This   obligation   is   clearly
articulated in section 154 of the Constitution, highlighting the  fact  that
intervention is an option to be exercised as an absolute  last  resort  only
once other less intrusive measures have failed to  yield  positive  results.
Accordingly, we call upon all of us in this House to  realise  the  need  to
support the constitutional amendments so that all of us, together  with  the
communities out there, contribute towards  pushing  back  the  frontiers  of
poverty, as the hon ...

... uNgqongqoshe wezeZindlu  owenza  umsebenzi  omhle  kakhulu  ukuncedisana
naboomasipala  ngoba  laphaya  emakhaya  abantu  into  abayaziyo   kukuthola
izindlu kuqala, okwesibini kukuthola amaservices. Sithanda  ukuthi  simbonge
kakhulu. Simfisela okuhle  la  aya  khona  sinethemba  elikhulu  ukuthi  uza
kuncedisa ukuthi kubonakale ukuthi abantu bayazithola izidingo zabo.  Andazi
mandithini ukumbonga uNgqongqoshe ngoba abantu empeleni  bajabulile  kakhulu
laphaya. Ziyathethwa  izinto  ezithethwayo  ngezindlu  ezincane  nako  konke
lokho kodwa abantu beneempendulo.  Sicela  abantu  bamaphepha  ke  khe  baye
ebantwini baye kubuza ukuthi baneliseke kangakanani na  ngoba  thina  sibona
abantu bengena  ezindlwini  kwaye  bayatsho  ngemilomo  yabo  abantu  ukuthi
isiqalo basinikiwe ngoba bebengenamali  yokuthenga  umhlaba,  isitina  kodwa
ngoku basezindlwini.  Bathi  baza  kubeka  kancane  bamane  besongeza  ukuze
baqhubekele phambili. Yiko lokho uNgqongqoshe  sibona  ukuthi  makabe  phaya
kulaa ndlu inkulu yeAfrican National Congress aze  kukwazi  ukubheka  konke.
Naboomasipala bayabonga  ngoba  akubalahlelanga  ngezindlu  ubafakele  zonke
izinto   ezidingekayo,   ugesi,   amanzi,   izindlela   njalo   njalo   yaye
sikunqwenelela okuhle la uya khona.  Enkosi.  [Kuyaqhwatywa.]   (Translation
of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... Minister of Housing, who does a very good job assisting  municipalities
because what people that live in rural areas  want  are  houses  first,  and
secondly, services. We would like to thank her greatly.  We  appreciate  her
efforts. We wish her good luck where she is going and  hope  that  she  will
help see to it that people do get what they need. I do not have  words  good
enough to thank the hon Minister, for people are quite satisfied out  there.
There may be a lot that is said about the houses being too small but  people
always have something to say. We ask  that  the  media  go  and  ask  people
whether they are not satisfied because  we  actually  witness  people  going
into new houses and with their own mouths they concur that  they  have  been
given something to work on as they did  not  have  money  to  buy  land  and
bricks before. They say that they are going to  add  on  and  move  forward.
That is why the hon Minister has been redeployed to the ANC Head Office.  It
is so that she can oversee everything. Municipalities  also  appreciate  her
role because she did not just give them empty houses, but she  supplied  all
the infrastructure - electricity, water, roads, etc. We  wish  her  all  the
best where she is going to be now. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, as we debate the merits  and  demerits  of
this Bill, we are reminded of the recent debacle that occurred  in  Kwazulu-
Natal that nearly triggered an outbreak of political violence  as  a  result
of the removal of the antidefection clause to allow elected  representatives
to cross the floor to the parties of their own choice. This was preceded  by
court cases to challenge the legality of  floor-crossing  legislation.  Yes,
this result was indeed a  short-term  victory  for  parties  that  took  the
Government to court. Rightfully so,  our  Constitution  did  not  make  such
provision for elected representatives to  defect  to  political  parties  of
their choice, and this necessitated the amendment of the Constitution.

The issues that have to be confronted are not so much about court  victories
against the legislative strength of the ruling party.  They  revolve  around
the question as to the necessity of this constitutional amendment.  What  is
it that we want to achieve? Who will benefit out of this amendment?  We  say
the floor-crossing legislation was based on political expediency to  compete
for power in a manner that was not in  the  spirit  of  nation-building  and
reconciliation. We therefore applaud both the IFP and the ANC  for  allowing
common sense to prevail in dealing with the issue.

This time, political parties and potential voters will  by  now  know,  when
they get to the elections next year, that  a  person  they  vote  for  might
defect to  another  party  if  the  circumstances  dictate  otherwise.  This
amendment  will  also  provide  a  mechanism  to  realign  and  balance  the
legislative strength of  parties.  This  will  force  political  parties  to
deliver on their election promises and if they are to  attract  any  members
in terms of floor crossing, this amendment in our view is  not  intended  to
promote the disobedience of elected representatives to  do  as  they  please
but to deepen democracy. We therefore support the Bill in the current  form.
[Applause.]

Nksz N MAHLAWE:  Mhlalingaphambili,  nam  andinakho  ukuthula  ndingayincomi
imbokotho ethe yasila, yacola, yaba ngumzekelo omhle kuthi  boomama  balapha
ePalamente, yangaphelelisi apho, yaba mgumzekelo  omhle  kubo  bonke  oomama
kweli loMzantsi Afrika. Sithi ke kuye,  aze  enjenjalo  nalapho  aya  khona,
athi njengoko  ecolisa  nje  xa  esila,  acolisise  ngaphezulu.  Malibongwe!
[Uwelewele.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mrs N MAHLAWE: Chairperson, I cannot but commend  the  millstone  that  has
ground so well and perfected  things  here  and,  as  such,  become  a  good
example, not only to us as women in this Parliament, but  to  all  women  in
South Africa too. We say to her that she should continue  to  do  just  that
wherever  she  is  going,   and   perfectly   grind   even   more.   Praise!
[Interjections.]]

Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon  Ministers  and  members  of  this
House, allow me to first acknowledge that what I am going  to  express  here
has been obtained  from  some  sources,  namely,  the  Constitution  of  the
Republic of South Africa, the affidavits made by the  Minister  for  Justice
and Constitutional Development and the affidavit of professor Robert  Arthur
Shrine, professor of political science at the University of Cape Town.

I am particularly making this acknowledgement,  not  because  I  fear  being
accused of plagiarism, but because I want to  convert  the  unconverted  who
have a perception that these constitutional amendments are just  an  attempt
by the ANC to attract more members to its fold. Actually, they have said  so
at this podium and I want to dispute that.

In most democratic countries, floor crossing is allowed. A  typical  example
of this is Germany. This is expressed in article 38 subsection  1  of  their
basic law which provides, and I quote,


  ... shall be representatives of the whole people, not bound by orders  or
  instructions and responsible only to their conscience ...

Professor Shrine notes that the right of parliamentarians  to  follow  their
conscience is an attempt to avoid the stranglehold that a party  might  have
over its members. Some parties have advanced arguments on  section  46(1)(d)
and section 105(1)(d), which provide that members of the  National  Assembly
and provincial legislatures shall  be  elected  in  terms  of  an  electoral
system ``that results, in general, in  proportional  representation''.  This
then does  not  preclude  members  from  exercising  their  own  rights  and
choices. The Constitution regards  floor  crossing  as  being  part  of  the
outcome of proportional representation.

A learned scientist, Vernon Bogdanor, expresses the above impression in  his
own words and says, I quote:


  It is therefore a mistake to refer to proportional representation  as  if
  it denotes a single type of electoral system.

He further argues that proportional representation  is  in  fact  a  generic
term connoting a number of different systems sharing only the common aim  of
proportionality between seats and votes ...

An HON MEMBER: What are you yourself saying?

Ms N MAHLAWE: I am saying so myself. I agree.


  This common aim however does not prevent the various proportional systems
  diverging considerably from one another.

Their  political  consequences  therefore  can  be  quite   different,   The
political consequence, in our case, is the floor crossing.

Some parties  have  challenged  the  floor-crossing  legislation,  advancing
arguments that there will be political instability and that it distorts  the
will of the electorate. I hope that some parties will be  honest  enough  to
tell this House that, emanating from the  municipal  floor  crossing,  there
has been no instability and that there has been no distortion.

Ndiyabulela ke Sihlalo ngokulifumana eli thuba lokuba ndithethe apha.  Ndiza
kucela okokuba la maqela athe afumana  abantu  abaninzi  phaya  koomasipala,
ngeliya xesha  lomtyhi  wokuwelela  kwelinye  iqela,  anyaniseke,  eze  apha
ngaphambili,  ayitsho  into  yokuba  azuzile  wona  ngokuvunyelwa   kwabantu
bawelele kwamanye amaqela, ngoko  ke,  ayasixhasa  esi  silungiso  kuMthetho
wokuwelela kwelinye iqela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation  of  Xhosa  paragraph
follows.)

[I would like to thank you, Chairperson, for affording  me  the  opportunity
to speak here. I would like to ask these parties that have gained a  lot  of
new membership from municipalities during the period of floor  crossing,  to
come forward and be honest about the fact  that  floor  crossing  advantaged
them and therefore they should say boldly that they support  this  Amendment
Bill. [Applause.]]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairperson, these are disturbing times when, instead  of
providing  jobs  that  were  promised  by  the  ruling  party,  we  see   an
unprecedented high rate of unemployment and the approval of prostitution  as
a means of job creation. [Interjections.]

In this country, a new word has entered the English vocabulary.  Prostitutes
are  called  sex  workers.  We  live  in  disturbing  times  when  political
prostitution  is  being  introduced  into  this  Parliament,  and  political
prostitutes are allowed to auction themselves to the  highest  bidder  under
the false pretension that the  prostitutes  are  serving  the  interests  of
democracy. [Interjections.]

The Fourth Amendment Bill  is  a  gross  violation  of  the  internationally
recognised doctrine of retrospectivity. The Bill  undermines  the  electoral
system which is presently based on proportionality. I have  said  it  before
and I say again: A constitution is  not  a  doormat  to  use  for  political
opportunism and expedience. A constitution is not a condom  to  be  used  to
play games with political prostitutes.  The  constitution  of  a  democratic
country is a sacred document. It must  be  treated  with  profound  respect.
[Interjections.]

The Fourth Amendment Bill  serves  ``parochial  interests''.  It  encourages
politics of the  stomach  of  members  of  this  Parliament  and  provincial
legislatures.  It  facilitates  their  self-interests,  not  those  of   the
homeless, the jobless, and victims of cholera and other  diseases,  as  well
as those of children who cannot go  to  school  because  their  parents  are
poor.

The Bill is a diversion  to  avoid  the  issues  facing  this  country.  For
instance, sections 211 and 212 of the Constitution show  the  way  in  which
traditional leaders have been fooled. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J DURAND: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: This sounds  exactly  like
the speech this member delivered in a previous discussion on this issue.  Is
it parliamentary to use the same speech twice? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, that is  not  a  point  of
order. But your time has expired. [Interjections.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: I just want to say that I have written this speech. I  would
know whether it is the same speech or not! Izwe lethu! [Our country!]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, our first democratic  election  placed  the
Government in power for the people by the people.

Having noted that, the crossing of the floor, as many may argue,  diminishes
the confidence that the public has in a member for whom they have voted  via
their party selection. For this reason, the person holding the seat  has  no
authority to cross the floor, as the seat was not  taken  in  an  individual
capacity.

However, having reviewed this amendment Bill, the conditions and  provisions
for the crossing of the floor, the MF views the process as  one  which  does
not pose such a large threat, especially for a smaller party like ours.  The
Bill allows for mergers and subdivisions, even  for  the  formation  of  new
parties. The window period is  especially  found  to  be  accommodating  and
protects party interests. The MF supports the amending Bill.
[Applause.]

The MF is in full support of the Northern Province  being  renamed  Limpopo.
This certainly gives back the province's  honour  with  its  new  name  and,
hopefully, new paths will open for  the  people  of  South  Africa.  The  MF
supports the Constitution of the Republic of South  Africa  Third  Amendment
Bill.

With regard to the outgoing Minister of Housing, I wish to say that  the  MF
wishes you well in your new position as the Deputy Secretary-General of  the
ANC. We wish you success in all  your  endeavours.  We  thank  you  for  the
wonderful service and delivery you have made possible  in  the  Ministry  of
Housing since 1995. We are going to miss you. [Applause.]

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Chairperson, on behalf  of  the  young  people  of  South
Africa, we would like to wish Comrade Sankie Mahanyele well. You  have  made
us very proud. We wish you well in your new endeavours.

Chairperson, Deputy President, hon members, on occasions like this  one,  it
gives us an  opportunity  to  reflect  on  ourselves  as  political  parties
representing our people in this House. It gives us an opportunity to  answer
this question honestly and openly: Are we  honest  to  the  people  of  this
country? I am asking this question because some parties in this House,  when
this Bill was first passed  last  year,  had  this  to  say:  This  Bill  is
immoral; it is a betrayal of  the  people  of  South  Africa  and  it  is  a
political expedience  on  the  side  of  the  ANC.  Some  even  referred  to
themselves as defenders of democracy against evil.

When two councillors in the East Rand and the Vaal crossed the floor to  the
UDM, the UDM called a rally in Tsakane to  parade  them  as  a  victory  for
democracy despite the fact that they were the people who  were  saying  that
this Bill was immoral. If you are so moral, why do you benefit from the  act
you believe to be an immoral act? It is only a person with  no  self-respect
or a hypocrite who would do that. Some of the people who portray  themselves
as defenders of democracy against the ANC are in  fact  defenders  of  their
own pockets, power and prestige.

The hon leader of the United Democratic Movement  formed  an  alliance  with
the discredited government of former President Botha in  1987  to  overthrow
the Matanzima regime so that he could get power. When he realised  that  the
ANC was about to get power, he became closer to the ANC, because he  thought
he would get power. He did not last in the  ANC,  because  he  was  never  a
democrat  in  the  first  place.  [Interjections.]  The  United   Democratic
Movement's challenge of the floor-crossing legislation was aimed at  getting
prestige and popularity, like their leader. Even after this  Bill  has  been
passed, despite opposition from them, if one member crosses  over  to  them,
they will have a big braai.

Our Constitution is an  embodiment  of  our  democratic  values.  I  do  not
believe that a party which prides itself on being democratic would  want  to
plunge the whole country into a  constitutional  crisis  just  because  they
fear they will lose premiership. We would have insisted on  the  premiership
in the Western Cape if we wanted to - after all, we are  the  biggest  party
in the Western Cape legislature - but we did not. We did not  because  these
changes are not  about  us,  but  about  making  sure  that  there  is  good
governance so that  we  can  use  the  state  machinery  to  push  back  the
frontiers of poverty and to create a nonracial society. [Applause.]

The Constitutional  Court  has  agreed  with  us  in  principle  that  floor
crossing is constitutional and democratic. I'm  not  sure  about  those  who
still oppose this Bill. What do they want to achieve? Why do  they  keep  on
chasing lizards when the crocodiles are against them? No  one  can  stop  us
from creating a nonracial, democratic society. Those  who  think  that  they
will stop us through court interdicts must know  that  koloi  ena  ha  iduma
iyatsamaya re ka se qaleng? [once that car starts idling, it pulls off.  Can
we not start?] [Applause.]

The Bill before us today accommodates ideological shifts that  might  happen
in a society. Politicians are products of society. Why do we want to  behave
as if those ideological shifts might  not  affect  them?  Constitutions  are
amended throughout the world to address  particular  situations.  After  the
Second World War, the United States made an amendment limiting the  term  of
office of the president to  not  more  than  two  consecutive  terms,  after
Roosevelt served more than four terms.

Amendments to a constitution are meant to avoid stagnation in a society.  As
young people, we shall continue to mobilise masses of  our  people  to  work
with the progressive forces to better our  lives  and  isolate  those  whose
only interest is to be loyal to their stomachs. The Bills  before  us  today
are no different from other constitutional Bills. On behalf of the  ANC  and
the young people of South Africa, we support both Bills. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Chairperson, I have some good news and some  bad  news  for
the hon Pheko. First the good news: I also used the same sermon  twice.  But
now the bad news: not to the same congregation. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Crossing of the floor is nothing new -  internationally  or  locally.  Whole
new parties have been formed by way of  crossing  of  the  floor,  like  the
party the hon Mulder represented for a long time in Parliament. Although  it
was within a constituency system where the voters had voted for  the  person
and not the party, you know and I know that you could put Humpty  Dumpty  on
the lamp posts, the voters voted for the party  and  the  candidate  arrived
here on the ticket of his party. No difference.

Vyf jaar, is 'n lang tyd in die politiek. Om verteenwoordigers vir vyf  jaar
vas te bind aan 'n bepaalde party, ongeag wat daardie party aanvang,  ongeag
hoeveel jakkalsdraaie hy gooi en by wie hy almal in die bed  spring,  is  om
die partystruktuur en partyleiding te verabsoluteer. Hulle is  dan  vir  vyf
jaar onaantasbaar. Hierdie wetgewing sal partye deurlopend op hul tone  hou.
Nou skryf hulle nie net een keer in vyf jaar eksamen nie, daar is  ook  twee
mini-eksamens tussenin.

Opposisiepolitiek in Suid-Afrika verkeer  tans  in  chaos.  Alliansies  word
gevorm en weer verbreek. Ons hoor van skandale en gerugte van  skandale,  en
van hofsake ook.  Die  AEB  is  sedert  sy  stigting  onverpoosd  besig  met
onderhandelinge met 'n wye verskeidenheid  groeperinge.  Ons  werk  aan  die
daarstelling van 'n nuwe politieke voertuig met integriteit, wat  sal  fokus
op die belange van minderhede in Suid-Afrika,  maar  terselftertyd  hom  nie
eksklusief wil isoleer nie, en deel wil  wees  van  die  hoofstroompolitiek.
Dit moet 'n party met 'n bepaalde Afrikanerfokus wees, maar  wat  onbeskaamd
s√™: ``Suid-Afrika eerste.''

Wanneer ek in die vensterperiode my setel oorneem na  die  Nasionale  Aksie,
is dit geen individuele opportunisme nie, maar die  spontane  resultaat  van
dit waarvoor oor drie jaar gewerk en onderhandel is. Ek nooi  agb  lede  wat
hierdie beginsels onderskryf: gebruik hierdie wetgewing, word  deel  van  'n
nuwe begin. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Five years is a long  time  in  politics.  To  bind  representatives  to  a
certain party  for  five  years,  irrespective  of  what  that  party  does,
irrespective of how many twists and turns it makes, and with whom  it  jumps
into bed, is to absolutise the party structure and  party  leadership.  They
are then untouchable for five years.  This  legislation  will  keep  parties
continuously on their toes. Now they will not write exams only once in  five
years, but there are also two mini-exams in between.

Opposition politics in South Africa is chaotic at the moment. Alliances  are
formed and broken. We hear of scandals  and  rumours  of  scandals,  and  of
court cases too. The AEB has since its inception  been  tirelessly  involved
in negotiations with  a  wide  variety  of  groupings.  We  are  working  on
creating a new political vehicle with integrity, which  will  focus  on  the
interests of minorities in South Africa, but which at  the  same  time  does
not want to isolate itself exclusively,  and  which  wants  to  be  part  of
mainstream politics. It must be a party with a certain Afrikaner focus,  but
which unashamedly says: ``South Africa first.''

When, during the window period, I  take  my  seat  across  to  the  National
Action,  it  will  not  be  a  case  of  individual  opportunism,  but   the
spontaneous result of that which has been  worked  for  and  negotiated  for
over a period of three years. I extend an  invitation  to  hon  members  who
subscribe to these principles: use this legislation, become part  of  a  new
beginning.]

You won't be a Johnny come lately.

Die AEB steun hierdie wetgewing en  sy  hele  koukus  gaan  daarvan  gebruik
maak. Mag ek net ... [The AEB  supports  this  legislation,  and  its  whole
caucus is going to make use of it. May I just ...]

May I add my voice to those people thanking the hon Minister.  Minister,  we
only want to say: Dankie, minister Sankie.  [Thank  you,  Minister  Sankie.]
[Laughter.]
Ms R TALJAARD: Chairperson, colleagues, we  wish  the  Minister  of  Housing
well in her new position.

The Third Constitution of Republic of South  Africa  Amendment  Bill  before
the House has a siamese twin  -  the  Local  Government:  Municipal  Finance
Management Bill. There are unresolved questions which we are  still  dealing
with as to the constitutionality of the Local Government: Municipal  Finance
Management Bill itself, despite the broadening of  the  intervention  powers
to be adopted today. The one cannot  and  must  not  be  considered  without
reference to the other. There is a very clear umbilical cord  linking  these
two  pieces  of  legislation.  The  Local  Government:   Municipal   Finance
Management Bill started as system of transparency  and  budgetary  oversight
over financial management and as the fiscal watch over  budgetary  processes
at local level.  It  has  ended  in  onerous  prescriptions  and  broad  new
discretionary intervention powers and an amendment of the Constitution  that
diminishess the oversight of the NCOP over interventions.

We need  to  ask  ourselves,  in  respect  of  both  the  Local  Government:
Municipal Finance Management Bill and  the  constitutional  trumping  clause
before the House, whether we are supporting and strengthening  the  capacity
of municipalities to manage their own affairs, given  that  they  raise  the
bulk  of  their  own  revenue,  or  are  we  simply   stifling   them   with
prescriptions emanating from National Treasury and a potential avalanche  of
discretionary interventions by either provincial or national Government?

The  processes  for  provincial  intervention   envisaged   in   the   Local
Government: Municipal Finance  Management  Bill,  the  national  legislation
required in section 193 (3) of the Constitution, if you will, must be  clear
and focus on financial  emergencies  in  order  to  curtail  the  broad  new
discretionary power given to MECs in the amendment before the  House  today.
As the Business Day editorial remarked  at  the  time:  ``As  things  stand,
provincial  governments  already  have  the  power  to  intervene  in  local
governments'  financial  affairs.''  In  certain  circumstances,  the  Local
Government: Municipal Finance Management Bill will broaden these powers  and
one trusts that, if granted,  these  powers  will  be  used  wisely  to  the
benefit of ratepayers and local residents.

At the outset, we have  to  say  that  the  Bill  before  the  House  is  an
improvement on the blatant, unbridled national intervention powers  codified
in its predecessor. It is also an improvement on the  former  version  of  a
municipal recovery agency assuming the responsibilities of local  government
and forcing  through  a  financial  emergency  recovery  plan  in  cases  of
financial distress. It does not, however, preclude completely  the  prospect
of direct national intervention in municipal affairs.

Given the unresolved question of provincial capacity  to  act  in  cases  of
distress, given their limited resources, the  prospect  of  direct  national
intervention in municipal affairs remains ever present and the  question  as
to whether this Bill is a victory for the federal cause can at  best  remain
unanswered.

In none of the discussions on this Bill  was  the  question  of  the  fiscal
capacity of provinces to deal with these new  powers  ever  addressed.  This
begs the question: If a provincial executive lacks the capacity or the  will
to intervene, what will guide the  national  intervention  power  and,  more
importantly, bridle it when national level intervenes in the  stead  of  the
province, as provided in section 139 (3) of the Bill? [Interjections.]

I have, Johnny. I do not need your education. [Interjections.]

While  the  Bill  before  the  House  arguably  could  be  construed  as   a
strengthening of a federal model of government, we have to interrogate  this
question more closely. We need to  contend  with  the  spectre  of  national
intervention  in  section  139  (7).  We  have  to  ask  whether  there  are
sufficient safeguards to protect local government  against  unnecessary  and
politically frivolous interventions. The  first  safeguard,  which  we  will
discuss when the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management  Bill  comes
before Parliament, is the question of the processes and procedures  set  out
in the Bill under which a provincial intervention  can  be  instituted.  The
second safeguard must be found in the constitutional  amendment  itself.  In
this regard, the argument has been made that local  government  can  take  a
provincial intervention on review, as the  exceptional  circumstances  under
which the MEC acted are challengeable. These safeguards are cold comfort  at
this stage, given the possible  scope  for  intervention  and  the  national
intervention power  and  indeed  political  interventions.  There  are  four
stages of interventions set out in the new amendment and I  will  not  dwell
on all of them, save to say that in terms of section  139(5),  not  only  is
the intervention power mandatory in the  event  of  a  financial  crisis  or
where a municipality breaches its obligation to provide  basic  services  or
fails to meet its financial commitments, but the  provincial  executive  may
impose a recovery plan, binding the municipality in both its  executive  and
legislative functions. This is untenable. As a last resort,  of  course,  in
section 139(7), national Government  may  intervene  in  the  stead  of  the
province, if the province fails to act.

This schema is problematic. There is  too  much  discretion  and  the  lines
delineating provincial and national responses are too  indistinct,  but  let
us highlight the facts in respect of which  there  is  agreement.  We  agree
that local government's financial management is in  material  disrepair.  We
agree that we need a Public Finance Management Act  type  system  for  local
government to function properly and  deliver  services  to  our  people.  We
agree that our constitutional negotiation process was  an  arduous  one  and
that the powers of the provinces and local government were some of the  most
painstakingly contested areas of subsequent agreement.  We  agree  that  our
Constitution sets up a specific governance architecture  with  three  levels
of government with distinctive powers and functions under a broad rubric  of
co-operative governance.

However, we disagree fundamentally on whether or  not  it  is  desirable  to
undo a constitutionally negotiated architecture through the introduction  of
a new card game like a trumping clause that emasculates many  of  the  other
constitutional  provisions,  aiming  at  protecting  the  local  sphere   of
government and its integrity. We disagree fundamentally, but  because  there
is a desire to implement a new  policy  dispensation  in  respect  of  local
government, including a substantive redrafting of the municipal systems  via
the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Bill, the  founding  text
of our constitutional order should make way  for  new  policy  positions  on
local government's financial management and intervention powers.

In  the  Premier  of  the  Western  Cape  vs  the  President  of  RSA,   the
Constitutional  Court  stated,  in  relation  to  section  41(1)(g)  of  the
Constitution, that it seeks to prevent one sphere of  government  using  its
powers in ways  which  would  undermine  other  spheres  of  government  and
prevent  them  from  functioning  effectively.  The  system  of   provincial
intervention we create today, and which we will be fleshing out  in  greater
detail in the Local Government:  Municipal  Finance  Management  Bill,  will
have to answer to the requirements of section 41(1)(g). In  addition,  while
we are creating the constitutional power in the new section 139  to  bind  a
municipality in the exercise of its legislative functions, the  desirability
of such a step must always be questioned.

It is regrettable that the proposal tabled by the hon  Dr  Tertius  Delport,
which would at least have minimised the discretionary power of the MEC,  did
not find favour in  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice.  The  Democratic
Alliance will not be supporting the Constitution of the  Republic  of  South
Africa Third Amendment Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, the refusal  to  allow  a
short debate to pay tribute to the hon Minister of Housing is reflective  of
a small mind. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: [Inaudible.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Yes, well. You have had part of your brain removed,  so  you
are in the best qualified position to say that! [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr L T LANDERS: Hon Chairperson, the hon  Comrade  Sankie  has  served  this
House  and  this  country   well.   We   pay   tribute   to   her   efforts.
[Interjections.] We want to say to her, on this last day of her presence  in
this House, that we  appreciate  all  the  efforts  that  she  has  made  in
improving the lot of the poorest of the poor. We want to wish  her  well  in
her  new  endeavours.  Personally,  I  will  miss  her  smiling  face,   her
friendliness and her personality. [Applause.]

Chairperson, the hon Minister of Justice correctly spelt out the  background
to the measure that is before this House today, when he pointed out that  it
was the hon Colin Eglin who consistently brought this matter up  during  the
negotiations for our Constitution. But, what the  hon  Minister  of  Justice
did not point out was the fact that the hon Colin Eglin did this  even  pre-
1994. He did this at Codesa and he did this in the  negotiating  council  at
Kempton Park. I can say this because I know. I  was  there.  The  hon  Colin
Eglin, I can attest to the fact, was very  skillful  in  his  arguments  for
crossing-the-floor legislation, to the extent that  today  we  are  able  to
debate the measure that is before this House. It is a pity though  that,  of
late, the hon Colin Eglin's voice  on  floor  crossing  has  been  silenced,
perhaps to the detriment of the DP's principled position. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, I listened carefully to the hon Mncwango's  tirade  during  his
speech from this podium. I find it particularly  significant  that  the  hon
Mncwango's new sweetheart, the Democratic Party, is supporting this  measure
which he describes as marking one of  the  darkest  and  lowest  moments  in
democracy. [Interjections.] Now, the hon Mncwango went on to  say  that  the
real purpose of this legislation is the bringing about of a coup  d'√©tat  in
Kwazulu-Natal, and he agrees from his bench. Now, it  is  therefore  correct
to assume that the DP, which they are now associated with, is  therefore  in
favour of the imminent coup d'√©tat in Kwazulu-Natal by virtue  of  the  fact
that they are supporting this measure. [Applause.]

Chairperson, I am informed  that  the  hon  Taljaard,  together  with  other
members of  the  DP,  participated  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Portfolio
Committee on  Justice  and  that  she  engaged  all  other  parties  in  the
committee on the position which she put forward today. Subsequent  to  these
debates and discussions, significant amendments were made  to  the  original
text of the Constitution of the Republic of  South  Africa  Third  Amendment
Bill. That was the last time we  saw  the  hon  Taljaard  in  the  Portfolio
Committee on Justice. Today, we  discover  that  the  DP  is  opposing  this
measure. Now, we want to call upon the real leaders of  the  DP  to  get  to
grips with the issues of the day and to demonstrate the leadership  that  is
expected of them. [Interjections.]

I want to come back to the hon Albert  Mncwango  who  has  today  adopted  a
purist and also a principled opposition to the  measure  before  us.  And  I
want to challenge the hon Mncwango, who is national organiser  of  the  IFP:
If he is so principled and implacably opposed  to  the  measure  before  us,
then I challenge him to go back to his province and say to those members  of
other political parties who have joined the IFP  to  leave,  with  immediate
effect. [Applause.] There are councillors, and I have their names  in  front
of me, who have joined the  IFP:  Memela,  Ntozake,  Zuma,  Mlambo,  Gumede,
Ngcobo, Makoba, Ngculu, and the list goes on. So, if the hon Mncwango is  so
implacably opposed to this measure, it is then appropriate for  him  to  get
on to the phone and phone these councillors who have  joined  the  IFP  from
other parties and tell them that they are  no  longer  welcome.  [Applause.]
[Laughter.]

The  MINISTER   FOR   JUSTICE   AND   CONSTITUTIONAL   DEVELOPMENT:   Deputy
Chairperson, I want to thank the hon members for what I  think  has  been  a
very interesting debate. One should not be fooled by  the  words  of  Madame
Taljaard when she says she wishes our departing colleague everything of  the
best, because we know that the real sentiment was expressed  by  none  other
than the hon Gibson on behalf of his party. [Interjections.] We know this.

We should not be fooled into thinking that the hard, ice-cold heart  of  the
DP eventually melted when they heard that we were heaping praise  upon  her.
We should not be fooled at all. It is the  least  of  the  felicitations  we
need and shall accept. [Interjections.]

Hon Mncwango, according to  the  official  record,  the  IFP  accepted  nine
defectors - it was a beneficiary in other words  -  and,  according  to  the
official record, the UDM accepted 11  defectors.  [Interjections.]  Now,  in
this House they have been called all sorts of names, or rather we have  been
called thieves, for instance. So if you received nine of these  people,  you
indeed indulged in  real  political  kleptomania  yourself.  [Laughter.]  So
where is moral probity when you quietly receive these?

Of course, the  hon  member  Pheko  calls  them  ``political  prostitutes''.
[Laughter.] I never thought when I met the hon member Pheko in  New  York  I
would live long enough to see his exceptional performance, which is akin  to
that of a house jester, in this House. [Laughter.] I never thought  I  would
see that one day.

But I am old now - 50 years old. I  have,  eventually,  seen  the  best-ever
performance. [Interjections.] Well, let me tell you something: a  dunderhead
is a sort of person who actually pretends to be morally  up  there  and,  at
the same time, quietly receives what the hon  Pheko  calls  ``prostitutes''.
That's a dunderhead.

I want to say to you that we received all the people who  made  the  choices
that this legislation allowed them to make. And,  in  case  you  don't  know
this, yes,  as  the  ANC  we  do  want  the  premiership  of  KwaZulu-Natal.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] We want to save that province from  Lionel  Mtshali,
who threatens to descend with armed Zulus  and  their  shining  things  upon
Maritzburg. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF  COMMITTEES:  Order!  Order,  Minister.  Yes,  hon
member, are you rising on a point of order?

Mrs S A SEATON: I am, Chairperson. Mr Lionel Mtshali is not here  to  defend
himself and I think that is uncalled for. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, that is  not  a  point  of
order. You may proceed, Minister.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: It is not  a  point
of order at all. A newspaper in KwaZulu-Natal says he has  called  upon  all
self-respecting Zulus to descend upon Pietermaritzburg  this  coming  Friday
with shining things. [Interjections.]

Now, we want to defend that province from any premier who  incites  ordinary
people to defy the law. We want to and, indeed,  will  work  very  hard.  We
want to assure you, at the same time, that we won't use any method that  the
Constitution and the law does not allow.  Those  who,  indeed,  have  always
wanted to join us, once this becomes law, are free to come home. Thank  you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Constitution of the Republic of  South  Africa  Third
Amendment Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 305: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D;  Asmal,  A
  K; Bakker, D M; Baloyi, M R;  Baloyi,  S  F;  Bapela,  O;  Bekker,  H  J;
  Benjamin, J; Bhengu, F; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I;
  Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Cachalia, I  M;  Camerer,  S  M;  Carrim,  Y  I;
  Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chikane,  M  M;  Chohan-Khota,  F  I;
  Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Davies, R H; De
  Lange, J H; Dhlamini, B W; Diale,  L  N;  Didiza,  A  T;  Dithebe,  S  L;
  Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D M; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Doman,  W  P;
  Douglas, B M; Du Toit, D C; Dudley, C; Duma, N M; Durand, J; Dyani,  M  M
  Z; Erwin, A; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Geldenhuys, B
  L; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gillwald, C E; Gomomo, P  J;  Goniwe,  M  T;
  Goosen, A D; Gous, S J; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M;  Gxowa,
  N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom,  D  A;  Hendricks,  L  B;  Hendrickse,  P  A  C;
  Herandien, C B; Hlangwana, N L; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jassat,  E  E;
  Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M  U;  Kannemeyer,  B  W;
  Kasrils, R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J;  Kgauwe,  Q  J;  Kgwele,  L  M;
  Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Lamani, N E; Landers,
  L T; Le Roux, J W; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lekota, M G P; Lishivha,
  T E; Lobe, M C; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J;  Ludwabe,  C
  I; Luthuli, A N; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B  S;  Mabe,  L  L;  Mabena,  D  C;
  Mabuza, D D; Madasa, Z L; Madikiza, G; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduna,  P
  M; Magashule, E S; Magazi, M N; Magubane, N E; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-
  Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S;  Makasi,
  X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki,  C  J;  Manuel,  T  A;
  Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mars, I; Martins, B A D; Maseka, J T; Maserumule,  F
  T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela,
  N F; Matlanyane, H F; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
  Maziya, M A; Mbadi, L M; Mbete,  B;  Mbombo,  N  D;  Mbulawa-Hans,  B  G;
  Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J;  Mfundisi,  I
  S; Middleton, N S; Mkono, D G; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P
  N; Mncwango, M A; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Mnumzana, S K; Modise,  T
  R; Modisenyane, L J; Moeketse, K M; Mofokeng, T R; Mohamed, I J; Mohlala,
  R J B; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloi, J; Moloto, K  A;
  Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D  M;
  Moropa, R M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I;  Mothoagae,  P  K;
  Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B; Mpaka, H  M;  Mpontshane,  A  M;
  Mshudulu, S A;  Mthembi-Mahanyele,  S  D;  Mthembu,  B;  Mthethwa,  E  N;
  Mtsweni, N S; Mudau, N W; Mutsila, I; Mzizi, M A; Mzondeki, M J G;  Nair,
  B; Nash, J H; Ncinane, I Z; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M;
  Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, N; Ngculu,  L
  V J; Ngema, M V; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M  L;  Nhleko,  N  P;
  Nhlengethwa, D G; Niemann, J J; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C;  Nobunga,  B
  J; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C;  Ntombela,  S  H;  Ntshulana-Bhengu,  N  R;
  Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, J T; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana,  T  L
  P; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Odendaal, W A; Olckers, M E; Olifant, D
  A A; Oliphant, G G; Oliphant, M N; Oosthuizen, G C; Pahad, E G;  Phadagi,
  M G; Phala, M J; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D;  Pretorius,  I
  J; Rabie, P J; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea,  M
  M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Rasmeni, S M;  Ratsoma,
  M M; Redcliffe, C R; Reid, L R R; Rhoda, R T; Ripinga, S  S;  Roopnarain,
  U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E (Cassim);  Schippers,  J;  Schneeman,  G  D;
  Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Seeco, M A; Sekgobela, P S; September,  C  C;
  September, R K; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Sibiya, M S M;  Sigcau,  S  N;
  Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S  T;
  Slabbert, J H; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
  M; Southgate, R M; Swart, S N; Tarr, M A; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo,  L
  J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B;  Twala,
  N M; Vadi, I; Van Deventer, F J; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A; Van Wyk, A  (Mrs);
  Van Wyk, A (Ms); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der
  Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, S C; Vezi, T E; Xingwana,  L  M  T;  Xulu,  M;
  Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.


  NOES - 34: Andrew, K M; Bell, B G; Borman, G M;  Botha,  A  J;  Clelland-
  Stokes, N J; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Farrow,
  S B; Gibson, D H M;  Grobler,  G  A  J;  Jankielsohn,  R;  Kalyan,  S  V;
  Koornhof, N J J van R; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Makanda, W; Maluleke,  D  K;
  McIntosh, G B D; Moorcroft, E K; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Ntuli, R  S;
  Opperman, S E; Schmidt, H C; Selfe,  J;  Semple,  J  A;  Seremane,  W  J;
  Skosana, M B; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Waters, M.


  ABSTENTIONS - 1: Aucamp, C.

Question agreed to in terms of section 74(3)(a) of the Constitution.

Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Third Amendment  Bill  [B  33B-
2002] accordingly read a second time.

Question put: That the Constitution of the Republic of South  Africa  Fourth
Amendment Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 300: Ainslie, A R; Andrew, K M; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K;  Aucamp,
  C; Bakker, D M; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bapela, O; Bell, B G; Benjamin,
  J; Bhengu, F; Blaas, A; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S;  Borman,  G
  M; Botha, A J; Botha, N G W; Cachalia, I M; Camerer, S M;  Carrim,  Y  I;
  Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chikane,  M  M;  Chohan-Khota,  F  I;
  Cindi, N V; Clelland-Stokes, N J;  Coetzee-Kasper,  M  P;  Cronin,  J  P;
  Cwele, S C; Davidson, I O; Davies, R H; De Lange,  J  H;  Delport,  J  T;
  Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H  K;  Dlali,  D  M;
  Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Doman, W P; Du Toit, D C; Duma, N M; Durand,
  J; Dyani, M M Z; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Erwin, A; Farrow, S B; Fazzie, M
  H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G  J;  Geldenhuys,  B  L;  George,  M  E;
  Gerber, P A; Gibson, D H M; Gillwald, C E; Gomomo,  P  J;  Goniwe,  M  T;
  Goosen, A D; Gous, S J; Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A  J;  Gumede,  D  M;
  Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P  A  C;
  Herandien, C B; Hlaneki, C J M; Hlangwana, N L; Hogan, B A;  Holomisa,  S
  P; Jankielsohn, R; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan,  Z  P;
  Kalako, M U; Kalyan, S V; Kannemeyer, B  W;  Kasrils,  R;  Kekana,  N  N;
  Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, N J J
  van R; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Lamani, N E; Landers, L T;  Le  Roux,  J  W;
  Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lekota, M G P; Leon, A J;  Lishivha,  T  E;
  Lobe, M C; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lowe,  C  M;  Ludwabe,  C  I;
  Luthuli, A N; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuza, D
  D; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduna, P M; Magashule,  E  S;  Magazi,  M  N;
  Magubane, N E; Magwanishe, G  B;  Mahlangu-Nkabinde,  G  L;  Mahlawe,  N;
  Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makanda, W; Makasi, X C; Malahlela,
  M J; Maloney, L; Maluleke, D K; Malumise,  M  M;  Manuel,  T  A;  Mapisa-
  Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela,
  N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlanyane, H F; Matsepe-
  Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula,  S  M;  Maziya,  M  A;  Mbete,  B;
  Mbombo, N D; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; McIntosh,  G  B  D;  Mdladlana,  M  M  S;
  Mentor, M P; Mfundisi,  I S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A;  Mnandi,  P
  N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane,
  L J; Moeketse, K M; Mofokeng, T R; Mohamed, I J; Mohlala, R J B; Mokoena,
  A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloi, J; Moloto, K A;  Mongwaketse,  S
  J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M;
  Moropa, R M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I;  Mothoagae,  P  K;
  Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B;  Mpaka,  H  M;  Mshudulu,  S  A;
  Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtsweni, N S; Mudau, N
  W; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncinane, I Z; Ndou, R
  S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka,  E;
  Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubeni, J M;  Ngwenya,  M  L;
  Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Niemann, J J; Njobe, M A A; Nobunga, B  J;
  Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B
  M; Ntuli, J T; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana,  T
  L P; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Odendaal, W A; Olckers, M E; Olifant,
  D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oliphant, M N; Oosthuizen,  G  C;  Opperman,  S  E;
  Pahad, E G; Phadagi, M G;  Phala,  M  J;  Phohlela,  S;  Pieterse,  R  D;
  Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Radebe,  B  A;  Radebe,  J  T;  Rajbally,  S;
  Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai,  C  M  P;  Rasmeni,  S  M;
  Ratsoma, M M; Redcliffe, C R; Reid, L R R; Rhoda,  R  T;  Ripinga,  S  S;
  Rwexana,  S  P;  Saloojee,  E  (Cassim);  Schippers,  J;  Schmidt,  H  C;
  Schneeman, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seeco, M A;  Sekgobela,  P  S;  Selfe,  J;
  Semple, J A; September, C C; September, R K; Seremane, W J; Shabangu,  S;
  Sibande, M P; Sigcau, S N; Sikakane, M  R;  Simmons,  S;  Sithole,  D  J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Solo, B M; Sonjica,
  B P; Sono, B N; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Swart, P S; Tarr, M A; Thabethe,
  E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete,
  P; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van Deventer, F J; Van Jaarsveld,  A  Z
  A; Van Wyk, A (Mrs); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van
  der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, S C; Waters, M; Xingwana, L M T; Zita,  L;
  Zondo, R P; Zuma, J G.


  NOES - 41: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Bekker, H J; Biyela, B P;  Dhlamini,  B
  W; Douglas, B M; Dudley, C; Green, L M; Hlengwa,  M  W;  Koornhof,  G  W;
  Lucas, E J; Madasa, Z L; Madikiza, G; Mars, I; Maseka, J T; Mbadi,  L  M;
  Mbuyazi, L R; Meshoe, K R J; Middleton, N S; Mkono, D G; Mncwango,  M  A;
  Mpontshane, A M; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Mzizi,  M  A;  Ngema,  M  V;
  Ngubane, H; Nkabinde, N C; Pheko, S E M; Ramodike, M  N;  Roopnarain,  U;
  Seaton, S A; Sibiya, M S M; Skosana, M B; Slabbert, J H; Southgate, R  M;
  Swart, S N; Van Wyk, A (Ms); Vezi, T E; Xulu, M; Zulu, N E;

Question agreed to in terms of section 74(3)(a) of the Constitution.

Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Fourth Amendment Bill  [B  69B-
2002] accordingly read a second time.

                     FILLING OF VACANCY ON ICASA COUNCIL

     (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Communications)

Question that Mr G Petrick be recommended for appointment as  councillor  to
Icasa agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:32.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    Translations of Bills submitted:


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


              Wetsontwerp op die Voorkoming van  Korrupsie  [W  19  -  2002]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of  the  Prevention
         of Corruption Bill [B 19 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75).

                         THURSDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 2003

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:
1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
     Development on the Constitution of the Republic of South  Africa  Third
     Amendment Bill [B 33 - 2002] (National Assembly -  sec  74),  dated  19
     February 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional  Development,
         having considered the subject of the Constitution of  the  Republic
         of South Africa Third  Amendment  Bill  [B  33  -  2002]  (National
         Assembly - sec 74), referred to it  and  classified  by  the  Joint
         Tagging  Mechanism   as   a   section   74   Bill,   endorses   the
         classification of the Bill and reports the Bill with amendments  [B
         33A - 2002].


          The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


         1.  Section  139(3)  of  the  Constitution  presently  grants   the
              national executive a discretion to table national  legislation
              regulating  the  process  of  intervention  by  a   provincial
              executive in local government in terms  of  section  139.  The
              Committee, during  its  initial  deliberations  on  the  Bill,
              considered the possibility of amending section 139(3) so as to
              make the enactment of such  national  legislation  compulsory.
              Having noted that the  national  legislation  contemplated  in
              section 139(3) has already been introduced in  Parliament  and
              that  it  is  presently  being  considered  by  the  Portfolio
              Committee on Finance, the Committee deemed it appropriate  not
              to amend section 139(3) as originally considered.


         2. Section 100(3) of the Constitution contains  provisions  similar
              to that of section 139(3)  in  that  it  grants  the  national
              executive  a  discretion   to   table   national   legislation
              regulating  the  process  of  intervention  by  the   national
              executive in provincial administration. However, the Committee
              was informed  that  no  legislation  contemplated  in  section
              100(3) has been drafted or is in the process of being drafted.


         3. The Committee has, for  purposes  of  consistency  with  section
              139(3), decided not to amend section 100(3) so as to make  the
              enactment of the national  legislation  contemplated  in  that
              section compulsory.  However,  the  Committee  would  like  to
              recommend that the Minister of Finance be requested to  submit
              a report to the National Assembly, within three months of  the
              adoption of this Report by the National Assembly -


              (a) indicating all steps he has taken or  will  be  taking  in
                  order to table the national  legislation  contemplated  in
                  section 100(3); or


              (b)  if  he  does  not  envisage  tabling  such   legislation,
                  providing motivation for this decision.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
     Development on the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa  Fourth
     Amendment Bill [B 69 - 2002] (National Assembly -  sec  74),  dated  19
     February 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional  Development,
         having considered the subject of the Constitution of  the  Republic
         of South Africa Fourth Amendment  Bill  [B  69  -  2002]  (National
         Assembly - sec 74), referred to it  and  classified  by  the  Joint
         Tagging  Mechanism   as   a   section   74   Bill,   endorses   the
         classification of the Bill and reports the Bill with amendments  [B
         69A - 2002].

                          FRIDAY, 21 FEBRUARY 2003
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

(1)   Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (a)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 19 February 2003  in  terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section  75
         Bills:


         (i)     National Ports  Authority  Bill  [B  5  -  2003]  (National
               Assembly - sec 75).


        (ii)     Public Protector Amendment Bill [B  6  -  2003]  (National
               Assembly - sec 75).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:
    Referrals to committees of tabled papers:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Foreign Affairs, the Portfolio Committee on  Safety  and  Security,
         the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Portfolio  Committee  on
         Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  for  consideration.  The
         Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs must confer with the  above-
         mentioned  committees  and  the  Portfolio  Committee  on   Foreign
         Affairs to report:


         (a)     Protocol relating to the Establishment  of  the  Peace  and
              Security Council of the African  Union,  tabled  in  terms  of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (a)    Resolutions of the Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts  for
         2002 and replies  thereto  obtained  by  the  National  Treasury  -
         Twenty-fourth and Twenty-fifth reports, 2002.


     (b)    Government Notice No 104  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         24257 dated 14 January  2003:  Designation  of  an  institution  of
         which the activities  do  not  fall  within  the  meaning  of  "The
         Business  of  a  Bank"  ("Ithala  Development  Finance  Corporation
         Limited"  formerly  known  as   "KwaZulu   Finance   &   Investment
         Corporation Limited"), made in terms of the Banks  Act,  1990  (Act
         No 94 of 1990).


     (c)    Government Notice No 33 published in Government Gazette No 24264
         dated  24  January  2003:  Proposed  amendment  of   Pension   Fund
         Regulations, made in terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956  (Act  No
         24 of 1956).

National Assembly:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker:


     Report of the Public Service Commission on  the  State  of  the  Public
     Service for November 2002 [RP 6 - 2003].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and  Local  Government
     on the Local Government: Municipal Structures Second Amendment Bill  [B
     68 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 20 February 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government,  having
         considered  the  subject  of  the   Local   Government:   Municipal
         Structures Second Amendment Bill [B 68 - 2002]  (National  Assembly
         - sec 75), referred to it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
         Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the  Bill  with  amendments
         [B 68A - 2002].

                          TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    Translations of Bills submitted:


     (1)    The Minister for Safety and Security:


              Wetsontwerp op Springstof [W 43 - 2002] (National  Assembly  -
              sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of  the  Explosives
         Bill [B 43 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:

    Membership of Assembly:


     The vacancy which occurred owing to Dr N O Mndende  vacating  her  seat
     with effect from 15 February 2003, has been filled with effect from  17
     February 2003 by the nomination of Mr G T Madikiza.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Public Enterprises:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African  Forestry  Company
     Limited (SAFCOL) for the year ended 30 June 2002.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Insurance
     Amendment Bill [B 52 - 2002] (National Assembly  -  sec  75),  dated  7
     February 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered  the  subject
         of the Insurance Amendment Bill [B 52 - 2002] (National Assembly  -
         sec 75), referred  to  it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
         Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the  Bill  with  amendments
         [B 52A - 2002].


