---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 June 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-06-06
---

FRIDAY, 6 JUNE 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:01.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                        TAXI RECAPITALISATION PROCESS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr J P CRONIN (ANC): Chairperson, I am personally very pleased, and the ANC
is very pleased, that Government is now showing signs of moving very
quickly towards completing the tendering process for the important taxi
recapitalisation process. I think this has taken a long time. It is a
complicated process, but we now see signs of quick movement and we would
want to encourage and welcome that.

At the same time, we are concerned that Santaco, the SA National Taxi
Council, is putting in some wobbles on the matter. We would urge them to co-
operate on the matter. They are other principal beneficiaries of this
multibillion rand recapitalisation process. It needs to be very clean and
the tendering process needs to be a good one, and we urge them not to try
to get themselves tangled up in it. Therefore we urge Government to now
proceed effectively with this important measure, which I think will provide
safer and better transport to millions of commuters in South Africa.
[Applause.]

                         RIGHTS OF VICTIMS OF CRIME

                            (Member's Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Chairperson, the many victims of crime in our country
get attention from Government leaders such as Deputy President Zuma when
they are looking for photo opportunities. Then we hear them criticise our
Constitution, lawyers, the law in general, judges, etc. But nothing is
actually done to help the victims of crime.

For years the DA has been championing victims' rights. In particular, we
called for a victims fund to help crime victims with medical expenses and
other forms of compensation. After all, the state pays the medical expenses
of criminals while the victims are ignored.

We called for a victims of crime fund using money confiscated by the Assets
Forfeiture Unit. Although the ANC agreed in principle years ago, they have
done nothing. Millions of rands lie in the criminal assets recovery
account, but nothing, not a cent, has been paid out.

The DA believes that it is time to put your money where your mouth is, Mr
Deputy President. Use the fund to compensate the victims of crime on the
gang-ridden Cape Flats.

                   EFFECTS OF LEGISLATION ON PLASTIC BAGS

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Chairperson, while the IFP commends the hon Minister
of Environmental Affairs and Tourism for attempting to rid the country of
the alien species, the plastic bag, that grows on fences, pavements, in
lakes and in rivers, we are concerned that this new plastic bag legislation
is having a negative impact on the jobless, the poor and those in far-flung
rural areas.

It is all very well for those of us who have cars to take our parcels in
our trolleys to the boot of our cars, empty the trolleys into the car,
drive home and then take them inside in a basket. But for those students,
workers or people who work some distance from shops and are not in the
habit of slinging baskets or bags over their shoulders, they often have to
resort to taking off their clothes to wrap up their goods.

If doing without plastic bags should bring the price of goods down, we also
see no sign of it. So we would like to ask the hon Minister to establish if
prices have dropped, to empower NGOs to make cloth bags, to encourage
supermarkets to stock and to sell them and to offer some special
dispensation for shops in rural areas to make the packing of parcels easier
for the poor.

                        FUNDS TO FIGHT AIDS PANDEMIC

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms F HAJAIG: Chairperson, the leaders of the world's richest countries have
pledged billions of dollars to fight the Aids pandemic in Africa. The
leaders of the G8 countries have also pledged to endorse a plan to set up a
peacekeeping force on the continent and to provide financial support for
Nepad projects.

The ANC welcomes these developments. We believe that the pledged resources,
if honoured, will contribute to the revival of the African continent. We
also hope that the pledges to fight the Aids pandemic in Africa will also
be matched by the revamp of international trade laws to allow developing
countries to buy the cheaper generic version of Aids drugs.

The ANC welcomes the role that is played by the Republic of South Africa,
through President Thabo Mbeki, and other African leaders in putting the
case for Africa's development firmly on the global agenda. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                              FIREARMS CONTROL

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr J SCHIPPERS (NNP): Chairperson, the New NP is in favour of a possible
general amnesty for people who want to hand over firearms to the
authorities. The number of illegal firearms confiscated by the SA Police
Service in 2001-02 justifies our support. From the Minister of Safety and
Security's reply to an NNP question, the following figures came to light:
In 2001, 19 744 illegal firearms were recovered; in 2002 a total of 21 601
recoveries were made. The most recoveries were made in KwaZulu-Natal, where
11 635 firearms were confiscated over a two-year period, followed by
Gauteng with 10 437 and Limpopo with 6 122 confiscations. For the period
2001-02, 900 of these firearms were linked to crimes.

The New NP calls on the Minister of Safety and Security and the national
police commissioner to discuss urgently the matter of a firearm amnesty. It
should also be made clear to the public that it would not be a blanket
amnesty, but that the SA Police Service will verify whether any of these
firearms were linked to criminal activities. Illegal firearms need to be
taken off the streets. I thank you.

                          MORE RESOURCES FOR SANDF

                            (Member's Statement)
Mr A BLAAS (ACDP): Chairperson, the SA National Defence Force is neither
affordable nor sustainable because of budgetary constraints and the
increased demands on its services. Over and above the fact that this
compromises the readiness of the Defence Force, it also resulted in a
crisis in the DOD's hospitals that in the past have prided themselves on
their good reputation.

Two Military Hospital is virtually collapsing. In terms of the Occupational
Safety Act, it could be shut down. There is a lack of support services in
terms of its core business. Understaffed nurses must also take care of
these services, to the detriment of patient care.

Theatres are closed down because of redundant equipment. The former Natal
Medical Command headquarters is in a similar state of decline. In the midst
of all this, the workload increased because of the age profile of its
members. The Minister of Defence and the Government must accept the fact
that the financial allocation to the Department of Defence is not
sufficient to cater for the demands placed on it.

Policies cannot be formulated and implemented without the supporting
resources. The time has arrived to either revisit the demands imposed on
the Defence Force or make more resources available. We are destroying the
institution that should be our prime deterrent against outside aggression.
Thank you.

                        GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT SUMMIT

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr S L DITHEBE (ANC): Chairperson, an historic Growth and Development
Summit will take place on 7 June 2003. The summit will be attended by
representatives from Government, organised labour, business and community
sectors. The summit will be a culmination of months of preparation by
various stakeholders to, one, map out practical and achievable plans to
increase investment in our economy; two, roll back the frontiers of poverty
and address the challenge of unemployment and, three, promote economic
growth and development.

The ANC believes that the success of the summit depends upon the extent to
which we all actively take up and implement decisions of the summit. The
ANC believes that Parliament has an important role to play in this regard.

                       SERIAL RAPIST IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member's Statement)

Miss S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, a serial rapist in the Chatsworth area
of KwaZulu-Natal has in two months claimed 10 victims. The rapist is said
to be a man of medium build, in his early thirties, well-dressed and fluent
in isiZulu. He cons female job-seekers in the Chatsworth area by telling
them that he knows of a permanent post for them at the nearby dairy. He
appears to be familiar with the company's employees' needs and is using
this as a decoy to tempt his victims. Clover Dairies in KwaZulu-Natal,
however, denies having employed anyone to canvass potential employees for
them.

The MF is very concerned about this, and is worried that this rapist might
strike again. We call on the public at large to be aware of this rapist and
his tactics. If anyone has any information that may assist in his arrest,
they should please contact the nearest authorities.

It is hoped that the Chatsworth Investigative Unit will receive a lead to
arrest this perpetrator so that he could be brought to justice and removed
from the community before he strikes again. Thank you, Chairperson.

                       PRESIDENT EVADES ZIMBABWE ISSUE

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr C AUCAMP(NA): Agb Voorsitter, die Nasionale Aksie is bemoedig deur
verskeie uitsprake van president Mbeki gedurende die vraesessie gister in
die Parlement, oor onder meer regstellende optrede, ekonomiese groei,
werkskepping en verbeterde dienslewering. Die een, groot vrot kol is egter
weer eens die President se ontwykende antwoord op die kritieke situasie in
Zimbabwe. Mnr Mbeki het weer eens geprobeer om die aandag van Zimbabwe af
te lei deur na ander lande, soos die DRK, te verwys. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP (NA): Hon Chairperson, the National Action is encouraged by
various statements by President Mbeki during the questions session
yesterday in Parliament, inter alia about affirmative action, economic
growth, job creation and improved service delivery. However, the one fatal
flaw is once again the President's evasive answer regarding the critical
situation in Zimbabwe. Mr Mbeki tried, once again, to divert the attention
from Zimbabwe by referring to other countries such as the DRC.]

This tactic to use other issues as a decoy in order to avoid the issue in
contention reminds me strongly of the desperate way in which the Minister
of Health tried to dodge the issue of Aids, by saying: ``I'm the Minister
of Health, not the Minister of Aids.'' Likewise, the President in effect
said: ``Ask me about Africa, don't ask me about Zimbabwe.''

Dit werk ongelukkig nie so nie. Nie terwyl ons op hierdie oomblik die
ergste vorm van staatsterreur en menseregteskendings deur die polisiestaat
van Robert Mugabe beleef, en hy 'n minderheidsregering deur geweld in stand
probeer hou nie. President Mbeki het wel aangedui dat beide Zanu PF en die
MDC bereid is om oor die pad vorentoe te onderhandel. Geen onderhandeling
kan egter plaasvind onder die knuppelhoue, sambokslae en boeie van Mugabe
se stormtroepe nie. Die Nasionale Aksie verneem graag van President Mbeki
of hy Mugabe sal aanspreek om hierdie terreur te stop, ten einde die
noodsaaklike klimaat te skep vir die onderhandelinge waartoe hy glo bereid
is. Daarsonder, kan geen sinvolle onderhandelinge plaasvind nie. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Unfortunately it does not work like that. Not while we are at present
experiencing the worst form of state terrorism and human rights violations
by the police state of Robert Mugabe and he is trying to maintain a
minority government by means of violence. President Mbeki has in fact
indicated that both Zanu-PF and the MDC are prepared to negotiate about the
road ahead. However, no negotiations can take place under the baton
bashings, sjambok lashings and fetters of Mugabe's storm troops. The
National Action would like to ask President Mbeki whether he is going to
tell Mugabe to put a stop to this terrorism in order to create the climate
essential for the negotiations which he is apparently prepared to hold.
Without that no meaningful negotiations can take place. I thank you.]

                       CHOLERA OUTBREAK IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms N D NGCENGWANE (ANC): Chairperson, on 27 May 2003, a total of 232 cases
of suspected cholera were treated in Tonga Hospital in Mpumalanga. A
further 88 cases were confirmed to be cholera cases. Three people have also
been confirmed to have died of cholera. The ANC provincial government of
Mpumalanga visited areas such as Mangweni, Driekoppies, Mkobodozi, Nyoni
and Mehlwane farms, which are reported to be affected by the epidemic.

The provincial department of health, in responding to this epidemic, also
organised media slots to increase awareness about this disease. The MEC for
local government further approved an amount of R840 000 to assist in
ensuring that these rural areas receive clean and safe water. The ANC
welcomes the prompt action of the provincial government of Mpumalanga to
contain the spread of cholera. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        UNEMPLOYMENT ON THE INCREASE

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr R S NTULI(DA): Chair, South Africa is not working. Over 7 million people
are unemployed and many have simply stopped looking for work. After nearly
a decade of ANC-rule, we have lost 1 million jobs. Nearly 42% of South
Africans are unemployed and nearly 27 million South Africans live below the
poverty line. [Interjections.]

The South Africa the ANC ignores is unemployed with hungry children; with
people living in fear of murderers and criminals, and learning more every
day of nepotism and corruption that points to ANC cronyism and of sickly
deals reaching up to the highest level of Government.

The Growth and Development Summit this week is costing us more than just
lavish refreshments for the selected few who are allowed to attend: It is
costing us hope. South Africa cannot afford another failed summit, such as
the Presidential Job Summit of 1998. We cannot afford a Government that
only looks after the employed and leaves the jobless defenceless and
destitute. [Interjections.]

South Africa cannot afford another 10 years of ANC-rule, which consistently
fails to attend to the employment needs of the country. [Interjections.] I
thank you. [Interjections.]

                     MANAGEMENT OF FRESH WATER SUPPLIES

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr B W DHLAMINI (IFP): Chairperson, the international theme for World
Environment Day, which was held on Thursday, 6 June, last week was,
``Water: 2 billion people are dying for it.'' This theme is of particular
relevance to us in South Africa as many of our regions have limited
resources of fresh water supplies. There are areas in our country that are
experiencing shortages of water because of bad planning and mismanagement
of their water supplies.

It is critical that the fresh water resources that we do have are managed
on a sustainable basis. We cannot allow a situation to develop in which
people are without water because, for example, a golf course or some other
development that was not properly planned is using up most of the fresh
water supplies. All the various municipalities, authorities and relevant
stakeholders and decision-makers must work together to ensure the long-term
sustainability of our fresh water resources. This is a precious and scarce
resource that we must not be taken for granted. I thank you.

            WEAPONS HANDED TO POLICE BY COMMUNITY POLICING FORUM

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr R J B MOHLALA (ANC): Chairperson, on Monday, 2 June 2003, the
Atteridgeville West community policing forum demonstrated the spirit of
Vukuzenzele when it handed over confiscated weapons and other instruments
used by criminals to pursue their criminal activities. Those who were found
in possession of these weapons were handed over to the police. The ANC
commends the community policing forum for the sterling work they do in
fighting crime. We believe that it is through such good co-operation
between the police and the people that we will overcome crime in our
communities.
The ANC, therefore, calls on other communities to emulate this example and
not take the law into their own hands. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  TARGETING OF PENSION PAYPOINTS BY ROBBERS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD (NNP): Chairperson, the New NP has noted that over
the past week robbers have targeted pension paypoints in different
provinces, and that in one incident robbers made off with R1 million of
pension money. All these robberies were well-planned and robbers were well-
prepared. It is clear that pension payout money has become a soft target
for criminals. This adds to the problems pensioners are already
experiencing at paypoints.

In many cases pensioners have to walk very long distances to get to their
paypoints and stand in the queue for hours before they receive their
pension money. Not receiving pension money on the day of payment means that
some pensioners will have to go to bed hungry. Pension money is the only
lifeline for most pensioners. It is evident that still a lot needs to be
done to improve service delivery at paypoints. We cannot allow that
vulnerable members of society should suffer because of poor service
delivery and the lack of adequate security measures.

The New NP calls on the Government to fast-track the National Social
Security Agency Bill which, will centralise the administration of social
grants and streamline the process. I thank you.

Hon MEMBERS: Hear! Hear!

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I want to understand from
you if the guideline I have been given by the Speaker of Parliament still
applies: That I respond to all statements that relate to the cluster in
which I serve. And if that is the case, there are six statements that I
need to respond to. Is that the guideline?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Proceed, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. Firstly, hon
Sheila Camerer, your observation ... of course, there are people who are
sitting in the gallery today and there are others out there who were
listening to you as you were speaking, and they are asking the question: Is
this hon member not the member who was Deputy Minister of Justice in this
country who ought to have designed the very programme that she is talking
about? [Interjections.]

The people who are sitting here and the others who are out there are asking
the second question: Is it not possible that this hon member belonged to
this party which was ruling the Western Cape for three years? Is it
possible that she did not have this idea then? If she did not have this
idea over three years, is it possible that she could have had this idea at
any time in the past? [Interjections.] [Applause.]

But, of course people have an understanding of what is happening here. The
point she raised was predictable, because their entire policy is based on
only one thing - statistics. Now, because they are so narrow in their
views, they are going to be narrow in terms of the statements they raise
here and they are going to be narrow in terms of their attention to crime
in this country. [Applause.]

The issue of a possible general amnesty is indeed a question that we are
discussing in regard to the illegal possession of firearms. Today I am
meeting with the national commissioner, who is going to come and present a
proposal to me. I do not know how we are going to deal with this matter. Of
course, I am going to ask questions to ensure that in the end what we put
in place, which I must indicate to the hon member, is characteristic of how
we do things: We sit down and discuss strategically what needs to be done
given the tactical questions that we confront on a daily basis. So I will
ask questions to ensure that in the end, what we come up with is, of
course, acceptable and is in the best interest of our people in South
Africa.

The issue of the SANDF is going to be responded to fully by the Minister of
Defence next week. I understand his Budget Vote speech is Friday next week.
He will be able to indicate what is happening.

But let me say to the hon member that at every turn where we have
discovered weaknesses in our programmes, we have sat down and tried to
rectify those situations. And I'm sure that he will indicate to me what
programme he has to address whatever weaknesses exist in our medical
services relevant to the military hospitals that you have referred to.

This also applies to what was raised by the hon member of the MF. I will be
happy to get whatever information you may have on the situation you
presented here, because the police officials in KwaZulu-Natal must indeed
do everything possible to ensure that that alleged rapist is indeed
apprehended.

On the question of Zimbabwe, the President was here yesterday, talking to
these issues. The hon members had an opportunity to ask questions. The fact
that it takes an hon member more than 12 hours to formulate a question for
the President is not the President's problem. The member had an opportunity
yesterday, while the President was here and while the issue was being
discussed, to ask a question. But as I say, you can't blame the President
if the hon member took more than 12 hours to formulate a question.
[Applause.]

Now, again, our people are watching our session and there are others who
are here today, and they hear someone who is a public representative in
this august House say that South Africa is not working. This person who
says South Africa is not working is a member of this House and this House
is in full session.

Last night he left this House and went about his normal processes of life.
This morning he woke up, came to Parliament and now he says: ``South Africa
is not working''. [Laughter.] [Applause.] In other words he is saying: ``I
am not alive. I am dead.'' And he wants us to respond to such a ridiculous
statement. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I would like to
acknowledge the hon member's focus on the need for clean water and
congratulate him for correctly focusing on local government, the municipal
level, because many people think that water is not only produced by the
skies and the Lord up there, but that water everywhere in the country is
the responsibility of national Government. We are the custodians, but we
can only resolve the problems on the ground through local government
structures, working closely with the community.

The same links to the unfortunate development of cholera, and I also
congratulate the provincial government in Mpumalanga, especially the health
department, for the way in which it is, very quickly, able to care for our
people.

Where does the cholera come from? In this case in Mpumalanga, where 80
people have succumbed, the index case - that is the first case - is traced
to a person who was in Mozambique where cholera has been breaking out for
quite some time, and that person came into the Mpumalanga area. We cannot
find any source of cholera in the rivers there. We need to bear that in
mind. Thank you.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry:

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, hon members,
amanzi ayimpilo. Pula nala gotso. [Water is life.] Last year we hosted the
world summit, called to ensure a prosperous future for our people and
planet. The summit gave us an opportunity to consider how we are
progressing and improving the quality of the lives of our people.
Notable was the high regard in which South Africa is held internationally.
Our environmental policies were praised, our efforts at poverty alleviation
likewise, as well as our commitment to developing our economy and that of
the African continent in a sustainable manner.

Based on our reputation for sustainable use of forest resources, our
assistance was sought to find ways to preserve the tropical forests of
Central Africa; a world heritage that must be sustainably managed for all.
But what was highlighted over and over, was the way we manage our water
resources and our success in making the right to water a reality for the
many millions who did not enjoy it in 1994.

One of the largest events at the summit, the Water Dome, was organised by
my department. Visitors commented that our tap water was not just safe, but
more pleasant to drink than water in many of the world's great cities.

A UN report about the world availability of water reveals that there are
only 30 countries with less water available per person than South Africa.
Water-stressed countries, including Namibia and Botswana, Afghanistan,
Syria and the Sudan, have more water per person than we do.

This budget is presented against the background of a drought hurting many
rural communities in Mpumalanga and Limpopo; a drought which has
contributed to unpleasant water quality problems from Hartebeespoort Dam to
Prieska. The drought is providing a gauge as to whether our water resource
management is really sustainable in our tough conditions.

In 1994, Government made a promise, a compact with our people. The
Reconstruction and Development Programme committed us to the short-term aim
of providing every person with enough water for health, and I quote: ``by
establishing a national water and sanitation programme which aims to
provide all households with a clean, safe water supply of 20-30 litres per
capita per day, and adequate sanitation facilities''. And so we took our
first steps up the country's water ladder - isitebhisi samanzi.

Next month we celebrate the delivery of clean water to the 9 millionth
person, served by this department's rural programme, and I ask you to wear
the badges. Impumelelo enkhulu! That's great progress! Government as a
whole has supplied millions more than that, through housing and urban
programmes, leaving between 5 million and 6 million people still to be
served. The figure will be determined when the results of the 2001 census
are released.

But we are not going to be content when everyone has got onto that first
rung of that ladder, with access to water from a tap in the street and
sanitation. That's what we can call the first rung. What did the RDP say? I
quote:


  In the medium term ...

But we're looking at the short term now.


  ... the RDP aims to provide an on-site supply of 50-60 litres per person
  per day of clean water. Water supply to nearly 100% of rural households
  should be achieved over the medium term and adequate sanitation
  facilities should be provided to at least 75% of rural households.

The promise for the next 10 years is to move up the ladder, from communal
tap - the first rung - to the convenience and dignity of having water in
people's own yards, with each household with its own toilet, and then in
time, household connections with hot and cold running water. Ukugibela
isitebhisi samanzi. [To climb the water ladder.] As we climb the water
ladder so our people will experience better and better standards of supply
and service.

The policy review has considered how to move up to the next step, and
therefore we reject the allegations of a coterie of self-proclaimed real
revolutionaries who have never struggled in their lives, that Government
has failed on its RDP promises. On the contrary, we have delivered them and
more. And the way forward will be outlined in the water services White
Paper.

Many people rightly ask whether our systems are functioning to standard.
Water supply does not end when pipes are put underground. What happens when
a pipe bursts? What happens when diesel must be bought for the pump? What
happens when the operator fails to open the valves to a community? What
happens when some people take more than their fair share of water at the
expense of others further down the pipeline? These issues are confronted
every day in communities across the country.

I asked Prof David Hemson of the University of Durban-Westville - I believe
he's with us today - who had highlighted these challenges, to investigate a
relative sample of our DWAF-funded projects in KwaZulu-Natal. His report
did not give us 100%, and I would have been surprised if we'd got full
marks. His team visited 23 schemes across the province. Seventeen of those
schemes - that's 74% - were supplying water as intended. Only one had a
technical problem, needing a new pump. In three schemes there was no water
because neither the community nor the local government - and I turn to the
hon member there - had paid for diesel or electricity. In the last two,
there was community conflict over how the scheme should be run and who
should benefit.

These findings are encouraging because once these problems are solved, it
will be possible to get the schemes back in operation, providing water to
communities in a sustainable way. My appreciation to Prof Hemson for his
work, which will continue. He draws attention to many issues, from the role
of the communities and the NGOs to compliance with RDP standards, which are
indeed helpful.

As a department, we have surveyed over 1 500 departmental schemes, to the
value of R10 billion, as we prepare to transfer them to local government,
as we must. While the vast majority are working, rehabilitation is needed:
40% because of normal ageing, the way you service a car; 19% owing to
vandalism, including, unfortunately, theft of diesel engines, illegal
connections, which cause leaks and reduced pressure, depriving whole
communities of supplies; and 18% because normal maintenance had not been
done.

The next phase of our work is, therefore, focusing on strengthening local
management and local government. This year's budget provides not just R1,2
billion for new water supply and sanitation infrastructure, but also R116
million for refurbishment, R93 million for capacity-building and R25
million for strengthening our oversight role.

Last year, when we started our policy review, I asked the people of South
Africa: What problems do you have with your water services?, and we went
out through the media, TV, radio and press adverts. The responses confirmed
that the challenge goes beyond infrastructure, with many complaints about
poor service and people not benefiting from free basic water - also
pinpointed by Dr Hemson. Most people had tried to engage their local
municipality, without success, and were extremely and understandably
frustrated. And I greatly sympathise with them and have confronted those
municipalities.

Many municipalities need to improve the efficiency of their water and
sanitation services. They receive substantial grants and municipal
officials are well-paid. It is, therefore, time to ensure that our people
get the service to which they are entitled. The department will
increasingly concentrate on its long-term job: supporting, monitoring,
regulating and cajoling municipalities to provide effective and affordable
water and sanitation services.

It has been claimed in certain quarters that water supply to some 10
million South Africans has been cut off. One zealous Wits professor even
suggested to this parliamentary portfolio committee that the figure might
be as high as 13 million. But, like statements that Government is
privatising all our water services, this is a fable. The Human Sciences
Research Council, which published the book in which the claims were made,
has now stated that the figure was, and I quote from their letter to me,
``a misplaced extrapolation by a researcher of an HSRC survey, and
considerably overestimated the phenomenon''.

There are lies, damn lies and statistics, and there are people who
deliberately lie with statistics. This is a classical case. John Pape, co-
author of the book, who was recently extradited to the USA on charges
relating to the so-called Symbionese Liberation Army, glorified the use of
incorrect information. In a paper entitled Down With Missionaries and
Objective Academics, he encouraged colleagues not to present facts to help
workers make their own decisions, but rather simply to lead them to support
the desired positions and courses of action as advocated by the real
revolution. I do trust he is coping with his incarceration, but misleading
working people by withholding concrete facts or providing incorrect
information is no basis for morality or long-term political success.

I trust that David McDonald, his co-author, of Queens University, Canada,
and sometimes the University of Cape Town, will now retract and, like Prof
Hemson, provide some honest information that reflects what is really
happening on the ground today in a way that helps us solve the problems.

Messrs McDonald, Ed Cottle and Bond, listen up! Banumzane lalelani! The
HSRC used surveys and information from local government and concluded that
``a plausible estimate of the number disconnected at any point during that
period would be about 2% of all connected households''.

And that's a couple of hundred thousand people. But that, they go on, ``the
extent and consequences of disconnections by local authorities remains a
serious matter of concern''. And indeed that does, no matter how few or
many in number. I agree wholeheartedly and have been most perturbed by the
zealousness of some local authorities, from all parties by the way. And I
give an example; Cape Town City, a year and a half ago, at Tafelsig; Umtata
City, where these cutoffs have taken place without any due regard to the
people concerned.

In the three largest metropoles, in the first three months of this year, 53
000 households were cut off, typically for a short time. That is 17 800 per
month. If this is typical of all households with metered water connections,
about 250 000 people would be cut off at any one time, including many who
should in fact be paying, who can pay but conveniently forget to attend to
their bills. And they certainly need to have their water cut off when they
don't pay.

I'm not happy with this number, but it is far from the crisis that those
phone ... revolutionaries have tried to portray and managed to get in the
headlines in The New York Times, The Observer and The Times of India,
rubbishing our country through that disinformation. Our policy is clear: We
cannot deprive people of basic water. Where there are problems, the
municipalities may only restrict flow to the free basic water level -
6 kilolitres a month - rather than cutting off completely. But people,
other than indigents, who use more than the free allowance have to pay, and
if they don't they face restrictions.
The White Paper will clarify this and propose any amendments needed to
existing laws to ensure that everyone, from mayor to Mama noBaba (father
and mother) in the informal settlements, knows that water cannot be cut off
completely with the ANC in power, save where public health is at risk.

The free basic water policy goes further than the RDP, which promised only
a lifeline tariff. Twenty six million live in municipalities that have
implemented this policy. Once again, allegations by the
pseudorevolutionaries that Government has gone back on its promises are as
empty as a leaky bucket.

Many more will enjoy free water from 1 July, the start of local
government's financial year. Given the generous increase in the equitable
share, I will name and shame municipalities that fail to implement.

These and other matters will be dealt with in that White Paper, which will
clarify the arrangements for the transfer of schemes to local government
and for funding through the Municipal Infrastructure Grant. It will also
outline the future of that important family of Public Service providers,
the water boards. I congratulate Rand Water Board on its centenary as a
world-class public organisation. Izandla ziyagezana. [One hand washes the
other.] [Applause.]

Sanitation is our crucial challenge and delivery by the National Sanitation
Programme, including the Housing and Municipal Infrastructure Programme
continues with improved sanitation to over 2 million people last year by
Government as a whole. Over R220 million was spent by my department,
providing toilets for over 65 000 households, last year. Over R320 million
has been allocated this year to provide sanitation in 120 000 households as
part of the national target of 300 000 for the combined programme. Derrick,
I know how you encouraged us to get stuck into this.

This will keep us on track to eradicate the backlog by 2010. We will
promote community-based labour-intensive approaches that should generate
over 600 jobs annually and put R50 million into rural pockets.

The department is helping to eradicate the despised bucket system. The
target for eradication in over 400 000 households is three years' time.
Communities and municipalities must agree on the system used to replace the
buckets - the ventilated improved pit toilets in rural areas or low-flush
waterborne systems in dense peri-urban settlements. Properly built VIPs, as
Mvula Trust can show, are a first class design. The full-flush system that
everyone wants will not work where sufficient water is unavailable. The
department will continue to collaborate with the Departments of Health and
Education to improve sanitation in schools and clinics.

Water resource management makes our water services and forestry work
possible. The current drought highlights the importance of managing the
water we have, both above and below the ground, storing it in wet years to
use in dry years. Ground water, that hidden treasure - igugu elifihlekile
[hidden treasure] - can be much more reliable. The Berg River Project will
assure Cape Town's water supplies.

As announced in the President's state of the nation address, we are
preparing to build a dam on the Olifants River in Limpopo, to supply the
rapidly expanding mining sector's domestic needs. The Lesotho Highland
Water Project is going well, with Mohale dam nearly a quarter full. Its
water will flow to the Vaal when the tunnel is completed, adding to the
contribution that Katse Dam is already making.

Dams are vital to our survival, but the way they are built must not
prejudice local communities as happened with the construction of the Gariep
and Inanda dams in the past. I was shocked to learn of the arbitrary
treatment of the communities concerned by the apartheid government and told
them that while I cannot compensate them directly, my provincial colleagues
will ensure that their suffering is recognised when farming and housing
opportunities are allocated. And I am grateful to the NGO, Earthlife-
Africa, for working with us in supporting the communities concerned.

We need to check our progress in the transformation of the department and
indeed whether we are doing our job as parliamentarians. The evidence for
this is the co-operation we are seeing between Minister, department,
parliamentarians and the public. As an example, the drought has highlighted
the need for discipline in the use of water, and I've recently reported to
the NCOP on the progress we have made on using the eye-in-the-sky satellite
technology to curb illegal water use.

Boere moet oppas, die groot Boer in die hemel sal die vonnis vel as Hy
hulle sien water neem wat nie aan hulle toegeken is nie. [Farmers beware.
The big Farmer in the sky will pronounce His judgment if He sees them
taking water which has not been allocated to them.]

But we depend on information from the ground as well. I am encouraged by
the many who tell us about things happening in their areas, like the
resident who told me about farmers illegally building dams to steal water
from the Crocodile River.

The role of MPs is illustrated by the hon Dr Jean Benjamin, who brought to
my attention the disgraceful attitude that still prevails in some of our
untransformed rural communities, reflected in the way that workers were
treated in a recently established Water User Association. And this, I have
heard, was placed around the hand of a labourer, because they were not
satisfied with his work, and padlocked. But the days are gone when chains
are used to punish people.

Daardie dae is verby om nooit weer terug te kom nie. [Those days are gone
and will never come back.] Zadlula lezonsuku. [Those days are gone.]
Matsatsi awu afitile. [Those days are gone.]

Government officials know - and so do you with your loud mouth - that they
have to respect the basic value of human dignity. There have been
dismissals in cases of gross racism. Workers of Water User Associations
must be treated with the same dignity and respect that they would enjoy in
Government and could expect from any employer. I cannot go into more
detail, because some of the incidents concerned are the subject of
disciplinary proceedings in my department. But I want to assure members
that I greatly value their reports. I will act on them and then report back
to them. I wish to acknowledge the role of the unions in this respect.

My Director-General will establish systematic oversight of the Water User
Associations, similar to the water boards, which has enabled me in their
case to keep a close eye on developments and to intervene in cases such as
that of Umgeni Water. Problems there have been decisively dealt with
through contract cancellations, dismissal of managers and serious criminal
charges. I have been greatly helped by information provided, but carefully
documented information is more useful than anonymous, unsubstantiated
allegations leaked to all and sundry.

The restructuring of the department's plantation forests is continuing, and
I dealt with this in great detail in the National Council of Provinces a
few days ago. All the large plantations have either been transferred to new
operators or incorporated into the SA Forestry Company Limited.

As I reported to the NCOP, the Eastern Cape is an important province for
forestry. We believe that 60 000 hectares of new commercial forestry could
be added over the next 20 years, creating 3 000 direct jobs and producing
an additional R150 million turnover per annum. The department, working with
the relevant provincial departments, will be giving a high priority this
year to turning this potential into a reality. My appreciation to my
adviser, Denis Goldberg up there, for his energy in this regard.

I want to thank those MPs and Forestry South Africa, who pointed out that
payments are outstanding to the communities involved in the Singisi
project. More than R25 million is in the bank, awaiting the registration of
the community property association. As a result, I have raised the matter
with the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, whose officials are
responsible for expediting the process.

Our flagship programme, Working for Water, has cleared a million hectares
of invasive alien plants. National Treasury is currently reviewing how such
poverty relief programmes should be funded in future, and I'm hoping that
Working for Water will continue with a permanent budget and perhaps even
more funds. I congratulate the Ukuvuka Operation Firestop project, which
has just won a Green Trust award.

In Africa, we are promoting the same water and sanitation goals that we are
achieving at home. Through the African Ministers Council on Water, we are
developing an African water facility, a fast-track to fund less wealthy
countries to match the progress that South Africa has made in water and
sanitation.

We recently laid Tata Sisulu to rest and the country reflected deeply on
the lessons we learnt from his life. Perhaps the most important is that
value of putting others before ourselves, of service to others, as with
comrade Govan Mbeki - and today happens to be two years exactly since he
passed away. This is the contract which this Government, through, for
example, the department and today's budget, has with the people of South
Africa and the continent.

In the spirit of co-operation, I recognise the private sector's response to
my challenge to forge partnerships with Roundabout Playpump and can report
a contribution of R21 million to date for 442 of these wonderful playpumps
in rural schools.

I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the dedication to duty of the
new Chair of the portfolio committee, comrade Van Wyk, and the hon members
of his committee; [Applause.] my Director-General, Mike Muller;
departmental officials; ministerial staff; SA Association of Water
Utilities and the water boards; the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority; the
Water Research Commission; the National Advisory Council for Water and
Forests; Forestry SA; Mvula Trust and all the allied institutions in the
water and forestry sector.

6 June 1943, sixty years ago today, saw the opening of the second front
against Nazi Germany in the Normandy Landings, which together with the
blows of the Red Army from the East sped up the end to the Second World War
and liberation. I dedicate this speech, ``Climbing the water ladder'', to
our assault on war, to our war on poverty and an end to the slavery of our
people; an end to the slavery of our people, Mr McIntosh, and you should go
out and make sure - and we all have to - that this cannot happen in South
Africa. [Applause.]

Die dae van die kettings is verby. [The days of chains are gone.] Zadlula
lezonsuku. [Those days are gone.] Phambili! [Forward!] Amanzi ayimpilo.
[Water is life.] Pula nala gotso. [Rain, prosperity, peace.] [Applause.]

Mr J F VAN WYK: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, ladies and
gentlemen, one of my colleagues at the back said, ``Are you only going to
give us these badges?'' I said to her: No, this department is using its
money the way it should - to give water to the people. Let me start off by
expressing our gratitude to all who participated in the budget hearings.
Today, the report of the budget hearings is also tabled in this House.

We also want to congratulate the previous chairperson of the portfolio
committee for her deployment as Deputy Minister and want to thank her for
the constructive leadership that she gave while she was chairperson. Mr
Graham McIntosh of the DA is also leaving the committee. We want to thank
him for his contribution and want to wish him good luck. He's now moving to
the Department of Foreign Affairs and we hope he knows that Foreign Affairs
is not only about Zimbabwe.

There is no news like bad news, especially when Government is involved. The
bigger the blunder, the more eyes are fixed on Parliament. The ANC-led
Government, however, has some real achievements to show since 1994. The SA
Advertising Research Foundation has extracted a development index, which
shows extensive development in South African living standards since the
1994 elections. Saarf's development index shows that when it comes to water
reticulation, the Government can congratulate itself on a job well-done.

I am quoting from a report of the South African Advertising Research
Foundation (Saarf), a nonprofit industry body which does marketing and
media audience research. The ANC will participate in this budget debate
under the theme, ``Pushing back the frontiers of poverty'', in response to
the call of our President during the January 8th celebrations of the ANC,
but also because water is a key factor in socioeconomic development and
poverty eradication.

In 1994 there was no department responsible for water supply and sanitation
and huge backlogs existed. At least 14 million people were without clean
water and 21 million people without sanitation. Since 1994, about 9 million
people have received improved water supply and nearly 4 million received
improved sanitation.
The Saarf research study shows that by April 2000 water had been piped to
76% of households compared to the 68% in 1964. The struggle to get this
basic necessity of life has been reduced in rural communities, with a
remarkable 62% improvement in the number of households that now have water,
either in the house or on the plot. This is equivalent to 1,54 million
households. There is still some way to go as this improvement nonetheless
sees only 42% of rural households with water.

The rate of improvement means, however, that we should see many more
households benefiting in the near future. These figures show that the ANC-
led Government is pushing back the frontiers of poverty. We want to
congratulate the Minister and the Department for a job well-done.

Minister, julle kan julle op die skouer tik. [Minister, you can pat
yourselves on the back.]

The ANC welcomes the growth in the budget from R3,7 billion in the previous
year to more than R4 billion this year - a total increase of 8,6%. The
allocation for water services has increased by 24% to provide for the
refurbishment of the water schemes to be transferred to local authorities,
the acceleration of delivery of water supply schemes and the allocation of
an additional R90 million for sanitation projects.

To reduce the backlog for people without access to basic water services,
this money will be spend to serve another million people with basic water
supply and to provide an additional 120 000 households with basic
sanitation. This shows that the department is on track to meet the targets
of eradicating the backlog in water supply by 2008 and sanitation by 2010.
Indeed, the ANC-led Government is well ahead of the millennium targets.

Owing to the recent formalisation of the division of powers and functions,
there will be a shift in the duties and responsibilities of the department.
The department is, therefore, restructuring to ensure alignment with its
new role as sector leader, supporter and regulator. The current review of
the water services policy will result in the tabling of a revised White
Paper on the services in Parliament.

The future role of water boards is a matter that needs to be examined in a
careful and sincere way by the sector as a whole to ensure that all
institutional and other resources in the sector are utilised to best
effect.

The challenge of water and sanitation provision needs bold initiatves and
strong public partnerships. It is, therefore, important that all
institutions with capacity contribute towards water supply and sanitation
and be given the scope to make a contribution, instead of unnecessary turf
protection. The issue is not about institutions; the issue is about
effective water services delivery.

The report of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review shows that irrigation is
the biggest consumer of water. It uses 59% of our resource. Irrigation
farming has a bad history of racial discrimination and oppression. In the
past, some officials of the department joined farmers in those
discriminatory practices. The recent treatment of the workers in the
Vredendal area shows that some officials and farmers want to continue with
these discriminatory practices. This shows that although a lot of progress
has been made, not enough transformation has taken place in the water
sector.

The representivity statistics of the department indicate that there are
still some small noticeable race and gender imbalances. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Please continue, hon member.

Mr J F VAN WYK: Overall, 92% of the department's employees are from
previously disadvantaged backgrounds, but there are significant
discrepancies in their distribution across the post levels, especially in
the middle and top management levels. Gender imbalances are even greater,
with only 28% of the total employees being female.

Another challenge is the transformation of approximately 350 irrigation
boards into Water User Associations. These boards were historically
established to serve the interest of commercial farmers. There is a
legitimate concern that these Water User Associations, if not transformed
properly, will just continue with the discriminatory practices of the past.
It is, therefore, important that these associations be transformed to have
the appropriate community, racial and gender representation. It is also
important that we have proper oversight over these water associations, like
we have over the water boards.

During a recent study tour by the portfolio committee to the Eastern Cape,
the delegation noted with concern that in some rural areas people didn't
have access to clean and safe water because of the historical backlog
caused by the people on my left. They are dependent on unprotected springs
and rivers, and use the unpurified water that is also drunk by animals.

We further noted that there are some nonfunctional schemes inherited from
the old Bantustans, which supplied water to communities in the past. We,
therefore, want to urge the department and the relevant local authorities
and especially the local authorities, because they are the people who are
on the ground, to look at spring protection and the refurbishment of these
broken-down schemes as interim measures for water supply in these areas.

It was also reported by Amatola Water Board that the annual adjustments by
the department in raw water charges have contributed to the fact that the
cost element is now 22% of the final tariffs charged by the water board to
its consumers. Such charges have increased at an average of 18% over the
past two years, and the average water tariff currently being charged
Amatola Water Board was set at the second highest level to all water boards
in the country. This state of affairs is not socially and developmentally
justified, given the immense services, backlog and the severe economic
constraints in the Eastern Cape.

The 2003 Intergovernmental Fiscal Review also identified the cost of raw
water as a main contributor to the price increases in retail water. The
report also indicated that the price increases for retail water have
contributed towards inflation over the past three years. The huge challenge
for Government is to strike a balance between the protection of our scarce
water resources, accessibility of water services to the poor and ensuring
that pricing policies do not undermine inflation targets.

Nepad provides an initiative for the eradication of poverty and the
promotion of socioeconomic development in Africa within the framework of
democracy and good governance. Its intention is to place African countries,
both individually and collectively, on a path to sustainable growth and
development in order to halt the marginalisation of Africa in the
globalisation process.

Owing to linkage between water and socioeconomic development, it will be
necessary that efficient and sustainable use as well as protection of water
resources become an integral part of Nepad's activities. Nepad includes the
water and sanitation sector as a priority development issue. The fact that
the budget has specific subprogrammes that focus on African co-operation in
all three of its line functions illustrates the ANC-led Government's
commitment to Nepad and to eradication of poverty in Africa.

In conclusion, we want to thank and congratulate the Minister and the
department on the constructive role that they played during the World
Summit on Sustainable Development in strengthening the position of water
and sanitation on the international agenda of poverty eradication and
development. The portfolio committee also participated in the parliamentary
workshop on clean air and clean water as part of the WSSD.

Yesterday we celebrated World Environment Day, with the focus on water. The
theme emphasised the UN's declaration of 2003 as the Year of Fresh Water.
It also highlighted the huge challenge that faces our planet in addressing
the problems of poverty. Participation by young people in the World
Environment Day events and the National Water Week Programme is very
important.

We want to congratulate you and the department for making the Youth Water
Awards part of your National Water Week. Participation by young people in
the programme of this week, during the month of June, the month of the
youth in our Letsema Programme, is very important because water is our
future.

I want to thank members of the portfolio committee, the support staff of
the portfolio committee, our colleagues, Rev Moatshe and our other
colleagues from the select committee, the Minister, the director-general,
the department and all others who played a role in supporting us in our
work. A special thanks to Linton Booth and Contact Trust, who are always
there for us.

 The ANC supports this Budget Vote. Chairperson, I see I still have some
time left.

Die volgende spreker ná my is die agb Maans Nel, en ek hoor die agbare
McIntosh maak so baie lawaai hier langs my. Maans, ons twee kom van
dieselfde provinsie af. Die Nuwe NP het hom verbind om saam met ons te
baklei in die proses van die grense van armoede terug te stoot. Dit is dus
baie teleurstellend, Maans, dat jy liewers wil terughardloop na die outyd
toe. Ek hoop dat die outyd van diskriminasie en onderdrukking van mense . .
. Ek wil dit baie duidelik sê. Die enigste plek waar mense kom wees wat nog
klou aan rassisme en onderdrukking, is die ANC, want die ANC is 'n nie-
rassistiese, nie-seksistiese, demokratiese bevrydingsbeweging. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The speaker after me is the hon Maans Nel and I hear the hon McIntosh
making a lot of noise here next to me. Maans, we two come from the same
province. The New NP has committed itself to fight with us in the process
to push back the frontiers of poverty. It is therefore very disappointing,
Maans, that you prefer to run back to the past times. I hope that the old
times of discrimination and repression of our people ... I want to say this
very clearly. The only place where people who still cling to racism and
repression can be, is the ANC, because the ANC is a non-racist, non-sexist,
democratic liberated movement. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mnr A H NEL: Meneer die Voorsitter, ek wil graag verskoning maak namens
baie van die DA-lede wat vanoggend nie hier is nie. Hulle is by Rudi Heine
se begrafnis in Durban.

Dit is vir my 'n voorreg om, namens die DA, in dié debat op te tree. Ek wil
egter die Minister, wat vanmôre hier allerhande toertjies met 'n ketting
uitgehaal het, herinner aan die rooi ketting wat agter hom aansleep. Onder
die hiel van daardie rooi ketting is die grootste menseregteskendings
begaan. Mnr Cronin, jy moenie nou loop nie. In die geskiedenis van die
mensdom is meer mense doodgemaak onder daardie rooi ketting wat hy aanhang,
hierdie Minister, as onder elke onder politieke stelsel.

My party, die DA, en ek sal saamwerk ten opsigte van die lewering van
waterdienste aan al die mense, asook aan die beplanning vir die volhoubare
voorsiening van water op die lang termyn vir ons land. Ek sal egter ook
krities kyk na voorgestelde beleid, en dit beoordeel in die lig van die DA
se beleid. Die werkwyse sluit ook in die kritiese kontrolering, toepassing,
en uitvoering van wette en regulasies.

Laat my ook toe om die onsin op te klaar dat wanneer 'n mens opponeer, jy
onpatrioties is. Die demokrasie is gebou op 'n paar pilare, waaronder
algemene volwasse stemreg, gereelde verkiesings, 'n onafhanklike regbank,
vryheid van spraak en 'n onafhanklike pers, én 'n sterk opposisie met 'n
alternatiewe standpunt. Ja, ook 'n lojale opposisie, maar lojaal aan die
land, en nie aan die regerende party nie. Tas 'n mens enigeen van hierdie
pilare aan, verwater jy die demokrasie. Om dus 'n opposisieparty af te maak
as onpatrioties per se is om die basis van die demokrasie af te kraak. Dit
is juis die regerende party wat hierdie pilare van die demokrasie moet
koester, uitbou én verder dra.

Laat ek vir u aanhaal wat 'n man wat die hoofverkiesingsbeampte van die ANC
is, mnr Manne Dipico, sê. Hy sê hy is 'n bekommerde man, en ek haal aan:
``Omdat die opposisie bietjie swak is in die Noord-Kaap, in verband met die
werk wat hulle doen in alle gemeenskappe, sê ek altyd dit is 'n probleem,
want dit laat die ANC-lede, soos ek vandag sien, stilsit, en nie die werk
doen wat hulle moet doen nie.''

Ek wil vir Boeboe van Wyk sê, dit wat die opposisie in die Noord-Kaap doen
- die party waaruit ek kom - is ek nie bereid om dit te doen nie. Maar wat
ons gaan doen, en ek is spyt die agb Minister Nqakula is nie hier nie - hy
was vanmôre baie welsprekend hier - maar ek hoop, ek hóóp hy pas daardie
soort welsprekendheid toe in wat daar buitekant aangaan, want ons sal hom
deur ons opposisie dwing om dit te doen. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mnr A H NEL: Mr Chairperson, I would like to apologise for many of the DA
members who are not here this morning. They are at Rudi Heine's funeral in
Durban.

 It is a privilege to participate in this debate on behalf of the DA. I
would like to remind the Minister, who used a chain to perform all kinds of
tricks here this morning, of the red chain he is dragging behind him. Under
the heel of that red chain the most serious human rights infringements have
been made. Mr Cronin, you should not leave now. In the history of humankind
more people have been killed under that red chain which he hangs on to,
this Minister, than under any other political system.

My party, the DA, and I will co-operate with regard to the delivery of
water services to all the people, as well as regarding the planning of the
sustainable provision of water in the long-term for our country. However, I
shall also critically consider proposed policy, and judge it in the light
of the DA's policy. The modus operandi also includes the critical
monitoring, implementation and enforcement of laws and regulations.

Also allow me to clear up this nonsense that when one opposes, one is
unpatriotic. Democracy is built on a few pillars, among which universal
adult suffrage, regular elections, an independent judiciary, freedom of
speech and an independent press, and a strong opposition with an
alternative point of view. Yes, we are a loyal opposition, but loyal to the
country and not to the ruling party. Should anyone touch any of these
pillars, democracy would be watered down. To thus regard an opposition
party as unpatriotic, per se, is to break down the basis of democracy. On
the contrary, it is for that very reason that the ruling party should
cherish, build on and further these pillars of democracy.

I want to quote what a man who is the chief election officer of the ANC, Mr
Manne Dipico, said. He said that he was a worried man, and I quote:
``Because the opposition is a bit weak in the Northern Cape, regarding the
work they do in all communities, I always say it is a problem, because it
allows the ANC members,'' as I see today, to sit still and not to do the
work they should be doing.''

I want to tell Boeboe Van Wyk, that which the opposition does in the
Nothern Cape - the party from which I hail - I am not prepared to do it.
But what we are going to do, and I am sorry the hon Minister Nquakula is
not here, he was very eloquent here this morning. I hope, I hope he uses
that kind of eloquence in that which happens outside, because we shall
force him by our opposition to do it.]

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry sees its future role as
changing from an implementation agency towards providing policy and a
regulatory framework. I agree with this. The question is, however, whether
an independent regulator is not a more appropriate way to follow.

Another question arises from this changed role of the department and the
transfer of the management of water resources to catchment management
agencies, and that is how these institutions will be financed and staffed.
According to the National Water Resource Strategy, it will be financed
through levies. At present, however, the management of water resources,
including personnel, is financed from the exchequer. This levy will thus be
an extra tax, because I do not see any decrease in expenditure on water
resource management in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework.

Ek wil graag die Minister gelukwens met die vordering wat getoonword is met
watervoorsiening en sanitasie. Daar moet egter beklemtoon word dat die
volhoubaarheid van stelsels net so belangrik is, indien nie meer as die
skep daarvan nie. Die Minister moet ons ook die versekering gee dat die
lewering van hierdie dienste op 'n onpartydige wyse sal geskied. In my
wêreld word behuising, en veral kospakkies, op 'n skandalige manier deur
die plaaslike ANC gebruik om vriende, familie, en veral partygenote, te
bevoordeel.

Agb Voorsitter, ek wil graag enkele ander punte opper. Waterhulpbronbestuur
is een van die kernfunksies van die departement. Tog het ek klagtes gekry
van watergebruikers langs die Witelsrivier in George dat dié hulpbron
oorbenut word. Toe die persoon die saak onder Waterwese se aandag bring,
word hy na die polisie verwys. Ek dink dit is die Minister en sy amptenare
wat moet toesien dat waterhulpbronne beskerm word. Dit kan definitief nie
die plig van private mense of die polisie wees nie. Ek hoop die Minister
sal hieraan aandag gee. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to congratulate the Minister on the progress that has been
made regarding water provision and sanitation. However, it must be
emphasised that the sustainability of systems is just as important, if not
more important, than the creation thereof. The Minister must also give us
the assurance that the delivery of these services will take place in an
unbiased way. Where I come from housing, and especially food packages, are
used in a scandalous manner by the local ANC to benefit friends, family and
especially fellow party members.

Chair, I would like to raise a few other points. Water resource management
is one of the key functions of the department. Nevertheless, I received
complaints from water users next to the Witels River in George that this
resource is overexploited. When the person brought the issue to the
attention of the Department of Forestry and Water Affairs, he was referred
to the police. I think it is the Minister and his officials who have to see
to it that water resources are protected. It can definitely not be the duty
of private persons or the police. I hope the Minister will pay attention to
this.]

The next point I would like to mention is the issue of water losses, for
example that of Rand Water, which is 40%. I do not believe that nonpayers
in a metropole like the Greater Johannesburg area can all be poor.

Meneer die Voorsitter, ek sien my tyd is om, en ek sal baie graag dié saak
mooi wou gestel het, maar ek sal dit later in die debat stel. Baie dankie.
[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr Chairperson, I see my time has expired, and I would have liked to
elaborate on this matter, but I shall do so later in the debate. Thank you
very much. [Time expired.]]

Mr M S M SIBIYA: Deputy Chairperson, the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry, like all other state departments, has got delivery programmes
with measurable objectives by which it is assessed. The IFP assessment is
based on what had been allocated and used, but it also entails our input
into what we think should be done in future to address some problem areas.
We note that the department continues to provide water services to areas
where there is dire need for this resource. We really appreciate that. In
giving our input, I will address the following issues.

Regarding water services, the IFP realises that the department has set
itself a target of 1 million people who should receive basic water supply.
This is not an unachievable goal, given the fact that this department has
managed to address water resource backlogs from 1994 to date. There are
many communities and households that have received their basic share of
this resource. Our concern may be that for people who have the meterage of
water, there has been a considerable amount of free kilolitres of water
supply, through the local government, whereas there are areas outside the
meterage that have not received water, let alone free basic water.

We don't intend for the department to rob Peter in order to pay Paul, but
we are basically saying: If Paul is paid, Peter should be paid too. Peter,
in this case, is the rural communities who are always victims of
nondevelopment and/or underdevelopment.

We also understand that the competency to supply water is also assigned to
the local government, which bodes well for the devolution of power in a
democracy. As administrators always say, one can delegate authority and
power, but accountability cannot be shared. We need to assess the impact of
success of water supply of the department and also, fairly, blame lack of
delivery on the department.

On the foregoing, we submit, that the department should also have a
gripping oversight function to see that water projects do not die down even
if they are assigned to local government and water boards' competence.
Accountability and policy development on water are the institutional
mandate of the department. An excellent working relationship between Salga,
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, the Department of Provincial
and Local Government and the National Treasury has led to the development
of a transfer policy with the necessary financial support flowing to
municipalities. The transfer of Dwaf schemes should gain momentum from 1
July 2003.

 The water schemes transfer is a matter of concern. We urge the department
to address this situation. The local authorities seemingly ignore the water
schemes because they believe that the debt incurred through these schemes
should be defrayed first before they take them over. We appeal that this
matter receives the Minister's attention.

The IFP appreciates the fact that 300 000 households are targeted for basic
sanitation. We also commend the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
for the fact that it has made it its policy to supply free basic water
within the broad municipal and intergovernmental policy and to work towards
the goal of access to basic water for all. We note, however, that there is
a long way ahead in addressing the issue of sanitation. Sanitation is a
health and hygiene matter, which cannot be ignored without the lives of
people being compromised.

The problem of sanitation affects both urban and rural areas in varying
degrees. There are some peri-urban settlements still using the bucket
system, especially in the Free State, but in some rural areas sanitation is
almost nonexistent. We believe that both urban and rural areas should
receive a fair share of sanitation projects as an element of the better-
life-for-all principle. We are not watering down the noble efforts done so
far, but we only request an untilting balance in the matter.

Concerns were raised in the portfolio committee that schools are put up
without provision of clean water and sanitation because there are some
arrangements that are supposed to be made with the Public Works department.
We probably need to emphasise that there must be close co-operation between
the Departments of Education, Water Affairs and Public Works, so that
schools are put up with simultaneous provision of water services and
sanitation.

Regarding forestry, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has
transferred responsibility and management of commercial forests to the SA
Forestry Company Ltd. We also note that some other large forests have been,
or will be put on lease, and the process is nearing completion. We support
this as we think that it is a drive to empower self-reliance efforts and to
privatise those services that are burdensome to the state. The commercial
forests should indeed be leased out and/or privatised so that, in return,
the state can derive a commercial benefit of lease from these commercially
driven agencies. The state only renders a service, and it is not profit-
driven.

We appreciate that the indigenous forests are still the competence of the
department. We support the state's oversight in order to ensure sustainable
development to keep and safeguard these forests for future generations and
environmental protection. We believe that the department's protection of
the indigenous forests fairly and duly supplements the exploitative nature
of commercial forests.

The IFP supports this Budget Vote. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mrs M L NGWENYA: Deputy Chairperson, ...

... ke dumellana le wena Ministara le dipatemente ya rena, ge le re ka 2008
badudi ka moka ba South Africa ba tla nwa meetse a go hlweka. Ebile ke
dumellana le gore ka 2003, dimilione tše hlano di tla nwa meetse a go
hlweka. Re a dumela gore ka 1994, dimilione tše lesome le metšo e mene di
be di enwa meetse a ditšhila ka didibeng le diphoofolo. Bwale, ke rata go
tseba gore na Morena Ntuli o wa DA o be a le kae, ge go direga diphethogo
tše ka moka ge a bolela dilo tše a bego a di bolela go na bjale. DA, a le
ke le tlogele go šomišha batho ba rena ka remote control. Matšatši ao a
fetile, a ka se sa bowa. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[I agree with the Minister and our department when they say that in 2008,
all South African citizens will drink clean water. I also agree that in
2003, 5 million people will drink clean water. We agree that in 1994, 10,4
million people were drinking dirty water in wells, with animals. Now I'd
like to know where the DA's Mr Ntuli was when all these changes were taking
place, if he speaks the way he does now. DA, will you please stop using our
people by remote control. Those days have gone and they will never come
back again.]

Stop exposing yourselves. As a member of a committee I feel a very strong
responsibility towards ensuring that the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry uses its budget to wipe the scars of poverty and hunger from the
face of our country. That is our responsibility. This department is
involved throughout all the areas, the remotest places of South Africa, in
carrying out the task of delivering water to the people.

We as MPs and as portfolio committees are representing the people when we
ensure that the department sees to our needs and is aware of our past, our
strength, our humanity and our opportunities. The slogan used during the
world summit, last August in Johannesburg, especially when the marvellous
Water Dome was being unveiled and around the country during the celebration
of water week, was: ``Water is our future.''

The future is not only our tomorrow, but the tomorrow of all generations to
come. We plan to deliver water to our people, who, along with everyone
else, have been left out of sustainable water supply. These are the things
I intend to elaborate on today.
On the road ahead, we see the challenges facing this Government and we look
at what this department in particular has to face. We must also reflect on
the road already travelled and build on the experience and the achievements
of the past nine years.

At the dawn of our new democracy in 1994, the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry was faced with the challenge of developing and implementing a
programme to provide a safe water supply to 14 million people who had been
deprived of the right because of the policies of the apartheid regime.

At the same time, it also faced the challenge of integrating the 19 water
components of former homeland administrations into a single Water Affairs
and Forestry department. This, the department had to do with minimum
service delivery interruption.

We must be mindful of the many things that happened prior to the
department's programme of service delivery and interaction: We have
witnessed the transformation of local government from the interim
arrangements of transitional councils in 1994; the first democratic local
election in November '95; the redemarcation of local authority boundaries
and election in 2000, and now the final phase of implementation of the
powers and functions of municipalities regarding water supply and
sanitation, with effect from July this year.

As parliament, we have examined in detail how the institutional
arrangements can be transformed to deliver the best levels of service in
the most appropriate manner. We are now on the threshold of ensuring that
local government takes full responsibility for its constitutional mandate,
which now entails that the department withdraws from its role of interim
water service provider. It relinquishes ownership of infrastructure that
has existed since 1994 and turns to strengthening its regulatory
responsibilities.

As we map out the road plan for the road ahead, Minister, you and your
department should not underestimate the challenges in your quest to achieve
your target of transferring all staff, assets and budget to local
authorities and service providers by 30 June 2005.

In this regard, I have three major concerns. The first relates to the
transfer of 2 094 staff. Your department's officials did inform the
portfolio committee on Wednesday that through a comprehensive benchmarking
exercise, you have established that the situation regarding potential
overstaffing is not as severe as originally expected, and that through a
process of redeployment the impact on local government will be minimised.

However, based on my experience and knowledge of the situation on the
ground in Limpopo in particular, I must impress upon the Minister and the
department the need to incapacitate local authorities by transferring
skilled, committed and well-experienced people to the affected
municipalities, such as ours and others in other provinces. In this regard,
it is important that the department gives due consideration to an adequate
skills development plan and make arrangements to provide the necessary
training.

My second concern relates to the condition of the infrastructure to be
transferred. As parliamentarians we have on many occasions raised issues
relating to the disruption of services owing to the poor condition of
infrastructure. While we recognise that the department has secured R326
million to start the process of rehabilitation, the question to be asked is
what the department is going to do to ensure that sufficient funds are
provided to complete the programme, without which, Minister, your programme
will be compromised.

My third and final concern for the moment is in regard to the capacity of
local government to effectively and efficiently perform the water supply
and sanitation functions. While I recognise that the department is
transferring human resource capacity and budgets, I cannot help but ask
whether local government has the necessary managerial capacity to perform
the expanded functions.

I would suggest that the department, together with SALGA and the Department
of Provincial and Local Government, urgently assess current capacity and
implement a programme to address any deficiencies.

In conclusion, I must commend you and the department for the excellent
preparatory work done thus far, and confirm that we are available to give
guidance and support to you, Minister, and your department in meeting the
objectives of the programme. Therefore, the ANC supports the budget. I
thank you. [Applause].

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and colleagues, in South Africa,
which is largely a semiarid region, quantitative water scarcity is a
serious concern. Precipitation is typically low and unevenly distributed,
while evaporation is high.

Minister, I and the New NP note with appreciation the increase in
allocation under the various programmes of your budget, which will enable
you and the department to accelerate services under water resource
management and especially under water services to eradicate the backlog in
the provision of water services and speed up delivery of basic sanitation.

I support your statement, Minister, that good progress has been made with
provision of clean potable water and sanitation to the households, and wish
to make the following constructive criticisms for consideration in so far
as it concerns the delivery of free basic water.

Recent visits to four provinces, namely Limpopo, Mpumalanga, kwaZulu-Natal
and the Eastern Cape by a multiparty delegation of the Portfolio Committee
on Water Affairs and Forestry, to carry our their oversight role, but
especially to observe and enquire whether the implementation of the free
water policy of 6 kilolitres of clean potable water per family was
progressing efficiently and effectively. These visits by the portfolio
committee were also to encourage and enhance good governance.

Besides the said visits by the portfolio committee, hearings were also held
during which representations were made on the said subject. Written
submissions were received from various organisations. Most of the cities
and big towns visited by the portfolio committee in the said four provinces
experienced few problems in the delivery of the prescribed 6kl clean
potable water to households. It was especially in the rural areas of these
provinces, where the majority of our impoverished families reside and where
unemployment is at its highest, where problems in the delivery of free
basic water were experienced.

The following are some of the problems municipalities and villages
encountered in the said provinces with regard to delivery of the prescribed
6kl of clean portable water. In the case of the Limpopo province, where the
majority of the population live in the rural areas, where a serious drought
is at present being experienced, where, to a great extent, water for
consumption is derived from boreholes and where, in the case of the
Mokopane Municipality, free basic water had not been implemented owing to
regular shortages, resulting from the fact that pipes are not big enough to
carry the water to surrounding villages and communities, which in turn
resulted in nonpayment by the communities.

In the Mahwelereng Municipality no effective water supply was experienced
and therefore no free basic water was available. The same can be said about
the Ha-Malema village. At the Vhembe District Municipality the water
situation was found to be inadequate. Ninety percent of the population was
still receiving water below the RDP standard. Mothadi village had a water
shortage, although it has two rivers flowing through it.

Areas like Makhado and Tholemela experienced that at certain times of the
day water was not supplied. These were some of the problem situations
pointed out to the portfolio committee as far as the provision of basic
free water was concerned. In comparison with the over 1 000 villages in the
province, the problem could have been much bigger.

In the Mpumalanga province, shortages of water were experienced in
KwaMhlanga in particular, whilst in Nmombela Municipality a huge backlog in
terms of service delivery was inherited. Overall, sufficient potable water
is available in this province, owing to it being a water-rich area.

In the provinces of KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape, similar situations
were pointed out to the portfolio committee. But owing to time constraints,
I will not be able to highlight them. The hearings that were held,
submissions received and presentations made by the various organisations
and institutions also highlighted the problem being experienced by
municipalities in efficiently and effectively providing the free basic
water quota to households in South Africa.

I would like to summarise the problems experienced by municipalities in
general and especially in the rural areas of our country concerning the
implementation of the free basic potable water policy as follows: Lack of
capacity; lack of water resources; lack of a measuring mechanism; lack of
skills and resources; poor or old, dilapidated infrastructure; contours of
the landscape; non payment and cost of recovery.

In view of the problems experienced - listed above - I am of the opinion
that a review of the free basic water policy should take place as it is not
being implemented as intended. I thank you.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the department is faced with a
major challenge of ensuring that our people are able to access clean
running water and of managing our forests in line with the vision of
sustainable development.

We have noted the work done by the department so far in terms of achieving
its objectives. It is also worth mentioning that even the world bodies have
ranked our country as one of the few countries in the world with safe tap
water that we can drink without any fear of being exposed to diseases. In
the past few years, we have also witnessed more than 1 500 projects being
initiated to provide ready access to clean water to more than 9 million
people.

However, there have been reported problems with certain projects, since
their implementation, in certain parts of the country. Some of these
projects have been vandalised. We would like the department to embark on an
audit evaluation to determine the state of some of the projects that it had
implemented and also whether there are gaps that need to be addressed.

The UCDP would also like to bring to the department's attention that much
still needs to be done in rural areas as there are still many who are
exposed to diseases because of lack of clean running water, with no proper
sanitation.

We have to bear in mind that our Constitution guarantees our people access
to these basic needs, and if we are unable to provide such services, we are
not only violating their rights, but also being party to perpetuating
poverty that affects mainly poor people in this country.
We all know that poverty is linked to access to water and forestry. Without
water, our agricultural system can come to a halt as many of our people
rely on it. But, we must also ensure that the distribution of water between
the private sector and our communities is fairly balanced. The same goes
for forestry. If our trees are badly managed, surely we will be faced with
an environmental catastrophe as communities compete with nature for
survival.

In terms of expenditure trends within the department, it is worth noting
and heartwarming to know that the budget has grown, with a fine balance
between current and capital expenditure and poverty alleviation. In terms
of programmes undertaken by the department, we are fairly satisfied that
they are approximately designed to benefit our people, especially that the
budget makes provision for water provision infrastructure.

I would like to ... The UCDP supports the Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and departmental officials,
major strides have been made since our last local government elections in
the year 1999, mostly in our informal settlements, rural areas and farm
dwellings in so far as free basic water provision is concerned. Progress
has been made since the President of the ANC announced free basic services
in 2000. The poorest of the poor get delivery of water in terms of this
policy.

We need to applaud our Government for increasing the equitable share. This
will help the municipalities that have problems in making a reality this
free basic water policy.

The ANC-led Government will not allow any municipality not to use the
equitable share for its intended purpose, that is providing free basic
water. We in the ANC understand that municipalities are different because
some will use the equitable share on developing infrastructure, so each
case will be treated differently.

This House must note with concern the malpractice by some municipalities of
denying the poorest of the poor their constitutional and democratic right
of having access to water, which will not be tolerated.

As the ANC we will not tolerate water cuts whilst we are legislating for a
better life for all. We reiterate that the defaulters need to be dealt with
decisively. When we pass laws we must make sure that Ministers are in
control of the process and can intervene when necessary. To manage illegal
water disconnections, the municipalities can enter into partnerships with
consumers in low-income communities.

What actually happens when a consumer is disconnected from the system for
three months is that the municipality owes the consumer 18 kilolitres. The
provision of free basic water has really changed people's lives for the
better. Women are no longer required to carry the burden of fetching water
from afar, which means that time can be utilised productively.
This policy also contributes to food security. Because of the availability
of water, communities are able to start small gardening projects, which
boosts their health. This policy has boosted the economy in some rural
areas as spaza shops have been opened. We need to see to it that the
indigent policy of each municipality is accommodative of the needs of the
residents it is servicing.

Municipalities need to develop a plan when they do their cost recovery. It
is not for municipalities to cut off water to a whole block of flats
because of a few defaulters. In the same breath, their meter reading needs
to be accurate so that consumers pay what is due to them. This will also
help develop a proper plan because it will give us a proper understanding
of the resources that we have and the pattern in using them.

It in a fact that municipalities are in full swing, providing free basic
water, despite the capacity changes that we face in our municipalities. We
are determined as the ANC to deliver to all South Africans. This is the
core of our struggle since the formation of this organisation.

Our President spoke of pushing back the frontiers of poverty. This is
exactly what we are doing at Water Affairs, and we are very thankful to the
department and the Minister for their hard work. Thank you, Madam Deputy
Speaker. Pula Bagaetsho! [Rain, my countrymen!]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Deputy Speaker, fresh potable water is an acknowledged badge
of modern civilised life. In South Africa of old water was synonymous with
white life and was an effective tool of discrimination. It is heartening
that the Department of Water Affairs has set a clear target for the year
2008, when fresh potable water would become available to every household in
South Africa. Of course, the PAC would prefer the fast-tracking of this
process, with allocations of more funds to this department.

 Water is a priority and, therefore, it should enjoy priority in budgeting.
It is, in fact, cheaper to invest in water resources, the alternative to
spending money on cholera and other water borne diseases. Money spent in
this way is water down the drain. Besides, there are always human
casualties, which in this day and age should be avoided.

Many areas are still without water, despite the progress made. The Nebo
area, my annual song, is still waiting for water despite promises that the
Nebo Dam or reservoir is being built. This dam is, however, still
invisible. And so are the pipes, which I am reliably informed should have
been laid by now.

In this densely populated region water is a scarce, almost unknown
commodity. But I want to thank the Minister for the news on the dam on the
Steelpoort River. This is greatly appreciated and I hope that the Tubatse
River Dam will follow soon.

Recently I visited schools in the area. I could not believe that in May
many did not have books and many had inadequate classrooms. Some supplement
classrooms with squatter, matyotyombe, mkhukhu classrooms. Above all, many
did not have water. Children carried food and water provisions to school. A
simple borehole could relieve the situation until more secure water supply
reaches them. I'm talking about drinking water.

What about sewerage and water for washing hands? The schools I'm referring
to are Moriti, Zenzeleni, Mokgeretla, Motho Mang le Mang, Phatametsane
Senior Secondary School and Lehlake, Phokwane and Petlwane Primary schools.
The situation could be the same in all the 200 schools in the Nebo,
Groblersdal area. I'm keeping a watchful eye on this situation and will
come to this House to share the good news of change, and that will be a
moment of joy and celebration. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF notes the shared spectrum of
responsibility between the various spheres of government, namely, national,
provincial and local government. It is pleasing to note the substantial
increase in the money allocated to the department, and in view of division
of revenue and allocation to provinces, the amount allocated to KwaZulu-
Natal is promising. With the province's many needs, especially in terms of
drinking water, this is needed.

The MF congratulates the department, which next month shall be celebrating
its 90 millionth person to have gained access to safe water. The close
working relationship that the department exhibits with local government is
good, and beneficial to delivery.

There appears to be a pleasing improvement in terms of sanitation. The MF
is, once again, pleased with the allocated funds in respect to KwaZulu-
Natal, noting its population and needs. The allocation would certainly be
kind to pollution control and water conservation. The MF hopes though that
the bucket system will be done away with and that proper sanitation
facilities to be provided. Hon Minister, we thank you for your comment that
this matter is receiving your fullest attention.

It is said that there is such a thing as illegal water user. But it is
understandable that in a situation of drought a balance has to be reached.

The department appears to be making a substantial contribution in terms of
economic and social development in the agricultural sector. The MF has no
reservations as to the department's management of forestry and voices its
support for forestry conservation.

Yes, Minister, uqinisile ukuthi izandla ziyagezana. [it is true that help
is a two-way process.] The MF supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Nkul C J M HLANEKI: Xipikara, Vahubyankulu na Holobye, i ku pfumela loku
tiyeke ka Mfumo wa Afrika Dzonga leswaku nhluvuko lowu yaka emahlweni wu
nga fikeleriwa ntsena hi ku langutana na ku herisiwa ka vusweti na ku
hluvukisiwa ka ikhonomi. Mati, nkululo na mahanyelo lamanene swi tekiwa swi
ri swa nkoka eka ku fikeleriwa ka swikongomelo leswi. Ku ta fika laha,
nongoloko wa nkululo wa Mfumo a wu langutisana na vanhu lava hluphekeke ku
endla leswaku mihandzu ya nongoloko lowu yi kuma hi vanhu lava yi lavaka
swinene. Leyi i ndlela leyi nongoloko wa Mfumo wa hina lowu rhangeriwaka hi
ANC ya ku hunguta vusweti.

Ku vumbiwa ka rixaka ro pfumala xihlawuhlawu ku ya hi rimbewu na mahanyelo
ya xidemokhirasi i ntshunxeko wa Ma-Afrika na vantima hi ku angarhela, ku
suka eka vuhlonga bya tipolitiki na ikhonomi na ku antswisiwa ka vutomi bya
Ma-Afrika Dzonga vo tala lava ku nga vantima na vavasati.

Xiboho xa nhlengeletano ya hina ya 51 xi vula kahle leswaku vukumeki bya
swipfuneto swa nhluvuko swi ya emahlweni ku tlula eka hungu ra muholo wa
nhlayiseko naswona wu nghenisa hi ku loloka eka ku antswisa vutomi bya
vanhu va ka hina tani hileswi ku pimiwaka xiyimo xa vona.

Matirhele ya mati na nkululo a swi nghenisi ntsena eka vuswikoti na vumunhu
kambe swi pfuneta ku hunguta mafu na mavabyi ngopfu-ngopfu eka vana ni
mintlawa leyi hatlaka ku khumbeka. Leyi i mhaka leyi nga kanetekiki n'wina
vahubyankulu leswaku xiboho xa Mfumo xa ku phakela mati ya mahala emitini
na ku antswisa nkululo swi tisile vutomi byo antswa, ngopfu-ngopfu eka lava
pfumalaka swa vona. (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C J M HLANEKI: Madam Speaker, hon members and hon Minister, eradicating
poverty and growing the economy can only achieved through sustainable
development. That is what the South African Government believes. Water,
sanitation and good health are of importance in achieving this. The
Government's programme of sanitation focuses on the poor so that they are
the group that benefits most. This is what our ANC-led Government is doing
to eradicate poverty.

The creation of a nondiscriminatory society in terms of gender, and of a
democratic society, shows the fruit of freedom that all South Africans
enjoy, especially black people and women. We have moved away from the
political and economic bondage of the past.

At our 51st Congress it was resolved that resources should be acquired that
could be used for sustainable development. Water and sanitation also help
in reducing disease and sickness, particularly amongst children and
affected groups. It is an undisputable fact that the Government's decision
to provide free water to disadvantaged communities and to provide
sanitation has improved the quality of life of these communities.]

The scrapping of the bucket system, which is dehumanising our people, needs
to be speeded up. Hon Minister, we know that this is the function of the
municipalities, but they also need to put more money in the sanitation
kitty. The Minister should also put pressure on officials to link with the
relevant department because sanitation is known to be the competency of
this department.

The approach in dealing with this backlog needs to be multisectoral, with
all departments coming together. Policies that focus on equitable sharing
of existing resources are clearly not sufficient. It is now urgent to make
a careful study of the adequacy of funding for proper sanitation provision
both in rural and urban areas.

The school sanitation system, especially in rural schools with no
sanitation at all, is not moving. We would like to ask the department to
make sure that the funds kept by the Department of Education that are
allocated to address the backlog in rural schools are utilised for such
projects so that we speed up the delivery of sanitation in schools.

It has been found that nearly half of all schools use ordinary pit latrines
and that these are insufficient in number, overutilised, unclean and
unsafe. Another 11,7% of schools have no sanitary facilities at all and it
is estimated that there is a shortage of 217 399 school toilets. This is
one of the challenges that our Government faces. The health of school kids
depends on us, so let us improve it so that we have a healthy nation.

Comrade Minister, these problems are the legacy of the apartheid regime
which never prioritised school sanitation. It also boils down to the
allocation of resources. The issues that I am raising, Comrade Minister,
need the co-operation of various departments. The situation has changed for
the better because the number of schools with all the facilities that are
needed have been built by the ANC-led Government in rural areas.

The pollution of rivers owing to the lack of proper sanitation poses a
serious health risk for communities. Cholera, diarrhoea and malaria are
still prevalent. In addition to water provision to households, there must
be adequate sanitation. To avoid such water-borne diseases, the challenge
is to develop early warning systems and rapid response in cases of disease
outbreaks.

All departments that address sanitation have agreed to targeted dates to
clear the backlog. Therefore, more funds need to be secured to make these
dates realisable. We still believe and we are convinced that your
department, Comrade Minister, will be leading in the provision of
sanitation.

The current funding of R1 200 is not enough and that is demonstrated by
different projects that could not withstand strong winds. What is needed is
a proper structure that will withstand droughts and stormy weathers.
Otherwise, we will be doing the same exercise year in and year out.

There are other factors that need to be taken into consideration, such as
the distance from the town and the geographical condition of an area.

Endlele ra ku koxa ri lava ku cinca loko hi tiyimiserile ku antswisa vutomi
hikuva Mu-Afrika Dzonga un'wana ni un'wana ku nga ri na mhaka leswaku u
tshama kwihi, u lava nkululo lowunene. Nongoloko lowu wu lava ku fambisiwa
hi vaaka-tiko leswaku va ta dyondzisiwa hi Ndzawulo ya Mintirho leswi nga
ta vula leswaku va ta tshivela vuswikoti bya nkarhi wo leha na loko
projekte se yi herile, va ta swi kota ku tirhisa vuswikoti lebyi.

Minongonoko ya minkarhi leyi hundzeke a yi nga langutisanangi na ku katsa
vaaka-tiko. Leswi a swi endla leswaku ku nga vi na swikili leswi
hundziseriwaka eka vaaka-tiko naswona a swi engetela leswaku vanhu va
tshembeka eka mfumo leswi a swi onha moya wa ku tirhisina na vun'wini.

Tani hileswi nongonoko lowu wu nga ta nghenisa eka ikhonom wu ta thlela wu
fuwisa vaaka-tiko ku ya ku yile hikuva endzhaku kaloko ku hetiwile hi
tiprojekte va ta kota ku tivumbela mintirho leyi nga ta tshivela ku suka
eka tindzawulo to fana na tindzawulo ta mintirho, tindlu na dyondzo.

Ku dya ngopfu a hi ku hlula ndlala. Xiavo lexi xa amukeriwa hi ANC.
Khanimambo. Se ndzi gimetile, gi![Swandla.] (Translation of Tsonga
paragraphs follows.)

[It is important to provide service to every South African, irrespective of
where he or she stays. All of us need good sanitation. Such a service
should be driven by the community, which will receive training from the
Department of Labour and will also be able to use the acquired skills long
after the projects have come to an end.

Programmes that were used in the past did not include communities. As a
result, there was no transference of skills to these communities and people
had to depend too much on the government for everything.

Such programmes would make the economy grow, and communities will use the
projects that have been created to create jobs for themselves.

I have said more than enough today. This Vote is supported by the ANC.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Deputy Speaker, last night an SA TV broadcast dubbed
the six new parties the ``new kids on the block''. Indeed, literally and
figuratively the PJC is a new kid on the block. On 21 June, at 15:00, at
the Cape Town Civic Centre, we will be leaving our nursery to begin life in
the real world.

As new kids on the block, we have placed water as a priority issue, as,
indeed, it must become a priority issue with South Africa and the world, if
not ``the'' issue. This is because by 2020, as most projections hold, South
Africa would really be looking at severe water shortages. Why should this
be? This is because of the competition between the cities on the one hand,
and the farms on the other. Cities generally win hands down. This is going
to place enormous stress on South African agriculture because we are are an
enormously water-stressed country.

So what are we going to do in order to ensure that the future is not going
to be utterly bleak? There are a number of things that we need to begin to
put into policy right now so that as we come to the future, we would be in
a position to supply adequate water for South Africa.

The Mvula Trust undertook an empirical study. The study showed very clearly
that at municipal and local levels, where there was success, there was a
complete buy-in and participation by the local community. We need to
continue to do this to ensure that our schemes succeed. We also need to
help local schemes by ensuring that they have spare parts and financial
management plans, and that an on-site engineer is available from time to
time.

Privatisation has been going on, but we need to ask whether the equitable
share portion is in fact working as was intended. It is known that poor and
destitute homes have much larger families than ordinary homes. Therefore,
if a home has seven, eight, nine or even more family members, the amount of
water that is made available to it is inadequate for its needs. The family
will definitely then not be able to pay for the extra water that it
consumes, and we have a problem here which needs to be looked at.

In respect of demands on management, we again need to look at several new
technologies and ideas in order to ensure that a universal service in
respect of water is guaranteed. And I wish to make the following point,
that an article that appeared in the Cape Argus last night, for example,
need the very careful attention of the Ministry. We need to look at rain
water harvesting because only a very small portion of rain water is used
for irrigation purposes.

I believe that India, from the studies that we have undertaken, is the
leader in this area and we could learn from them how to harness rain water
for irrigation purposes. Yesterday I spoke of my experience in Australia,
where they use the dual-flush system, whereas in South Africa a single-
flush system might actually be using up 13 litres of water. In respect of
the dual system, we might be able to bring the amount of water for three
litres to half a flush and six litres for a full flush.

We also need to give very serious attention in policy development to ecosan
systems and the use of grey water. It is perfectly illogical to be using
clean pure water which is potable - drinkable water - for watering our
gardens, etc. We need to look at how to use grey water. Also, you will soon
be undertaking responsibility for dumping sites, and as they begin to fill
up, you will need to start giving attention to them.
As my time begins to dwindle, I need, finally, to support your budget, hon
Minister, and to say that the forests of our country, especially the lovely
Nkandla Forest, which lies untapped, be looked at for the possibility of
intrinsic use as well as for tourism.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Madam Deputy Speaker, I do want to congratulate the hon
Boeboe van Wyk on his election as chairman of the portfolio committee. I
think he is going to be one of the better chairpersons and a good Chairman
for the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs, and I wish him well. I think
he has a good man in Mr Maans Nel as the representative of the Official
Opposition on that committee. Both of them come from dry areas, so they
understand the value of water.

The hon the Minister, who is responsible for a very large department, and
who does not need to resort to cheap publicity stunts of the kind which we
saw during his address. He has been doing a good job in a very important
department which administers a huge budget, and doing that kind of thing
only diminishes him.

The privatisation of water is controversial for right and for wrong
reasons. Water supply and services are of necessity almost always
monopolistic. We have in our laws and regulations mechanisms to prevent
abuse of monopolies by municipalities and public bodies that deliver water.
Privatisation of a monopoly has to be evaluated and then monitored to
prevent abuse. This requires that a law be passed by this House to
establish an independent, competent, well-resourced, in human skills and
funds, regulator, which can then evaluate, set parameters and monitor all
water services which are income-producing, especially those that are
financed with private investment capital.

The squeals, which would be the wrong reasons for opposing privatisation,
from the antiprivatisation lobby should be heard, but ignored. Ethics is
not part of the Communist Manifesto. The hon Minister has made it clear
that there are people, who come from the political flotsam and jetsam that
collect around the anti-privatisation lobby, who are cavalier with the
truth and anarchistic in their actions. A regulator is required to assess
privatisation, not noisy NGOs.

The World Trade Organisation is understandably pushing for more
opportunities for water investments. South Africa has many water services
which could be privatised to produce many billions of rands of capital for
other purposes in our society, and also ensure adequate delivery and
increased investment in water services. The Minister should explain what
his department's position is and whether they are preparing themselves for
the negotiations and challenges which the World Trade Organisation will
present in terms of liberalising world trade.

We have in our province things that we call Asmal Memorials. These are the
water schemes to which the Minister has alluded, which are dry and not
working, and which were to be built in the mid-1990s. We are very pleased
that the Minister has used Prof Hemson, who is also of those militants from
the hard left to come in, like making a bad boy a prefect in a school, and
getting him to do a report on that. Some of those reports, as the Minister
mentioned, show what the position is. That is typical of the problems
around rural water schemes in our province. [Applause.]

Rev A D GOOSEN: Deputy Speaker, I will be speaking on Working for Water.
The alleviation of poverty in South Africa has been an important aspect of
Government's policy since the democratic elections in 1994. The Working for
Water programme has developed into one of the most prominent programmes
aimed at reconstruction and development. It has grown from a grant of
R25 million from the RDP programme in 1995 to a massive R440 million in the
2003-04 financial year and spending 97% of its budget.

There is much to celebrate in the work of the Working for Water programme.
The primary consideration must surely be that South Africa, like virtually
all other countries, faces severe potential threats from invading alien
plants. These threats are not trivial issues that can be dismissed as being
in the realm of Greenies, so to speak. These are real threats to our life
support systems which are the basis for sustainable development in our
country.

As the name implies, Working for Water addresses one aspect that can have a
major impact on our water security. Many of the invading alien trees use
far more water than the plants they displace, and left unchecked, they can
have a real impact on water quality, water quantity, in-stream flow
requirements and water reserve that is a core of our National Water Act.

South Africa is a water-stressed country and we, therefore, need to make
every effort to conserve our water resources. By the eradication of alien
plants we are, therefore, not only working for greater quantities of water,
but are also ensuring the quality thereof.

The invading alien plants also have a major impact on the work of the
Department of Environmental Affairs, being widely regarded as the single
biggest threat to our biological diversity and ecological functioning of
natural systems.

The Department of Agriculture is affected by the productive potential of
land being compromised by the onslaught of alien vegetation. Barring this,
we also have the threat of soil erosion.

Through private partnerships, the Santam/Cape Argus Ukuvuka Operation
Firestop Campaign has been created to combat the occurrence of major fires
along the Table Mountain chain. The uncontrolled growth of invasive alien
vegetation contributes to a large extent to this fire hazard.

The campaign also includes efforts at fire-fighting in poorer settlements
around the mountain and in two settlements at the Cape Flats. The campaign
has resulted in the employment of over 1 500 people.

Working for Water has a key role to play in the Nepad vision and globally
in the anticipated high profile of invasive species in the prospects of
free and fair trade. Our country has a responsibility in this regard
because of the threat of alien vegetation throughout the entire region for
in the final analysis, it could affect us negatively.

May I add that, apart from its regional importance, Working for Water has
achieved widespread international recognition, being associated with 34
national and international awards and being a significant factor in the
decision to ask South Africa to host the secretariat of the prestigious
Global Invasive Species programme.

In the past financial year the programme has created over 3 million person
days and employed more than 20 000 people, thus clearing a total of 1
million hectares of land which had undergone initial clearing and follow-up
work.

The programme is thus well-focused on poverty relief. The social
development perspective of the programme has various components; it creates
jobs for previously unemployed individuals, with a strong emphasis on
employment for women, youth and the disabled. The percentages for these
groups are: 54% women, 20% youth and 1% the disabled.

Various projects have originated from the social development perspective of
the Working for Water programme; it provides a minimum amount of training
to participants, including entrepreneurial skills and HIV and Aids
awareness training; it ensures access to child care facilities so as to
release women to the work force; it includes a partnership with the
Department of Social Development to reintegrate ex-offenders into society;
to provide reproductive health care training and support especially to
those employees who have unwanted pregnancies.

It is important to acknowledge that the programme faces real challenges.
First and foremost, the invading alien plants are still spreading and
growing at a rate that is faster than the programme can cope with.

There is clearly a need for better integration between key stakeholders in
addressing this problem. The programme needs better planning and
particularly with respect to emerging invading alien plants, the use of
biological control, the use of legislation as a disincentive to landowners
and those bringing in potentially invasive species as well as to coping
with the effects of fire, which are very hazardous. More research and
assessment needs to be done so as to really get on top of the problem.

Minister, whilst I am aware of projects in the Eastern Cape, for instance
in the Alfred Nzo District Municipality and in the village of Ntsizwa, I
want to request you to consider extending the programme to include forests
in rural parts of the Eastern Cape, where alien vegetation is causing great
damage to indigenous plants. Such projects will no doubt contribute towards
the creation of employment in those vicinities.
Anyone who has tried to establish and run a programme of such magnitude
will know that it is fraught with challenges. Democratic South Africa can
take enormous pride in the vision and determination to address this scourge
of invading alien plants as is now acknowledged all over the world.

I want to commend Ministers Ronnie Kasrils, Valli Moosa, Thoko Didiza, as
well as the support of the poverty relief allocation through the National
Treasury and all those who contribute to the flagship programme of Working
for Water. It is an essential part not only for pushing back the frontiers
of poverty, but is also a quest for making Government's vision of ``A
better life for all'' a reality.

We have indeed come a very long way since the dawning of a new democratic
society in South Africa and the department is contributing a great deal to
the eradication of poverty, for which we are most appreciative. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mnr J D ARENDSE: Agb Voorsitter, die agb Nel se verwysing na 'n rooi
ketting wat deur die Minister gesleep word is vir my 'n duidelike bewys dat
kleur nog 'n baie groot rol in die DA speel.

Ek is baie seker die agb Nel sou baie graag wil sê 'n ``swart ketting'',
want swart gevaar is die enigste beleid wat hulle nog in die DA het. Daar
bestaan niks anders nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die feit dat die agb Nel na die ketting verwys wat die Minister saamgebring
het as bewys dat die werker daarmee vasgemaak was, as 'n toertjie, is 'n
klinkklare bewys vir my dat die mishandeling wat die werkers op plase en in
plattelandse gebiede nog moet teëkom, deur die DA as 'n toertjie gesien
word. Verder kom mnr McIntosh ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr J D ARENDSE: Hon Chairperson, the hon Nel's reference to a red chain
being dragged by the Minister clearly indicates to me that colour is still
playing a very big role in the DA.

I am very sure that the hon Nel would have liked to say a ``red chain''
because ``swart gevaar'' is the only policy they still have in the DA.
Nothing else exists. [Interjections.]

The fact that the hon Nel labelled as a stunt the chain that the Minister
had brought with him as evidence that the worker had been bound with them,
is, to me, absolute proof that the abuse that workers on farms and in rural
areas still have to deal with is regarded by the DA as a stunt.
Furthermore, Mr McIntosh comes ... ]

... and he says, the fact that the Minister brought to our attention the
mistreatment, the abuse of a particular worker, that he brought that to our
attention is a publicity stunt. In other words, the DA says - they are both
from the DA - that when a worker complains about injury sustained on a farm
or in the manner that the Minister pointed out to us, that worker is only
interested in a publicity. [Interjections.] They showed me that they just
do not care. That is what they showed me. [Interjections.] They should be
ashamed of themselves.

Now the hon Bishop Mogoba leaves me ... I do not know ... confused. He
comes here and gives us a shopping list of complaints from schools he
visited. He did not tell us where in South Africa these schools are. I am
assuming, therefore, that it must be in Azania, and if it is in Azania, how
can a South African Minister be held responsible by the Bishop?
[Interjections.]

The legacy of apartheid denied our black entrepreneurs the opportunity of
participating in the forestry industry prior to 1994. During the
aforementioned period, this particular industry was running at a loss,
losing millions of taxpayers' money. This was a purely white-dominated
industry and the ANC have managed to turn the wheels to benefit our people.

In 1994, the then Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, Prof Kader Asmal,
requested his department to develop a new forestry policy for South Africa.
Through this initiative, a common plan was developed to ensure a common
vision for the forestry sector. When we adopted the White Paper on Forestry
in 1996, the department embarked on the development of a national forestry
action plan.

It is through these strategic documents that we were guided towards the
restructuring of the South African Forestry industry. A strong emphasis has
been put on the active involvement of the previously disadvantaged
communities in the management of forestry.

The restructuring programme of the department eventually saw the Government
leasing state-owned forestland to the private sector operators, especially
black empowerment companies.

We've seen huge savings for Government as it transferred forests to the
parastatal Safcol and to private operators, with important social and
economic benefits to the communities and black empowerment. This
contributed to poverty reduction through job creation and income-
generation. We commend the organised labour sector for its involvement in
the process since the beginning.

The forestry restructuring programme involves the restructuring of all
former homeland forests, the management of which Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry took over in 1994. It involves the transferring of the
commercial plantations to private ownership through an open tender
transaction process.

Since the implementation of the forestry restructuring programme share
ownership has been allocated, to the value of R150 million. Communities
identified as rightful owners received market-related rentals on a yearly
basis. Over the past five years state-owned forest parcels have been sold
to various black empowerment companies.

The success of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry's forestry
restructuring programme is laudable. Over the past few years the vast
tracks of commercial forestland has changed hands again, going back to the
previous disadvantaged, whilst still maintaining the principles of resource
conservation, attention to community interest and land claims, generation
of rural employment and the promotion of industrial development through
sustained wood production.

Indigenous forests are essential to South Africa's heritage, wildlife,
beauty and environment. Forestry represents a massive investment in the
country and plays an important role in the rural development strategy. We
have in South Africa 1 100 indigenous tree species, of which approximately
half grow along the south and east coasts and on the south-eastern slopes
of inland mountains.

The protection of indigenous forests is enshrined in section 7 of the
National Forestry Act, which states that: ``All natural forests, whether on
state, private or communal land, are protected.''

Since 1994, there has been a major shift from the exploitation of
indigenous timber subsidised by the state and the loss of access and
control by the community, to sustainable harvesting systems, which are
economically viable and maximise participation by stakeholders and
management in benefit sharing.

I therefore call on all of us to ensure that we apply the advantages
attached to our forestry industry for integrated and coherent socioeconomic
progress, and that we use our country's resources towards creating
sustainable growth and opportunities for all.

Let's concentrate and insist that we promote the new community forestry
programme, rural development and local economic growth.

The ANC supports the hon the Minister and his department in this Budget
Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, Chairperson, and
thanks to all the members for their inputs. I want to thank the hon Arendse
and Goosen, particularly, as time today did not allow me to dwell
sufficiently on the forestry sector. I decided to deal more with that in
the Council of Provinces yesterday.

Given the fine attendance here from the water and forestry alliance, I'm
very pleased that those who are involved in the green gold should see and
hear how Parliament and the portfolio committee focus on the need to
develop this tremendous resource, which makes such a difference to rural
poverty, to our balance of payments, to jobs and to the creation of wealth
in our country.

I want to deal with Bishop Mogoba's point, because he has been raising the
issue of the Nebo area every year running. I thought that he would have
looked a little bit more carefully, this past year, in order to be able to
report to us that bulk infrastructure in the area has been completed. There
are almost 9 000 metres of pipes and pumping in the main complex there. The
village reservoirs and RDP reticulation have been completed at Mabintwane,
north and south, and Green Valley, which are already getting water. Eskom,
sir, is soon to connect their electricity to the system to pump to your own
village of Phokwane.

Reticulation will be completed by the end of this year - R8 million has
been provided for that. Now I know you said you can't see the pipes.
They've actually been dug into trenches, ... [Laughter.] ... which are
covered up. So they are invisible. [Applause.]

I am perturbed about the lack of sanitation and water in the schools. We
have heard from members here - the hon Simmons and many others who do go to
the countryside, like I do - of many areas in the country that are still
unserviced. We have 5 million to 6 million people who still have to be
reached by the year 2008. One can really appreciate that people get
frustrated. They look at other villages that are easier to serve. As the
hon Simmons pointed out, the topography is a very big problem in large
parts of the country.

We really need to assure our people everywhere that the water is coming.
The sanitation - Chief Hlaneki, thank you for your survey of that - is
being improved and increased. And, as the hon Rajbally of the MF pointed
out, KwaZulu-Natal has had a tremendous amount of funding. The same applies
to Limpopo and the Eastern Cape. These are the three provinces with the
biggest backlog.

In relation to this, I would like to make a few quick points about some of
the areas that the hon Simmon referred to. In Mokopane, for instance, the
municipality has entered into an agreement with the local platinum mine to
augment the water supply from the Doorndraai Dam. That project is now under
way. Gomolemo, another one of the villages Mr Simmons visited, is very dry
and mountainous, as he has seen. Ground water is a possibility there.

We are looking for the stand-alone simple solutions before major
reticulation or infrastructure can reach villages. We do look for these
opportunities. I know that the department has been having some problems
because of the dryness of the area. We have nine Cuban specialists seconded
to the department. They are doing a marvellous job, because Cuba is
excellent in terms of simple stand-alone schemes which are closely related
to villages.

One of the critiques they gave me, when I had a couple of engineers over
here two years ago, while praising what we were doing, was: ``Minister, as
a country you seem to be going too much in for the more elaborate schemes.
Why don't you explore the ground water and put in simple stand-alone
schemes in some villages?'' My director-general knows that we're inclined
that way. With regard to the areas that are hard to get to, let's try to
find these methods to bring water to those people sooner.

 In relation to Makhado, which you mentioned, bulk water is supplied from a
regional water scheme, which is not big enough ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: ... to supply all the
communities.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Carry on, hon Minister. I'm trying to
get the House to listen to what you are saying.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Well, in that case, maybe cheap
publicity stunts get people to listen. Mine was not a cheap publicity
stunt, as the hon Arendse mentioned. Why is it a cheap publicity stunt when
a Minister in charge of a department of 27 000 people and attendant
projects such as Water User Associations, learns that something as barbaric
has taken place as somebody being put in chains?

Do I keep quiet, or is it not Parliament and the members of Parliament from
all parties who need to be informed that this is happening? And is
Parliament not the best place to sensitise our country and our departments
so that people should realise that when these kinds of dreadful, scandalous
events take place, we are not just going to be quiet? [Interjections.] I
can have my disciplinary hearing in my department and no one will hear
about it. In six months' time, some official or supervisor will be
disciplined, and that's it.

It seems that we have some people over there, in that party, who don't want
to hear these things. Talk about cheap publicity stunts: Mr McIntosh is the
man who, over three years ago ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Hon member, are you
rising on a point of order?

Mr I J PRETORIUS: No, Chairperson. I would like to ask the Minister whether
he will take a question. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: No, I'm not taking a question.
I'm finishing what I have to say, thank you very much.

We can remember one of the cheapest publicity stunts played, not actually
on us here, but on the leader, no less, of the DA, who was taken to KwaZulu-
Natal by one hon McIntosh. He was taken to Keate's Drift on the Mooi River,
with the press in attendance, to turn on a tap. And lo and behold, it was
dry; nothing came out. [Interjections.]

So, of course, he calls that an Asmal monument. That came from a previous
homeland that ran that province. It was a derelict scheme. It had nothing
to do with the honourable and illustrious predecessor of mine. It was a
totally derelict scheme. Here, the magician takes his leader to show the
nation that there is no water: ``Just look how this department and
Government fail.'' [Interjections.]

He talks about David Hemson as ``hard left''. He doesn't understand what
I've said. David Hemson, or anybody else, including him, can be hard left,
hard right or in the centre, but I'm not looking at ideology. What I'm
saying about the gentlemen, Pape & Company, is that they come with
incorrect facts, like this man here, McIntosh, who, with his name, ought to
have more reverence for water and the truth. He should dry his raincoat
more often, now, I believe, in the foreign affairs committee. But that is
cheap publicity stuntism.

What David Hemson did, irrespective of whether he comes from a left, right
or whatever background, is to seek to find fact, and to say: ``These are
facts,'' and to seriously look at them. That is the spirit in which I'm
raising the point about the individuals concerned.

But what do we get from these hon members here? [Interjections.] We get
nothing but hot air and cheap tricks over and over again. And, of course,
for them if you show up a chain, it's got to belong to the communist era;
it's got to belong to another country. They don't see that what the chain
represents for us South Africans, and what it would represent for any
labourer in this country, is the image of slavery that the Western Cape
agriculture was built on. When I see something like this happening in the
Western Cape today, to do with water services, certainly, I am not going to
ignore it and I will bring it here. I saw the chain yesterday, and I
thought: My goodness! This is what is wrapped around an individual, and
people say ``in jest''. But just look at the court jester here.
[Interjections.]

 Now, as far as you are concerned, you've learnt nothing and will never
learn anything. Go to Keate's Drift and twiddle around with those derelict
taps and hail, lo and behold the fact that water doesn't come.

Let me say that right across the river from Keate's Drift I opened a
project for 250 000 people, within six months of his leader turning on the
dry tap, with His Majesty the King of the Zulu people, and they are
receiving their water to this day. And, yes, we provide free water, the
only country in the world that provides a degree of free water to our
people. [Applause.] Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 11:44.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


     (1)    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:


         Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by Council on 5 June
         2003 and transmitted for consideration of Council's proposed
         amendments:


         (i)     Anti-Personnel Mines Prohibition Bill [B 44B - 2002]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
              Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 3 June 2003, p
              535).


         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence
         of the National Assembly for a report on the amendments proposed
         by the Council.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Sasria for 2002.


     (2)    Government Notice No 631 published in Government Gazette No
         24845 dated 16 May 2003: Borrowing powers of Water Boards listed
         under Schedule 3, Part B of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


     (3)    Proclamation No R.34 published in Government Gazette No 24772
         dated 17 April 2003: Commencement of the Division of Revenue Act,
         2003 (Act No 7 of 2003).

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Strategic Plan for the Department of Local Government and
     Administration for 2003-2006.

3.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Medium term Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
     Administration for 2003-2006.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Report of the Independent Experts' Assessment on Women, War and Peace.
     The report is also available on the parliamentary website at
     www.parliament.gov.za

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Special Pensions
     Amendment Bill [B 35 - 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 28 May
     2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 35 - 2002] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 35A - 2002].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Financial and
     Fiscal Commission Amendment Bill [B 21 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec
     76), dated 30 May 2003:
         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Financial and Fiscal Commission Amendment Bill [B 21 -
         2003] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 21A - 2003].



