---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 April 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-04-08
---

TUESDAY, 8 APRIL 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day:


  That the House, in view of the forthcoming Growth Summit, resolves to
  debate fully those steps which South Africa needs to take if the ideal of
  faster economic growth and job creation is to be realised.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day:


  That the House resolves to send a parliamentary delegation to Zimbabwe
  which will meet with all stakeholders, including the opposition and civil
  society organisations, and will report back to Parliament on the true
  situation in that country and what South Africa can do to assist the
  people of Zimbabwe to restore democracy.

                       WORLD HEALTH DAY, 7 APRIL 2003

                             (Draft Resolution)

THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I hereby move without
notice that the House:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the international community celebrated World Health Day on 7
           April 2003;


       (b)  the theme for this year's celebration was: A Healthy Environment
           for Children; and


       (c)  this year's celebration seeks to highlight the fact that
           millions of children die annually from environmentally related
           illnesses and therefore seeks to promote a healthy environment
           for children; and


  (2) calls on all the people of South Africa to rise to this challenge of
       promoting a healthy environment for children as part of the
       Government's focus on health awareness in the month of April.

Agreed to.

 LUNCH IN HONOUR OF VETERANS OF LIBERATION STRUGGLE HOSTED BY NELSON MANDELA
                                 FOUNDATION

                            (Member's Statement)

Mrs C I LUDWABE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Nelson Mandela Foundation hosted
a lunch in honour of the veterans of the liberation struggle on 6 April
2003 in the Sandton Convention Centre. This event also occurred in the
context of the commemoration of the cowardly assassination of Comrade Chris
Thembekile Hani, the leader of the stalwarts of our movement, Comrade O R
Tambo, and the hanging of the combatant of the people's army, uMkhonto
weSizwe, Solomon Kalusha Mahlangu.

These and many unsung heroes have played an important role in the struggle
for a free, nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and people's South Africa.
Forward to the struggle for the reconstruction and development of our
country. It was fitting for the Nelson Mandela Foundation to host this
lunch in honour of those gallant fighters. We reassure those cadres that
the ANC remains steadfastly working for the realisation of the noble ideas
for which they were prepared to make the supreme sacrifice. Aluta Continua.
[Applause.]

                            ERADICATION OF RACISM

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF (DA): Mevrou die Speaker, rassisme word baiemaal
verkeerdelik, veral deur politici, misbruik om politieke punte teen mekaar
aan te teken. Te veel word rassisme as 'n verweer geopper, veral wanneer
die argument nie genoeg meriete het nie.

Wat onlangs met Lericia Langenhoven by die skoonheidsalon in Welgemoed
gebeur het, is totaal onverskoonbaar en blatante rassisme. Vir 'n
sakepraktyk om agter rassisme te skuil en dan 'n hele gemeenskap met die
rassekwas te teer en veer is verregaande.

Ek hoop en vertrou dat die salon met die volle geweld van die reg getref
sal word. Die salon was verkeerd, rassisties en uiters selfsugtig om agter
sogenaamde wit, gesiglose vroue te skuil. Mej Langenhoven het haar posisie
op meriete behaal en moet in enige plek in Suid-Afrika kan werk. Sy is
welkom in Welgemoed.

Alle Suid-Afrikaners moet saamstaan teen rassisme. Die beste wyse is om
prontuit daaroor te praat en dit dan te ontbloot. Die aanval en uitroei
moenie verdelend wees nie, maar 'n gemeenskaplike faktor van ons almal se
strewe om daarvan ontslae te raak. Suid-Afrika het rassisme nie meer nodig
nie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member's statement follows.)

[Mr N J J VAN R KOORNHOF (DA): Madam Speaker, racism is often wrongly used,
particularly by politicians, to score political points against one another.
Too often racism is used as a defence, especially when the argument does
not have enough merit.

What happened to Lericia Langenhoven at the beauty salon in Welgemoed
recently is totally inexcusable and blatant racism. It is preposterous for
a business to hide behind racism and then to tar and feather a whole
community with the racism brush.

I hope and trust that the salon will meet with the full force of the law.
The salon was at fault, racist and extremely selfish to hide behind so-
called white, faceless women. Ms Langenhoven attained her position on merit
and should be able to work in any place in South Africa. She is welcome in
Welgemoed.

All South Africans must stand together against racism. The best way is to
speak openly about it and then to expose it. The onslaught and eradication
must not be a dividing, but a common factor in the pursuit by all of us to
get rid of it. South Africa does not need racism anymore. [Applause.]]

                    WORLD HEALTH DAY - FOCUS ON CHILDREN

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr E T FERREIRA (IFP): Madam Speaker, yesterday was World Health Day and it
focused on healthy environments for children. In developing countries it is
estimated that one out of five children die from environmentally related
illnesses. This figure shows that our children are the most vulnerable
people who are severely affected by environmental hazards. This
vulnerability is caused by the fact that children breath more air and
consume more food and water than adults do in relation to their weight.

Our country is faced with a big challenge, as one of the top five killers
of children, especially in rural areas, is diarrhoea, which has been
associated with inadequate access to water, sanitation and hygiene
education. Our people in the rural areas also are exposed to air pollution
on a daily basis as they use coal, wood and cow dung to make fire for food
as well as to keep warm in winter. This can lead to increased acute
respiratory infections, such as pneumonia, in young children.

There is therefore an urgent need for the creation of healthy settings in
homes and the community at large and for education of our people on
alternative means of energy that are safe and healthy for the sake of our
environment and, more importantly, of our children.

                            ERADICATION OF RACISM

                            (Member's Statement)

Mev R R JOEMAT (ANC): Geagte Speaker, mej Lericia Langenhoven van
Kuilsrivier het 'n vernederende daad van rassistiese diskriminasie beleef.
Dit het gebeur toe 'n Welgemoedse skoonheidsalon geweier het om haar as 'n
intern aan te stel op grond daarvan dat sy 'n persoon van kleur is. Dit
word gesê dat die eienaar 'n stelling geuiter het dat haar kliënte nie deur
'n persoon van kleur gehanteer sal word nie.

Alle Suid-Afrikaners werk hard om rassistiese diskriminasie en
rassevooroordeel uit te wis. Hulle slaag daarin om 'n nasie te bou verenig
in verskeidenheid. Die ANC-regering het die Menseregtekommissie ingestel en
het wetgewing deurgevoer soos dié oor die bevordering van gelykheid en die
voorkoming van onregverdige diskriminasie, nuwe wetgewing oor
arbeidverhoudings en vele ander wette wat die voorkoms van rassisme bekamp.

Hierdie is 'n geïsoleerde voorval, maar nogtans beklemtoon dit die
belangrikheid daarvan dat 'n verenigde nasie gebou moet word. Rassistiese
diskriminasie en vooroordeel is iets uit die ou bedeling en mag nie in die
nuwe Suid-Afrika verdra word nie. Die ANC doen 'n beroep op die eienaar van
die skoonheidsalon in Welgemoed om mej Lericia Langenhoven en haar familie
om verskoning te vra vir die vernedering wat hulle deurgemaak het.

Die ANC doen verder 'n beroep dat alle gemeenskappe en persone wat nog
steeds rassistiese gedagtes huldig en wat nog steeds rassisme in ons
gemeenskappe aanblaas, geïsoleer en ontbloot moet word. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member's statement follows.)

[Mrs R R JOEMAT (ANC): Madam Speaker, Miss Lericia Langenhoven from
Kuilsriver has experienced a humiliating act of racial discrimination. It
happened when a beauty salon in Welgemoed refused to appoint her as an
intern on the grounds that she is a person of colour. It has been alleged
that the owner uttered a statement that her clients would not want to be
dealt with by a person of colour.

All South Africans are working hard to eradicate racial discrimination and
racial prejudice. They are successful in building a nation united in its
diversity. The ANC Government has established the Human Rights Commission,
and passed legislation promoting equality and preventing unfair
discrimination, new legislation pertaining to labour relations, and many
other Acts to combat the occurrence of racism.

This is an isolated case, but it nevertheless emphasises the importance of
building a united nation. Racial discrimination and prejudice come from the
old dispensation, and may not be tolerated in the new South Africa. The ANC
appeals to the owner of the beauty salon in Welgemoed to apologise to Miss
Lericia Langenhoven and her family for the humiliation they suffered.

The ANC further appeals that all communities and people who are still
harbouring racist thoughts, and who are still stirring up racism in our
communities, be isolated and exposed. [Applause.]]

                              VICTIMS OF CRIME

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr J SCHIPPERS (Nuwe NP): Mevrou die Speaker, die wrede verkragting van 'n
62-jarige vrou in Uitenhage hierdie naweek en die moord op nog 'n kind
gister op die Kaapse Vlakte bevestig weer eens dat misdadigers geen respek
vir die waarde van lewe het nie. Die Nuwe NP erken die feit dat
wetsgehoorsame Suid-Afrikaners toenemend gefrustreerd en woedend raak.

Die stryd tussen wetsgehoorsame, eerlike Suid-Afrikaners en die misdadigers
wat aas op kinders en gesinne is 'n territoriale stryd om oorlewing. Elke
vermoorde kind is een te veel. Elke verkragting, elke aanval en elke moord
is nog 'n bitter pil waaraan Suid-Afrikaners moet wurg. Die Nuwe NP glo dit
is tyd om die slagoffers van misdaad te bemagtig om 'n aktiewe rol te
speel, om misdadigers te laat boet en om hulle vonnisse vas te stel.

Die Nuwe NP doen 'n beroep op die Regering om sonder verwyl 'n taakspan
saam te stel om die herinstelling van die doodstraf te ondersoek asook
maatreëls vir die toepassing daarvan op te stel. Die Regering moet alles
denkbaar doen om die skuldiges vas te trek en te straf. Dit is tyd vir die
slagoffers van misdaad om gehoor te word. Ek dank u. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member's statement follows.)

[Mr J SCHIPPERS (New NP): Madam Speaker, the cruel rape of a 62-year-old
woman in Uitenhage this weekend and the murder of another child on the Cape
Flats yesterday once more confirm that criminals have no respect for the
value of life. The New NP admits the fact that law-abiding South Africans
are becoming increasingly frustrated and angry.

The fight between law-abiding, honest South Africans and the criminals who
prey on children and families is a territorial fight for survival. Every
murdered child is one too many. Every rape, every assault and every murder
is yet another bitter pill on which South Africans must choke. The New NP
believes that the time has come for victims of crime to be empowered to
play an active role, to make criminals pay and to determine their
sentences.

The New NP appeals to the Government to compile a task team without delay
to investigate the re-introduction of capital punishment as well as to
introduce measures for its application. The Government must do everything
imaginable to apprehend and punish those who are guilty. It is time for the
victims of crime to be heard. I thank you. [Interjections.]]

   THEFT OF IDENTITY DOCUMENTS FROM THE EASTERN CAPE HOME AFFAIRS OFFICES

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr J T MASEKA (UDM): Madam Speaker, in the past month Home Affairs offices
in the Eastern Cape have been the victims of various break-in incidents. Of
specific concern is the fact that the criminals appear to be targeting
identity documents for theft. For instance, in Ntabankulu 481 identity
books were stolen from the Home Affairs office there, and in Centane
hundreds of ID books were also recently stolen. In total, several hundreds
of ID books have been stolen in the past month in various break-ins.

This theft can only have sinister motives. These criminals will no doubt
use these documents in a variety of crimes and fraud, from fraudulent bank
loan applications to fraud committed with social grants. Apart from this
danger, there is the very real danger that the applicants whose ID books
have been stolen are not able to access a wide range of private and
Government services. Many of these people are desperately poor, and hence
these thefts are a direct threat to their livelihoods. In addition, the
elections are near and these people will be deprived of their democratic
right to vote if they are without the required ID books.

The UDM urges Government to immediately investigate these incidents which
bear the hallmark of an organised crime syndicate. Government must also
immediately institute special measures to ensure that the issuing of new ID
books to the affected people is not delayed for another number of months.

   VANDERBIJLPARK CONSTITUENCY OFFICE FINDS A HOME FOR A HOMELESS ELDERLY
                                    WOMAN

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms D M MOROBI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the parliamentary constituency office
in Vanderbijlpark in the Vaal Triangle and Councillor Nellie Mutyele
intervened and highlighted the plight of 69-year-old Nkubonyane Agnes
Melatu, who lived under a tree for five years. Mme Agnes's life as a
homeless person started when her former employers relocated to Cape Town.
Councillor Nellie Mutyele found an alternative home for Agnes at
Vukuzenzele Home for the Aged.

When Mme Agnes's story was published in Metro newspaper, her family was
able to track her down to Vukuzenzele Home for the Aged, and now Mme Agnes
is reunited with her family from whom she had been separated for 20 years.
The ANC commends its cadres who have taken it upon themselves to intervene
in the case of Mme Agnes. This intervention was made without the
expectation of a reward. It was simply the goodwill of these cadres, guided
by the spirit of voluntarism, that made them act in the manner that
improved the life of Mme Agnes.

These interventions are also in line with the ANC's 51st National
Conference resolution on the aged which states that the ANC must take the
lead in creating a caring environment for the elderly.

It is this spirit that must guide us all as South Africans when we pose the
question: What can we do both as individuals and as a collective to lend a
helping hand to improve the lives of the poor? The ANC calls on patriots to
emulate this shining example and work for a better future for all South
Africans. [Applause.]

               AFTERMATH OF CROSSING-OF-THE-FLOOR LEGISLATION

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Madam Speaker, the period for members to cross from
one party to the other has come and gone, leaving in its wake differences
among parties represented in this Parliament. Some parties have grown and
enhanced their stature; some have lost members to the point of designation;
some have remained unscathed; some have been obliterated from the political
scene, while others have come up like typical laat lammetjies.

Some of the hon members who have abandoned their parties did this after
strenuous denial that they would indeed cross to other parties or form new
ones. This in itself brings to life the question of to what extent
politicians can be taken at their word. It calls for clarity on whether
their yes is yes, and conversely.

Other members have been so creative and imaginative to establish and
register new parties which we hope will enjoy long life and bring about
dynamism in the political scene. Some parties have remained intact while
others have only gained in the process. These are surely parties of the
future whose members remain as constant as the northern stars and who even
went as far as to convert other members.

Let us hope then that we as members will be able to find one another and
keep the light of multipartyism aglow.
                       TREATMENT OF OLD AGE PENSIONERS

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Speaker, recently old age pensioners died in a
long queue while waiting to receive their pensions. This was in Mount
Fletcher in the Eastern Cape. It is reported that their families have been
given R3 000 as compensation and were assisted with funeral expenses only
by the Government.

The PAC has made concerted efforts to speak to some Government officials
about this matter, but it seems their lips are sealed on this issue. Even
concerned traditional leaders such as Lebenya and Lehana could not get any
information.

All pensioners are humiliated every month. Sometimes, in some areas, when
they arrive there are no Government officials to pay the pensioners, or the
money runs out. Many times they have to stand in the queue for days before
they are paid. It is not unusual for old pensioners to spend a night
sleeping in the queue. The PAC demands a more respectable way of dealing
with old pensioners. They are our senior citizens. They should not be
subjected to this bitter life.

Families of the old pensioners who died in Mount Fletcher must be properly
compensated. The amount of R3 000 and payment for funeral expenses is an
insult to the intelligence of the African people. The officials concerned
must be fired. If a private company is involved in this matter, its
contract must be terminated. A better way of paying pensioners without
humiliating them must be found.

It is disturbing that only African people are subjected to these atrocious
conditions and service on pension day.

                              GLOBAL IDEA AWARD

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The giant
billboard in the Johannesburg inner city, the cultural meeting place, won
the Global Idea Award. This billboard contains Nicky Blumenfeld's ``African
Goddess at Work''. This award was launched in August last year and aims to
recognise the best media campaign worldwide, with the least negative impact
on the environment.

This initiative also seeks to encourage individual expression from new
artists. This project is important, because it contributes to
Johannesburg's inner city development and to Government's broader urban
renewal strategy. These artworks encourage tourists to visit the cultural
meeting place, thus attracting buying power and creating a viable market
for artists and other traders in order to showcase their products.

The ANC congratulates all sectors - the Government, the private sector and
civil society - for actively embarking on projects that contribute to inner
city development, and to the implementation of a broader urban renewal
strategy.

Re re Gauteng ha e hole, Johannesburg e boele e be le matla a yona hape.
Vuk'uzenzele Gauteng. Ke a leboha. [We say, let Gauteng develop and let
Johannesburg regain its strength. Vukuzenzele, Gauteng. Thank you.]

                              DRIVER'S LICENCES

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr J SELFE (DA): Madam Speaker, in reply to a question of mine yesterday,
the acting Minister of Transport admitted that more than 50% of all
driver's licences issued were invalid. Considering the fact that there are
about 7 million South African driver's licences, this means that more than
3,5 million of these could be invalid. Some licences have been withdrawn,
but this is merely scratching the surface of the problem. The whole purpose
of the credit card format driving licence was to remove any possibility of
fraud and malpractice in the issuing of licences.

Now, after spending millions of rands of taxpayers' money, and after
threats to prosecute those who do not convert their licences, we find that
the system is just as unsound and open to corruption as the original one.
This constitutes an indictment of the system. It also makes a mockery of
the time, effort and money spent by hundreds of thousands of honest
motorists to convert their licences. More seriously, it means that our
streets and highways are just as unsafe as they have ever been.

                          OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC FINES

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr M S M SIBIYA (IFP): Madam Speaker, it is highly worrisome that Cape Town
city alone is owed more than R300 000 in unpaid traffic fines. It is
reported that five minibus taxis and five other cars owe from R19 000 to
R4 000 each in unpaid traffic fines.

One wonders what the situation is in other cities and towns. The money owed
could have been ploughed back into development projects. It is incumbent
upon an offending driver to own up to his or her offence, but if co-
operation is not forthcoming on the part of the offending driver, it
becomes incumbent upon the traffic authority to make an offending driver
own up to his or her offence by using applicable procedures and laws to
make them own up. I thank you.

             RIGHT-WING SUPPORT FOR THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr C B HERANDIEN (Nuwe NP): Mevrou die Speaker, 'n onlangse meningspeiling
van markdata deur die Helen Suzmanstigting, het bevind dat die DA leier,
die agb Tony Leon, naas die VF se leier, die meeste steun by regses het.
Die agb Leon het 32% van die steun, teenoor die agb Mulder se 42%.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Hierdie peiling bevestig die vermoede dat die DA 'n regse magsbasis het.
Dit is ook duidelik dat die DA die KP vervang het, en dat die DA met sy
groeiende regse magsbasis besig is om die VF in te haal. Die DA bluf
hulself as hulle dink hul steun is gebaseer op hul kamtige liberale
oortuigings, want dit is die regse fondament waarop die DA gebou is wat die
agb Tony Leon die gewildste regse leier maak. Dit is nie wittes wat al hoe
meer regs beweeg nie, maar eerder slegs die DA, en daarom is hulle regse
magsbasis ook besig om uit te brei.

Hierdie peiling toon ook dat die DA nie 'n party is wat alle Suid-
Afrikaners se belange op die hart dra nie, maar eerder een wat hunker na
die ou Suid-Afrika. Die Nuwe NP weet dat Suid-Afrika aan alle Suid-
Afrikaners behoort, en dat slegs as ons wit-, bruin-, swart- en
Indiërgemeenskappe hande vat, sal ons 'n Suid-Afrika kan bou wat ons almal
se belange op die hart dra. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
member's statement follows.)

[Mr C B HERANDIEN (New NP): Madam Speaker, a recent opinion poll of
marketing data by the Helen Suzman Foundation found that the leader of the
DA, the hon Tony Leon, has, next to the leader of the FF, most support from
the right wing. The hon Leon has 32% of the support and the hon Mulder has
42%. [Interjections.]

This poll confirms the suspicion that the DA has a right-wing power base.
It is also clear that the DA has replaced the CP, and that the DA, with its
growing right-wing power base, is catching up with the FF. The DA is
bluffing itself if it thinks that its support is based on its so-called
liberal convictions, because it is the right-wing foundation on which the
DA is built which makes the hon Tony Leon the most popular leader on the
right. It is not the whites who are increasingly moving towards the right,
but rather the DA, and therefore their right-wing power base is also
growing.

This poll also shows that the DA is not a party that has the interests of
all South Africans at heart, but rather a party that yearns for the old
South Africa. The New NP knows that South Africa belongs to all South
Africans, and only if we as white, brown, black and Indian communities take
hands will we be able to build a South Africa which will have all South
Africans' interests at heart. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Order! It appears the ANC has found its voice. Somebody will
be making a statement on behalf of the ANC.

                            RACE AGAINST MALARIA

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr A N LUTHULI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the race against malaria was launched
on 3 April 2003 in Pretoria. This project involves drivers who have
volunteered to participate in a race that will start in South Africa and
end in Tanzania. The aim of this race is to raise consciousness and
mobilise people throughout the region to fight this disease.

Malaria is one of the leading causes of illness and disease in Southern
Africa. There are 88 million people living in Malaria transmission areas,
with 14 million being children under five and 4 million pregnant women, who
are at a high risk of contracting the disease. Poor communities are also
vulnerable to this disease, as many people who reside in these transmission
areas either do not have incomes, or have low incomes.

Health care centres are far from these communities, and they do not have
sufficient resources to pay for transport, consultation and treatment fees.
The fighting of malaria needs to be part of a public agenda, as this is one
of the major causes of death in the region. There has to be a partnership
between governments of the region, donor communities, business and civil
society to embark on a concerted effort to fight the scourge of the spread
of malaria.

The race against malaria highlights the need to put this agenda in the
public domain. We wish the rally drivers success as they highlight the task
we face of fighting malaria. Thank you. [Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 20 - Sport and Recreation South Africa:

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, Cabinet colleagues,
hon members, I am honoured to be delivering this, my fourth budget speech,
to this august House. Not only are we on the brink of our third democratic
elections, after the end of this financial year, we are also on the verge
of entering the second decade of freedom from apartheid domination. The
juncture presents us with an appropriate opportunity to take stock of what
we have achieved: for me over the period of my tenure and for us, in more
general terms, in the past 10 years. We must also consider what lies ahead
of us and determine the direction in which we should head as Sport and
Recreation.

Before I begin, allow me to welcome a few special guests who are in the
public gallery this afternoon. Santos FC was with us this afternoon. I
think they have gone for training. They were last year's PSL champions. The
Stormers rugby team were with us earlier today but they have had to leave
because of another commitment. We have Mr Thelo Wakefield and Koos Basson
with us in the gallery. [Applause.] We also have Mr Hendry Jones, a body
builder who, despite having been crowned Mr Universe during his
participation years in body building, has never received colours for
representing his country purely on the basis of his skin colour. There is
Mr Hendry Jones over there. [Applause.]

There are three youngsters who are with us today: Dorian Newman, Hilton
Klophas and Kwezi Qika. They are three talented surfers from extremely
disadvantaged backgrounds who made it onto the Western Cape surfing team
but are unable to get to the national championships because of a lack of
resources. The youngsters are seated over there in the public gallery as
well. [Applause.] I also want to welcome a guest from Canada, Mr Joe Van
Ryn, who is with us to renew our co-operation agreement with that country
for the next few years. [Applause.] We also have our MECs for sport, and
MEC MacKenzie is over there. We have a number of presidential sports
awardees with us here. Topsport administrators and representatives of
provincial departments are also here. We have a lovely exhibition in the
foyer where I saw Tat' uMlangeni playing some chess this afternoon.

I am introducing a budget of R225,762 million - the largest ever for Sport
and Recreation in this House. It represents significant growth from when I
first assumed this portfolio, almost four years ago. While it represents a
satisfying 275% increase, relative to the 1998-99 budget, it is still not
nearly enough for what is needed to place our country on an even footing
with our traditional adversaries in sport. Our athletes and teams will
therefore always enter the arena with a handicap. Moreover, the major part
of the budget, R129 million, comprises an allocation from the poverty
relief, infrastructure creation and job summit pool that, as I have already
indicated, will dry up at the end of this financial year. That will result
in a 53% decline in our budget which will detract from the progressive
growth in the allocation to sport that we have witnessed over the last
three years. This must be very disconcerting.
With the Building for Sport and Recreation Programme allocation removed,
the remaining R96 million is split up as follows: Programme 1 for
administration - R18 million; and Programme 2 for policy, funding and
liaison - R78 million. With regard to Programme 2, the amount available for
sports development amounts to R44 million. That gives an indication of how
underfunded sport really is. However, I am firmly of the opinion that,
despite setbacks every now and again, the tide has indeed turned for us in
sport.

While I sometimes have to lament the slow pace of change in sport, I am
convinced that the imminent release of the sports transformation charter
will bring us back on course to ensure rapid movement from the entrenched
racial, gender and spatial rigidities of the past and, indeed, turn the
tide into a flood. I am happy to note significant progress in the
representative profiles of certain sports. I have so far resisted the
option of legislating on sports transformation and have offered national
federations, instead, the opportunity to reconsider their own options for
driving the initiative into their structures. We must transform. There is
no alternative. If, however, we fail to make progress, I will have to
reconsider my options.

Sport has, in the past, been at the forefront of transformation in this
country. We cannot allow that advantage and the moral high ground that we
once occupied to be lost. That would amount to a betrayal of the many who
have dedicated so much, some even their lives, to the cause of ensuring a
fair dispensation in all sport. In this regard, I would like to draw the
attention of the House to some of those stalwarts whom we have lost during
the course of the past year. While I am sure that I will leave out many
names, I would like to acknowledge the services of Millin Petersen, Ben
Groepes, Ben Tengimfene, Harry Hendricks, and a host of others. While we
will miss them as we march on towards actualising the goals that they
dedicated their life's work to, we will never forget them.

We have just completed one of the most exciting sports competitions to be
witnessed in our country. Though our own team was not in the running for
the honours, the 2003 ICC Cricket World Cup has meant a lot to our society.
While the performance of the Proteas in the competition was disappointing
to all of us, the tournament itself was a resounding success. I would like
to congratulate the organising committee, under the leadership of Dr Ali
Bacher, on a job well done. You have proven to the world that, as a nation,
we can host major sporting events successfully. That bodes well for future
bids that we may want to embark upon.

Of course, it's quite regrettable that the competition was marred by the
refusal of England and New Zealand to play in Zimbabwe and Kenya
respectively. Their fears were confirmed to be unfounded by those who did,
in fact, play at those venues where the conditions were as secure and,
indeed, as exciting as at any venue in South Africa.

The socioeconomic benefits of the Cricket World Cup have also proven that
sport can contribute significantly to addressing the major challenges that
we face as a country. The consequences of a huge influx of spectators from
abroad has assisted us as a department and as an institution generally to
address one of the major challenges of our time in South Africa - that of
job creation and poverty relief. It is estimated that 25 000 foreign
spectators visited our shores to watch the Cricket World Cup. That
translates into almost 4 000 jobs if what Tourism South Africa tells us
about how the number of foreign visitors translates into jobs is correct.
It proves that sport has a role to play in pushing back the frontiers of
poverty by addressing the structural fault in our society that the
President of our country alluded to in his state of the nation address.
That fault divides our nation into two: one modern and relatively well-
developed, and the other underdeveloped and entrenched in poverty.

We recently hosted a successful conference on developing a strategy for
bidding for and hosting major international events. I am happy to confirm
that we reached consensus about approaching the matter in an orderly
fashion to ensure that we develop the capacity to host larger and more
complex events, to enable us eventually to present the biggest spectacle of
world sports, the Olympic Games, sometime in the future.

During the conference we committed ourselves to prioritising the bids to
host the 2010 Soccer World Cup in South Africa, the 2014 Commonwealth Games
in South Africa and the 2020 Olympic Games in our country. This programme
that we consider to be very realistic will be proposed to Cabinet in the
hope that Cabinet will give it its blessing and, in doing so, simplify the
task of any bidding or organising committee to do their work.

We have now confirmed our bid to host the 2010 World Cup. The President of
our country publicly expressed his support for the bid during his state of
the nation address and we will make sure that Government gives all the
guarantees that Fifa requires. This time we are sure that it is Africa's
turn as Fifa approved the rotation system last year. Our continent will
start that process. South Africa will be up against Nigeria, Libya,
Tunisia, Egypt and Morocco in the race to host this competition. While we
are quietly confident, we will not underestimate our African counterparts.
I shall be asking Cabinet for its formal endorsement of the bid very
shortly.

From a departmental perspective, we regard our Building for Sport and
Recreation Project as our flagship. We are of course concerned that the
latter programme, that is destined to become part of the municipal
infrastructure grant, will lead to an abrupt end to the facility creation
project because municipalities have many other priorities on which to
deliver. Sports facilities, we have established, do not feature high up on
their agenda. I will therefore engage my colleagues in Cabinet in order to
retain the project in my department, failing which I would like to ensure
that, at the very least, an amount is ring-fenced for facility creation and
upgrading to guarantee that we do not fall further behind on this important
project that is aimed directly at improving the quality of life of our
citizens.

Of course, our impact extends well beyond the creation or upgrading of
facilities. It also includes the skills that we transfer to the people that
we give employment to. It makes them more saleable in the tough job market
while the community sports councils and clubs that we establish, and
empowerment of local councils in managing the sports facilities that we
build, further contribute to the empowerment initiative. We also try to
foster an entrepreneurial spirit in the communities in which we build
facilities by encouraging informal trading opportunities where and when
sports events take place. We have also commenced and will continue to use
the project to make sport's contribution to the process of symbolic
reparation by naming these facilities that we build and upgrade after
fallen heroes in the areas where we build.

Our Building for Sport and Recreation Project commands a budget of R129
million in the coming financial year. One hundred and thirteen projects
have been identified that will be spread cross the country as follows: we
have given the Western Cape R8,7 million for 13 facilities; the Eastern
Cape gets R22,8 million for 25 facilities; KwaZulu-Natal gets R23,1 million
for 17 facilities; Mpumalanga gets R9,9 million for 12 facilities; Gauteng
gets R10,8 million for 10 facilities; Limpopo gets R19,2 million for nine
facilities; North West will get R10,25 million for 10 facilities; Free
State gets R9,6 million for 15 facilities; and the Northern Cape will get
R6,5 million for two facilities. We will build in communities as diverse as
Ngqamakwe, in the Eastern Cape; Petrus Steyn in the Free State; Boipatong
in Gauteng; Umvoti in KwaZulu-Natal; Machado in Mpumalanga; Ga-Segonyana in
the Northern Cape; and Nduli in the Western Cape. [Applause.]

I would like to implore the provinces and municipalities involved to ensure
that we deliver timeously on these projects. We must extend the building
phase of the project during which people in the communities will have
access to employment which is the primary purpose of this exercise. In the
past, the building phase was squeezed into three months and that limited
the period for employment. But, we have managed to pay more than 6 500
people an average of R4 500 during the building phases of these projects
over the past two years.

We also launched our Letsema campaign on 3 February 2003 in Cape Town by
cleaning up the Langa Stadium, with generous help from schoolchildren in
the community. We trust that the launch will provide the impetus for
similar efforts in communities around the country to afford our communities
greater access to participation in sport and recreation.

Of course, volunteerism is not something new in our institution because we
use volunteers. But sport could never have survived in this country or
anywhere else in the world without these volunteers. So the performance of
our volunteers during the Cricket World Cup is a shining example of the
capacity of our people to give generously in pursuit of the common good to
assist in building our country.

We have programmes in place to recruit, train and acknowledge the work of
volunteers. We have the SA Sports Commission and the Sports Coaches
Outreach, or Score, doing sterling work in this regard. I will endeavour to
integrate the activities of these structures with a view to ensuring unity
of purpose and to align our efforts with those of Government. The role of
the Tourism, Hospitality and Sport Education Training Authority, and the
resources to which they have access, will also have to be integrated.

Sport and Recreation in South Africa has been identified to play a leading
role with regard to implementing a people's contract for moral
regeneration. Our various projects, some of which are already up and
running, are aimed at the youth, especially those in the high crime nodes
identified by the President.

The launch of our Young Champions Project took place in Mamelodi on 18
January this year, to which we attracted more than 2 000 participants, and
involved a cross section of national, provincial and community
organisations. We will launch this project again in all the remaining
provinces in due course. The next launch will be this coming Saturday, 12
April, at Khayelitsha.

The programme is aimed at setting up sustainable local sports leagues in
the areas identified, into which young people can be drawn with a view not
only to ensuring that they participate in wholesome sport, but also to
enable us to identify talented players that can be channelled into the
competitive mainstream of sport.

One of the issues that has stood out like a sore thumb for me during the
interventions with stakeholders in sport and recreation, and also from my
own assessment of the situation, is the lack of progress with regard to the
initiative to ensure equity for women in the sports dispensation in our
country. On Friday the President referred to this during his speech at the
Presidential Sports Awards in Pretoria.

Women and Sport SA, that is Wassa, has had its flaws, and is currently
dormant. I have accordingly decided to reallocate that responsibility to
the sports commission, with a commissioner having been identified to
champion the cause of women. I've given them a mandate and clear guidelines
and targets for progressing this important priority of Government, in which
we in sport, once again, provide a visible face of progress in this regard.

We don't have a proud record of women's participation in sport. Women
representation and performance, especially that of black women, at the last
Olympic Games left a lot to be desired. It's a challenge that faces all of
us and a challenge that we hope we can live up to in the future.

I therefore implore our national federations to address this issue
vigorously. It's an integral part, as I've mentioned before, of the
national transformation agenda of building a people's contract for a better
South Africa.

I'm also happy to announce to this House that I've reached an agreement
with my colleague the Minister of Education who has just left now, Prof
Kader Asmal, on school sport. Our respective departments are working on the
details, but in essence we have agreed that the Department of Education
will take full responsibility for curricular aspects of sport, including
physical education, as well as the extra-curricular programme of the
schools.

My department and provincial departments responsible for sport, in
partnership with the national and provincial federations, will be
responsible for all competitive and representative school sport programmes.
Moreover, National Treasury has notified me that from next year on
resources for the Love Life Games will be co-ordinated through my
department. These developments will go a long way not only towards
addressing the vexing question of school sport resourcing, but also
ensuring that this important component of overall sport development is
properly aligned.

Friday last week we had the Presidential Sports Awards where the President
added his concerns at the refusal by certain schools, especially the former
white Model C schools, to introduce soccer into their sports programmes. I
want to issue a strong warning to such institutions, that are preventing
our children with an interest in soccer from developing their skills, that
I will be coming down very hard on them. [Applause.]

That brings me to transformation in sport. I've referred to this many times
before, even in this speech. I've already intimated about the extent to
which sport is a visible reflection of the progress we are making in
transformation in our society generally. I'm of the view that the image
that we present at the moment, especially in terms of representivity, is
not a good one. While our flags fly high in the sports arenas of the world,
generate pride and serve as a good marketing tool for our country,
spectators in our country are still left confused when our teams charge
onto the field of play about whether it's a team from Europe or a team from
Africa.

Very often European teams are more integrated than teams from South Africa.
Surely, this must be an indictment against all of us who are committed to a
new South Africa based on inclusiveness, equality and fairness. The people
this side of the House will never agree to that.

You are well aware of the investigation that we launched in response to the
statement by the UCB on transformation in sport. The John Smith report on
that commission is open for all to see and everybody is welcome to look at
it. It openly challenges the assertion of that national federation on the
matter. Indeed, if a federation such as cricket, that I regard as one of
those having made the most progress in South African sport with regard to
transformation, believes that it has reached its goals, I shudder to think
where other federations will stand on the matter.

I hope to launch similar investigations into the status of representivity
in all other sports this year. The unfinished business that we have with
the UCB and other noncompliant national and provincial federations on this
matter will be concluded, hopefully very amicably because my Presbyterian
upbringing makes me talk to people in a very amicable way.

Now that the ICC Cricket World Cup is out of the way, we will sit down and
talk about it. The transformation agenda will be a priority during my term
of office, and I make no excuses for that. I remain dedicated to that
cause. I will stay relentless with regard to it. As I've said before, this
matter is non-negotiable and will never be negotiable. My agenda has never
been one of seeking popularity. Rather, it has been one of contributing to
a national agenda of sport, which must necessarily be integral to the
agenda of the whole country. If that means I become embattled in terms of
media coverage or in terms of Donald Kleer and his opposition, I will stand
my ground, for I believe that it is in the national interest. I will never
compromise on that.

In the same breath, I must add that I've always been extremely considerate
on the matter. As I've said earlier, I've resisted the pressure and the
urge to legislate on the matter. But my patience is being stretched to the
limit, and I might be forced in the near future to consider this option
very seriously. I shall be watching the performances of all national
federations that have signed agreements with me, and I'll watch what they
are doing each and every time.

The transformation charter will be the culmination of an exercise that is
taking us around the country, consulting with people at grass-roots level.
I have hosted and will be hosting transformation imbizos in each of the
provinces at their insistence. The turnout at these imbizos has been very
overwhelming and has given me a clear indication of the will of the people
- a will to which I must and will respond.

The Ministerial Task Team into High Performance Sport has progressed beyond
reporting stage. The report will be going straight to Cabinet and has far-
reaching consequences for sport and recreation in South Africa. At the same
time it recommends that we prioritise sports that can contribute more
substantially to improving our international performances, in pursuit of
more medals and those that can increase the number of active participants,
by recruiting more and more people. That is the reason we are giving
colours to federations such as jukskei, because they are beginning to be a
mass-based sport.

The prioritised list, comprising approximately 12 to 15 sports in each
category, will receive more substantial resource allocation from
Government, with a view to ensuring the impact that we expect of them. Of
course, there can never be sufficient resources for achieving the levels of
success that we would like to see.

In the same context, we have recognised the need for national federations
to be run professionally. National federations are the primary delivery
agents for sport in our country. They work at the coalface. Indeed, some of
them are facing serious problems as a result of divisions and power
struggles within the ranks of administrators in their structures.

I cannot be expected to react to media speculation on such issues. When a
federation approaches me with a problem, we sit down and talk about it.
Those that have problems at this stage have approached me, and we will step
in and try and resolve some of their problems.

However, I want to warn the administrators that they are not going to get
away with murder by running South African sport the way they like. They
will not get away with murder. You can scream, jump and do whatever you
want, but you will do it the way we think is right. We are the governing
party. You are not governing this country. We are governing this country.
[Interjections.]

We've charged the SA Sports Commission to ... [Interjections.] ... We gave
you time during apartheid and you failed.

We have accordingly charged the SA Sports Commission to champion the cause
of eliminating some of these problems. The sports commission, together with
the host province Gauteng, hosted the South African Games in Pretoria last
year. Next year it is the Eastern Cape province that will host these games,
and we hope that budding young stars will come through in some of these
games.

Disabled Sport SA continues to do an excellent job, producing one world
champion after the other. At the Presidential Sports Awards ceremony last
Friday, two out of five gold and 16 out of 28 silver award winners were
disabled sportspeople. We will therefore continue to invest substantially
in that organisation to ensure returns that we can see.

The sports trust is also doing very well and has shifted its focus from
being a sports trust for equipment and equipping all our sportspeople right
around the country.

We will continue to endeavour to facilitate the establishment of a national
sports academy for the country. I believe that the absence of such a
structure in our country is one of the shortcomings that has contributed to
the lack of refinement in our international performances. We will endeavour
to ask the Ministers' Committee on the Budget to look into this issue of a
national academy for South Africa.

Regarding international relations, we are pursuing them in line with
Government's foreign policy. We are also looking at the migration of
sportspeople into and out of South Africa.

We are also looking at the usage of performance-enhancing drugs in our
sports, and we have seen that there is an increase in these drugs in
certain sports. And we warn the sports that we will make sure that this is
stamped out once and for all. Whether the drugs you are using are cannabis
or recreational drugs, whether your mother has given them to you, as Shane
Warne said, we will implement a standardised method of dealing with the
usage of drugs in sport. And the first offence for any offender is a two-
year ban from sport.

I'd also like to congratulate the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport for the
amount of work that they are doing. Last year they received an ISO 9 000
accreditation, making us one of the foremost antidoping agencies in the
world.

Our Davis Cup team has just won against Poland, and I'd like to
congratulate Kevin Curren and Cavin Bergman for the team's effort to win.

We are also looking forward to the Rugby World Cup in Australia towards
October, and we hope that Rudolph Straeuli and his team are preparing for
that.

Lastly, we are also preparing to go to the Africa Games in Abuja, Nigeria.
Our team is in preparation at the moment. Everything is in order. We will
be going there to defend our handsome win in 1999 in South Africa. So
Nigeria is waiting for us. And I wish all our athletes well in what they
are doing.

The Presidents Cup is coming up towards the end of the year. This is the
tie of the Presidents Cup golf, which is coming up at Fancourt in George,
and we hope that most of the members will participate in it.

Ernie Els was awarded a Presidential Sports Award. I think everybody here
will agree with me that we should congratulate Ernie for being one of our
leading sportspeople in the country, always flying the flag for South
Africa. [Applause.]

We hope that whatever we do will have the support of the House. We know
that we have the support of the portfolio committee, Sisi Ruth, Tat'
uKgware, my Ministry, the department and those wonderful people sitting up
there, who make sport what it is, not exclusionist, such as the people we
have on our left. [Interjections.] Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! hon Minister, will you please stand while I address
you. Blowing whistles is not only unparliamentary, but may also amount to
contempt. Order! I am considering the matter and also what penalty, whether
you deserve a red card, a yellow card, or going to the cooler. [Applause.]

All members are however advised that it's not a precedent, it is
unparliamentary and there is no doubt about that.

Ms N R NTSHULANA-BHENGU: Madam Speaker, hon members, fellow South Africans,
I would like to thank the officials from Sport and Recreation South Africa,
Boxing South Africa, the Institute for Drug-Free Sport in South Africa and
the South African Sports Commission for their commitment in sport.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. On Friday 4 April 2003 the President
hosted another Presidential Sports Achievement Awards ceremony. We pay
tribute to the sports heroes and all those African sports personalities
like Elizabeth Cameron-Smith, Staff Nkala from the Eastern Cape, Mvuzo
Mbhebe, Natalie Du Toit, Beverly Mashinini, Malcolm Pringle, the late
Friday Mavuso and the late Oom Ben Tengimfene, to name a few.

Some of these recipients are ordinary South Africans whose contributions in
sport were not motivated by any financial gain but by the love of their
country and sport. Some are already dead, yet their contribution in sport
will live on. We congratulate the award winners on their achievements and
thank the sport federations that nominated them. We acknowledge the role
played by the international sports bodies in bringing apartheid to an end.

We also salute the worthy contributions of the former nonracial sports
bodies like Sanroc and the NSC and others to ensuring the isolation of
apartheid sports as well as their contribution in the destruction of
apartheid.

We pay tribute to the countless sport administrators and players who played
a pioneering role in building nonracial unity in sport while apartheid
propagated racist policies in sport.

Today we want to acknowledge the sentiments expressed by the South African
public to the effect that South African sport is dying. We understand this
feeling, which is mostly based on the poor performance of our teams and
athletes, particularly in international competitions. This is a matter that
South Africa needs to work on to improve our performance. We also want to
highlight that there is also a positive side.

The tide has turned and a lot has been achieved since 1994. The vision of
the South African Sports Commission is to lead South Africa to world-class
sporting excellence. In pursuance of this vision, the SA Sports Commission
seeks to create a nation of world-class sportsmen and sportswomen by
improving the opportunities for all South Africans to participate in sport
and recreation. The sports commission has the responsibility of ensuring
that the management, promotion and co-ordination of our sport is
administered with excellence. In mass participation, the sports commission
is reviving and promoting indigenous games in South Africa and beyond.

Within this year's budget, the SA Sports Commission will publish a manual
on indigenous games that addresses standardised indigenous games, and one
of the indigenous games, ncuva, is being computerised. Two hundred and
thirty indigenous game facilitators have been trained in all nine
provinces. These facilitators will provide further training in the
provinces. This is a clear indication that we are on the right course in
the area of skills development and promotion of excellence in sport and
recreation.

South Africa is making progress in establishing a network of indigenous
games with Zone 6 countries and beyond, and we will host an indigenous
games festival between 4 and 6 September 2003. South Africa will also
participate in the TAFISA traditional games in Montreal, Canada, in July
2003.

We commend the SA Sports Commission for taking up the challenge of
promoting indigenous games, which was sharply raised by the President in
his 2001 state of the nation address.

The SA Sports Commission has also made steady progress with regard to
recreation. A national walk will be held in August 2003. Aerobics
instructors who will run aerobics classes for the communities have been
trained in three provinces: North West, Eastern Cape and Gauteng. Progress
has also been made in facilitating the participation of the previously
disadvantaged in the World Gymnastrada that will take place in Portugal
between 20 and 26 July 2003.

In making certain that South Africa participates in international and major
national events, the SA Sports Commission has a programme of identifying
talented athletes in order to ensure that South African teams are fully
representative. It also provides access to scientific support, training and
life-skills development services, as well as ensuring a supportive social
environment in order to increase the number of medals and test matches won
by South Africa.

This year, the focus of South Africa is on the All Africa Games. The SA
Sports Commission has already enlisted 16 accredited service provider
institutions in sport science as part of the campaign for the All Africa
Games. Two hundred and fifty athletes have benefited from this programme;
sport science centres in rural areas such as those in Fort Hare and Limpopo
have very basic equipment. Therefore, there is a need for improving centres
in the rural areas.

On high performance sport, there is restructuring of services and financial
allocation to elite athletes. Services rendered by service providers to
athletes and national federations are monitored. The SA Sports Commission
has also established a life-skills infrastructure to address the general
welfare of South African elite athletes and their support teams.
Facilitators trained by the SA Sports Commission will implement this
project in the provincial academies of sport. The modules for this project
will be developed by the SA Sports Commission and will cover, among others
cover: financial schemes, HIV/Aids, touring skills, legal contracts and
conflict resolution.

A multicoded athlete association will be established by April 2004. SASSU
is assisting with the scientific preparation of athletes who will be
competing in the World Student Games in Korea in August 2003.

The Minister of Sport and Recreation, hon Ngconde Balfour, is spearheading
the establishment of a national sports academy. Provincial SA sports
academies have been allocated R1 million each. Eight of the nine academies
have appointed academy managers. An academy of sport blueprint has been
finalised. The blueprint stipulates how academies should be run. Only 15%
of the allocated R100 million can be used for administration and 85% should
be committed to programmes on the ground.

Provincial departments of sports must play a leading role in ensuring that
the academies are given the necessary support and are adequately resourced.
Satellite academies and mobile centres should be established in all
regions, especially in the rural areas. All children that compete must have
gone through these academies.

We have made our mark in bidding for the hosting of the Olympic Games and
the Soccer World Cup 2006. We are bidding again for hosting the 2010 Soccer
World Cup. We urge all South Africans to support our 2010 Soccer World Cup
Bid.

South Africa has competed with reasonable success in international
competitions by developing world standards. Our Minister of Sport and
Recreation is serving in the World Anti-doping Agency. South Africa has
been awarded the regional office of the World Anti-doping Agency to look
after Africa. That relates very well to the African Renaissance programme.
We appeal for patience, commitment and co-operation. We are on the right
course.

Sithi asincome igalelo labanye abantu bakithi abazinikele nababambe iqhaza
ekuthuthukiseni ezimidlalo emazingeni aphansi. EMgungundlovu singabala
umnumzane uMoses Ndimande. UNdimande uqeqesha intsha yase-Edendale,
yaseMbali neyase-Ashdown emdlalweni wethenisi. Lokhu ukwenza engabheke
nkokhelo, eqoqa intsha eyivimba ukuthi ingangenwa ubugebengu, ukuphuza
utshwala nokubhema izidakamizwa. Ndimande kaMdladla, sithi uyibekile induku
ebandla!

Sibonga umsebenzi owenziwa uJomo Sono ngegalelo lokusiza abanegciwane
likagawulayo. UJomo wanikela ngendawo ayeyithengele iJomo Cosmos. Le ndawo
isetshenziswa ukugcina izingane ezinegciwane likagawulayo. MfokaSono,
usugogodile kwezokuthuthukisa umphakathi. INingizimu Afrika idinga amadoda
afana nawe. Kwande lapho othathe khona Mjomane! [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[We commend the role that is being played by some of our people who are
dedicating themselves and playing a crucial role in developing sports at
the lower levels. In Pietermaritzburg we can mention Moses Ndimande, who
trains the youth from Edendale, Mbali and Ashdown in tennis. He does this
without expecting any payment, keeping the youth from partaking in criminal
activities, drinking alcohol and using drugs. Ndimande, the son of Mdladla,
you have helped a lot!

We commend Jomo Sono's role of helping those that are affected and infected
by HIV/Aids. He contributed the land that was originally bought for Jomo
Cosmos to these people. This place is used for the safekeeping of the
children who are affected by HIV/Aids. Jomo, the son of Sono, you are a
veteran in developing the community. May you be blessed with a lot more,
Mjomane! [Applause.]]

Gert Viljoen is the principal of Hope School for the Disabled. His school
runs a special golf programme where pupils with disabilities are trained
and coached in golf. Nkosi Mashinini and Felicia Ntuli are products of this
initiative. We applaud this initiative. Its relevance is in profiling sport
for disabled people in South Africa.

These initiatives are a demonstration of what co-operation between
Government, community and private sector institutions can achieve. The ANC
supports this budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to recognise and acknowledge the presence
amongst us of the Women's Caucus of the SADC Parliamentary Forum.
[Applause.] They are meeting here. You are most welcome in the South
African Parliament.

Mr T D LEE: Madam Speaker, our Constitution contains a Bill of Rights. It
is designed to ensure that every South African can achieve their full
potential. But the ANC has taken this right away from us.

The relationship between South Africans and sport is unbreakable. Sport is
our love and it is our passion. Our teams are built around our heroes -
people like Jomo Sono, Chester Williams and Morné du Plessis, who I
recognise in the gallery. [Interjections.] Their success is mirrored in our
pride, their failure in our despair. Through sport we have learnt to battle
one other and emerge united, and to take on the world and emerge
victorious. It is a common goal towards which we all strive, and a single
triumph through which we all celebrate.

Sadly, the ANC has taken this away from us. The ANC has taken away the
common sense of belonging. It has taken away a shared sense of achievement.
The ANC has taken away everything that was achieved in 1994, and has turned
our sport into a racial battleground where our best are undermined and our
talent goes unrewarded. In short, the ANC has taken away our true
potential.

Under the ANC our sport is no longer about what we can achieve, or what we
can take pride in. Under the ANC, sport has become a political tool. The
ANC has replaced development with quotas, and it has replaced merit with
race. Who are we? We are no better off now than we were under apartheid.
[Interjections.]

What was the struggle against apartheid, if not the struggle to be treated
as equals? Under the ANC there are no equals - there is only black and
white. The ANC has systematically warped our ideals. It has done so without
regard for public opinion. It has done so without consultation with our
players and administrators, and it has done so without regard for the
consequences.

In 1997 the late Steve Tshwete said: ``There is going to be interference by
Government in every sphere of life in South Africa, including sport.''
Interference is simply another word for the ANC's political agenda of
transformation. By prioritising racial sensitivity and representivity ahead
of talent and ability, the ANC has shifted our sporting emphasis away from
being the best, towards being the most demographically representative.

The ANC has turned South African sport into a racial numbers game. It has
moved the emphasis away from the development of our up-and-coming talent.
You cannot fast-track an entire generation. As in every area of life,
sporting success requires talent, dedication, opportunity and time. These
are hallmarks of success; if they are bypassed you only succeed in taking
away a person's full potential. But the ANC has taken away much more than
this. By constantly undermining our sporting institutions, the ANC has
taken away the autonomy of this country's sporting bodies and imposed its
will at every level.

In January last year the Minister of Sport, the hon Ngconde Balfour, called
on Sarfu to appoint a coach who will make the transformation of rugby his
first priority. In other words, the ANC called on an independent sporting
body, in the form of the South African Rugby Football Union, to set aside
the emphasis on winning and to concentrate on implementing the ANC's
political programme of transformation. How can any young rugby player
aspire to be a Springbok when the Springboks themselves have been
instructed not to aspire to be the best? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Lee, please take your seat. Hon
member, are you rising on a point of order?

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Yes, I am.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: What is your point of order?

Mr N J GOGOTYA: The hon member has mentioned the ANC almost 11 times, and
has not said anything about his party, the DA. That is what he is intending
... [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon M J Ellis?

Mr M J ELLIS: May I address you on that point of order? That man over
there, that hon member, constantly raises these rather stupid points of
order, and I am asking you that we don't appreciate it. That type of point
of order has been raised now. It was not a point of order before. It is
certainly an attempt to try and discredit the hon member at the podium. I
urge you, Mr Chair, to take action against the hon member.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Gogotya, that is not a point of order.
Mr Lee, please continue.

Mr T D LEE: I thank you, Chairperson. Again last year the Minister of Sport
intervened directly and overruled the UCB's decision ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Let me have order in the
House. Mr Ellis, your member is at the podium, can we give him an
opportunity to be heard?

Mr M J ELLIS: What about the hon Minister? Was he allowed?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Lee, please continue.

Mr T D LEE: Again last year the Minister of Sport intervened directly and
overruled the UCB's decision to scrap the quota system, despite the UCB
having met targets, agreed to by the Department of Sport, and a long and
exhaustive consultation process. The ANC has taken away our right to strive
to be the best. This is the consequence of transformation and political
interference. [Interjections.]

In March last year the President said: ``For two to three years let's not
mind losing international competitions, because we are bringing our people
into these teams.''

Who are ``our people'', Mr President? Do ``our people'' not have the same
aspirations and standards as every other sporting nation? Did ``our
people'' not fight evils like apartheid for the right to be the best they
can be? Who is the ANC to take that right away from them? When the
president of the ANC and the Head of State sends out the message that our
sporting teams must be prepared to lose, how can we then take the ANC
seriously when they say they stand behind a national side? When President
Mbeki wishes the Proteas good luck, or Mr Ngconde Balfour dons a Bafana
Bafana top, how can we take them seriously?

We can't. Because, quite simply, the ANC does not have, and never has had,
South Africa's best sporting interests at heart. Mr Minister, I think it is
said that the bigger they are, the harder they fall. The time has come for
you to go, Mr Minister. Here is your red card. [Laughter.]

The ANC is trying to take away our right to dream - it is trying to take
away our right to aspire to great things, but it will fail. The ANC will
fail because it is wrong. It will fail because South Africa's sporting
pride exists outside of the ANC. Ultimately, Chairperson, South Africa's
sporting passion is something the ANC can never take away from us. I thank
you.

Mr I Z NCINANE: Sihlalo namalungu ahloniphekileyo ... [Chairperson and hon
members ... ]

... executive members of the various sports federations, particularly the
executive members of the SA Rugby Football Union, and my colleagues ...

... hayi madoda nani boomama andifuni kuchith' ixesha ngale ndoda isuka
apha. Kuba le ndoda ityiwa ngumvandedwa wezinto ababe kade bezenza,
bengaphumeleli. Seyincekelele nje ukuba sisithunzela sala madoda
ayombelelayo. [Kwaqhwatywa](Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[... ladies and gentlemen, no, I do not want to waste time with this man
who has just departed from here, because he is being pestered by a guilty
conscience about the things they used to do, without success. He just
perseveres in being an apparition for the men who sing for him. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Ncinane, please take your seat.

Mr K M ANDREW: On a point of order: Is the hon member allowed to address
the House without taking off his prison uniform? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Ncinane, please take your seat.

Hon members, I want to warn you against spurious points of order.
[Interjections.] This is the second one this afternoon. I want to ask you
to please avoid raising spurious points of order. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I rise to address you on
a point of order. The hon member Ken Andrews ...

An HON MEMBER: Ken Andrew.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Yes, the hon Ken Andrew made this
particular statement. He passed a particular comment about the hon member
at the podium, Comrade Ncinane.

What he mentioned is unparliamentary in the sense that it casts aspersions
on the standing and stature of the hon member speaking. We ask you to look
into that question, and to rule accordingly.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Andrew ... [Interjections.] Can I
address that point of order first? Mr Seremane, we will come back to you.

Mr Andrew, you did cast an aspersion on the integrity of the hon member.
Can you please withdraw.

Mr K M ANDREW: Sir, I withdraw.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, according to your ruling, no spurious points
of order should be made. I stand up on a very valid point of order: That of
casting aspersions on the opposition, in the sense that it is denigratory
to say others are impundulus [fabulous birds] or some such thing.
[Laughter.] What it means - I don't remember the exact word - is
isithunzela, meaning they are just like dummies ... [Laughter] ... or like
zombies. It is actually an insult, and casts aspersions on people's
integrity.

This august building of ours consists of the ruling party and elected
members of the opposition party exercising their constitutional rights and
they need not be denigrated for fulfilling that responsibility.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I will look at what the hon
member said, and give a ruling.

Please continue, hon Ncinane.

Mnu I Z NCINANE: Ndiphakama apha ndihalalisela, ndincoma uMphathiswa
wezeMidlalo noLonwabo ngenxa yenkqubela ayenzileyo ukuza kuthi ga ngoku.
Ndiza kukhe, ke Mhlali-ngaphambili, ndibubeke ecaleni ubu`Ncinane' bam,
sithethe kakuhle nala madoda nabantu bonke baseMzantsi Afrika.

Kukho abantu abambalwa, ngeliny' ixesha abaninzi, abahamba betyala uthuthu
ezinweleni zabantu baseMzantsi Afrika, betyala nentshongo emehlweni kunye
nomsizi omnyama, besithi `ezemidlalo eMzantsi Afrika zihamba kancinane xa
zithelekiswa namanye amazwe', yabe ke noko ngentetho entle yesixhosa
bubuvuvu obo. Asiyiyo inyani.

Njengoko nisazi nonke bantu baseMzantsi Afrika, abakhoyo nabangekhoyo apha,
okokuba uMzantsi Afrika uvela kwixesha elide lobandlululo. Namhlanje simi
apha ke, singu-ANC, sithetha nabantu bonke sisithi mabasinike ithuba
elaneleyo khon' ukuze bakwazi, kwixesha elizayo, ukusithelekisa nenkqubela
yamanye amazwe. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr I Z NCINANE: I rise to congratulate and commend the Minister of Sport
and Recreation for the progress he has made up to now. I am going to put
aside the fact that I am Ncinane for us to talk nicely to these guys and
all the people of South Africa.

There are a few people, sometimes many, who go about planting ash in the
hair of the people of South Africa, smearing the eyes with pipe oil and
black soot, saying, ``sport, in South Africa, progresses slowly in
comparison to other countries'', and that, put in beautiful isiXhosa, is
rubbish. It is not true.

As you know, all of you people of South Africa who are present here and
those who are not here, South Africa comes from a long period of
segregation. Today we, as the ANC, stand here, talking to all the people,
saying they must give us sufficient chance so that, in future, they can
compare us with other countries, in terms of development.]

It must be understood that the changes that we have just undergone in South
Africa, of having sport commissions and sport academies, were Australian
models, and the equalisation of sport between Australia and South Africa is
a process, not an event. Our Minister and his department are trying their
best to emulate Australia. We have made a tremendous improvement. I am
delighted to repeat what Nozabelo Ntshulana-Bhengu has said at this podium,
namely that the South African academies have been started by our Department
of Sport and Recreation and the many sports academies were started on a
small scale by the then National Sports Council in 1997. Because the
National Sports Council was an NGO, they only managed to raise R500 000 for
each of the few provinces that were experiencing the establishment of
sports academies.

A few months ago, a good, reasonable and progressive Minister decided to
give R1 million for each provincial sport academy, which is very good and
remarkable for this country. [Applause.]

Australia started their sports science institutes many years ago in 1973,
and their sports science institutes exceed 11 in total. That means it
happened over 30 years ago. That is difficult to compare. They put R5
million into each provincial academy. They do not hesitate, because of
their financial muscle, to contract coaches from outside Australia and use
them effectively for their various teams. That is why their financial
support has put them in the news today.

Ukukhuphisana kwabo kuqala ngokuba kuqheliswane kwiminyaka emithandathu.
Soloko beyenza ke loo nto. Abazange bavuke kusasa babe sele belilizwe
eliphumeleleyo, njengoko nisithi nifuna sivuke kusasa sibe sele sililizwe
eliphumeleleyo. Yaye ke bakwazile ukubeka ilizwe labo emapini
ngokusebenzisa ezemidlalo. Yiyo loo nto besoloko besezindabeni
kwezemidlalo, ngokunjalo nelizwe labo. Ii`Straight out highlanders' zabo,
ngamany' amazwi amaziko abo emveli kwezemidlalo (indegenous sport
structures) afakwa kakhulu imali, kangangeminyaka engamashumi amathathu
eyadlulayo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Their competition starts with training each other for six years. They
always do that. They did not wake up one morning and were suddenly a
successful nation. They were then able to put their country on the map
through sport. That is why they and their country are always in the news.
Their straight highlanders, in other words, their indigenous structures,
have been heavily immensely financed for the past 30 years.]

Their women's and gender programme is visible, in so far as it can be
compared to ours, but the fact is that the best ambassador for sport in
Australia is Cathy who runs 400m races. It means that South Africa is on
the ladder and we are getting there, without any doubt. We are not
apologetic about setting up standards and choosing Australia as an example,
because we want to be of that world-class standard.

Our economic situation needs to improve, but in order to redress these
imbalances, I want to call today on the officials of Sport and Recreation
SA, particularly those that are involved in sports commissions, to pull up
their socks and improve on what they are doing by raising funds, because
the reason that we have agreed on the Australian Sports Commission and the
South African Sports Commission is the matter of fundraising.

We want to request, in good spirit, the sponsors of this country to stop
sponsoring big sports like rugby, cricket and athletics. There are small
codes of sports in rural areas that need to be given a chance in terms of
sponsorship, because they are also customers and supporters of these big
companies. [Applause.]

Following the twinning of provinces of Australia to our provincial
departments of sport in South Africa, the Australian volunteers throughout
the country have enabled us to be on a progressive better business delivery
footing. The school structure in Australia is able to fully support the
school structures that belong to their department of education. This is
what the Minister has tried to do in the agreement with the Minister of
Education, the ever-ready Kader Asmal. [Laughter.] The schools are service
providers of all federations we are setting up.

I appeal, in conclusion, to everybody in South Africa to rally behind
sport, to be a united force and somehow put aside our cheap political point-
scoring and support sports as South Africans. Sport is the only activity
that we can use to unite and speak with one voice. We need to finalise
broadcasting policies, because disjointed broadcasters in our country are
not like paid television and free-to-air television in Australia that are
complementing each other all the time so that even a listener and a
supporter in Keiskammahoek is able to watch TV without further payment.

Ndiyacela ke malungu ale ntlanganiso nabathandi bezemidlalo abakhoyo apha
okokuba sikhe siyeke ukudlalisa, sithabathe ezemidlalo ngokuzimisela ngoba
ndicela umgeni kuwo onke amasebe akhoyo, Mnu uChief Whip of the Majority
Party neNdlu iphela okokuba akukho sebe elisogqithayo sili Sebe leZemidlalo
noLonwabo ngokubonisa ngezorhwebo zeli lizwe kumanye amazwe ...
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[I therefore request members of this Assembly and sport lovers who are
present here, that we stop playing and take sport seriously, because I
challenge all the present departments, Mr Chief Whip of the Majority Party
as well as the entire House, that there is no department which surpasses us
as Sport and Recreation SA in marketing this country in other countries
...]

... so that our international relations are good. They can only be good
because of sport, and the other departments can follow the leader, that is,
Sport and Recreation SA.

With those few words, let South African sportsmen and sportswomen, through
our co-operation, take their rightful place in the world. With those few
words, if at all they are few, I wish to express my thanks for the support
of everybody in the department, the portfolio committee and everybody else.
Let us continue to do that until the cows come back home to the kraals.
[Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Chairperson, hon members and Ministers, confident people
who have clear goals in life and see a future for themselves, tend to make
life choices that are healthy and less risky, whereas people who feel
trapped in a spiral of hopelessness tend to pay less attention to the
future and are more likely to adopt risky lifestyles.

The aim of Sport and Recreation is to improve the quality of life of all
South Africans by promoting participation in sports and recreation in the
country and through the participation of South African sportspersons and
teams in international sporting events. Therefore Sport and Recreation
should be treated in our budget process as one line function that is
important in improving our lives.

The role that sport and recreation plays in our daily lives can be summed
up as follows: Firstly, sport is a tool for rehabilitation in Correctional
Services. Sport as an activity in Correctional Services meaningfully
occupies the mind of a prisoner, thus also removing harmful thoughts aimed
at hurting other people, and making them become sociable citizens.

Secondly, sport plays a part in promoting healthy lifestyles. Sport is a
powerful ailment remedy that can prevent and possibly heal most sicknesses
like stress, hypertension and heart disease, etc. Therefore, it is not only
an extramural activity, but should be part of life.

Thirdly, there is sport and education. School sport is a primary component
of the Government initiative to popularise sport and recreation amongst the
youth. Sport helps to engender positive socialisation among children, to
understand that even as players they are competing opponents. A spirit of
cordiality and socialisation therefore prevails.

Sport plays a role in the struggle against discrimination of disabled
persons. The integration of disabled persons in sport brings back the
personality and dignity a disabled person might think she or he has lost.
It boosts the self-esteem of the disabled person.

With regard to sport and Africa's rediscovery, or Nepad the All Africa
Games in Nigeria later this month should demonstrate Africa's preparedness
to pull together through Nepad and the AU and become a significant player
in global issues, bringing back Africanness that was wished away by
colonisation. Sports display a very positive angle of the African people
and provide for peaceful competition among nations.

The IFP therefore wishes to state, Minister, that sport and recreation
should not be treated as a twilight zone. It is part and parcel of our
whole as a country. We relate to health, we relate to sports, we relate to
foreign affairs. Therefore, in the budgetary process it should not be
treated as a twilight issue, but as a line function that is important in
marketing our country.

The IFP wishes to compliment the SA Institute for Drug-Free Sport for
adopting stricter measures to emphasise that drug use in sports should not
be the norm. This institution, through its subprogramme, exceeded its
target, which indicates serious business. But we should emphasise that
sportspersons may need to be workshopped by medical sport experts or
practitioners on drugs to take and not to take for fitness. Even ordinary
energy boosters can contain elements, or ingredients, tantamount to
disqualification on testing, and this must clearly be conveyed to
sportspersons.

It is also noted that the department has transferred a large portion of its
budget to sporting federations and that the monitoring of the use of such
funding is efficient, given that 74 federations were watched closely. It
should, however, be pointed out that nondependence on state funding of the
federations should be encouraged as no federation should of necessity rely
on state funding for its survival.

The department's intervention prevented the exclusion of the South African
team from the Commonwealth Games due to the lack of significant
sponsorship. This is highly appreciated as it would have killed the
sportsmanship of the team and its morale. Perhaps all the sporting codes
should make it compulsory to make sure that they raise the necessary
sponsorship so that we do not lose out on participating in international
events.

The department is also complimented here on playing a role in promoting
HIV/Aids awareness through the ``Play Safe'' campaign. The department has
to be complimented on Programme 3, which has embarked on 55 projects
countrywide in the 2001-02 financial year. This consisted of the upgrading
of 37 sports facilities and the building of 18 new ones. There are also 85
new projects in the 2002-03 budget that were supposed to have been
completed at the end of March 2003.

Kodwa Ngqongqoshe, ngesintu ngifisa ukusho lapha ukuthi njengoba kuwumgomo
kahulumeni ukuwandisa ukungena kwabantu emidlalweni, lezi zinkundla
zezemidlalo ziyakhiwa ezindaweni, ikakhulukazi emadolobheni, kodwa
ezindaweni zasemakhaya azakhiwa. Emadolobheni nakhona lapho kunenkinga
yokuthi azisebenziseki ngenxa yokuthi omasipala babiza imali enkulu evimba
abantu ukuba bazisebenzise. Ngakho-ke sizocela ukuthi okungenani imali
engena kwimifelandawonye akube yiyo eya esetshenziselwe ukusingatha
izinkundla zemidlalo. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] (Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)
[But, hon Minister, I wish to say in Zulu that it is the Government's
policy to increase the number of people who join sport, and sports
facilities are being built in some areas, like the urban areas, but they
are not being built in the rural areas. Even in the urban areas there is a
problem of accessing these facilities because municipalities charge a lot
of money for using them. This prevents people from using these facilities.
Therefore, we would like to ask that the money that goes to federations
should be used to run these sports facilities.]

I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, when we look back at the past financial year,
2002-03, what do we see? We see that the programmes implemented by the
Ministry of Sport and Recreation have to a great extent been successful. It
has worked. If we look at sport in general, we see the promising and
talented young sports players of all race groups coming through the various
sporting codes to prove themselves at the highest level of sports
participation.
Look at rugby, for example. Having gone through various national age group
levels, namely from under 13 to under 21, the following young and talented
players represented South Africa at the last Under 21 Rugby World Cup,
which they won, namely Enrico January, Ashwin Willemse and Hanyani
Shimange, to name but a few. At present they are busy distinguishing
themselves at the Super 12 rugby level, soon to become household names in
South Africa. They are the new role models for our youth and up-and-coming
young rugby players. The same can be said about cricket, soccer, swimming
and athletics.

Yes, the Ministry has been successful in their implementation of the
various programmes. It is also true that the Ministry of Sport and
Recreation wanted to do much more as far as provision of facilities in
areas of our disadvantaged and marginalised communities, where the need is
at its worst, is concerned. Our youth need more opportunities and providing
facilities is one way to address these needs so that our youth can also
reach their optimum development in sport.
The New NP has already expressed their support for scrapping quotas when
selecting the Springbok rugby team. The New NP wants to recommend that the
Ministry also consider the scrapping of quotas when selecting the South
African teams in respect of cricket, athletics and swimming. And I have
noted what you said, hon Minister, in this regard.

The New NP also supports the Ministry's view that the economic potential of
the sport and recreation sector for the country is significant; that Sport
and Recreation South Africa, together with the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism, are envisaging the international marketing of local
sport events, the bidding for international sport events such as the Soccer
World Cup and the Olympic Games as well as supporting the National Sports
Federation to bid for the hosting of major international events. And,
again, we noted what you said in this regard, Minister.

Hierdie optredes, indien suksesvol, sal nie net alleen die Republiek van
Suid Afrika as 'n sportaanbieder-mecca bekend maak nie, maar sal bydra dat
broodnodige valuta wat dit tot gevolg sal hê, die land invloei. Dit sal lei
tot meer werkskepping en sal die hoë armoede wat ons tans in die land
ondervind tot 'n mate aanspreek. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[These actions, if successful, will not only put South Africa on the map as
a sports presenters' mecca, but also contribute to the concomitant
essential revenue it would generate flowing into the country. This will
lead to greater job creation and to some extent address the high levels of
poverty that we are currently experiencing in the country.]

The New NP has taken cognisance, with appreciation, of the increased amount
of R58 460 000 on the previous Budget Vote of 2002-03. The bulk of the
budgeted Vote amount for the 2003-04 financial year, which is R225 762 000,
will be for the transfer of payments that will include capital transfers to
local authorities for provision of facilities, or the upgrading thereof.
These transfer payments will make up 83% of the 2003-04 budget.

Can the hon Minister indicate what mechanisms are in place to ensure that
the funds made available to municipalities are used for the purpose for
which they have been approved? The increase in funding for Programme 2:
Funding, Policy and Liaison, from R16 264 000 in the 2002-03 year to R18
137 000 in the present financial year will enable Sport and Recreation
South Africa to provide funds to the South African Sports Commission, the
South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport and others to continue with
their important functions.

The New NP supports the Vote. [Time expired.]

Ms D M MOROBI: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers, members of
Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, in this year of united action to push
back the frontiers of poverty, the youth of our country should be persuaded
to rely on their own productive efforts, and be engaged in sports to secure
a better life for themselves and others. Our success will depend upon
creating a moral society, a conducive environment and access to information
about sports facilities. A young person is vibrant, energetic, and
developing in age, conduct and character. In South Africa the term
``youth'' has a range of different meanings. The youth are regarded as
violent, unruly, undisciplined and underdeveloped.

These negative definitions were a contributory factor to the launch of the
moral regeneration campaign in 2002, focusing directly on the rebirth of
the character of young men and young women. We urge young people to take
the opportunity offered through the provision of facilities by
participating in sports.

Ka dilemo tse telele dipapadi di ne di bapalwa bakeng sa ho intsha bodutu,
jwalo ka diketo, morabaraba, kgati, sekotjhe le tse ding. Re leboha mmuso
wa rona wa ANC oo ka ona ho ileng ha hlaka hore bophelo bo botle ho bohle
bo ka phahama bakeng sa dipapadi tsa mefuta yohle. Le ho totobatsa hore
merabe yohle ena le bokgoni ba ho bapala dipapadi kaofela. le hoja mmuso wa
kgethollo o ne o etsa eka tse ding tsa dipapadi ke tsa ba baSweu feela.
(Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[For many years, games such as diketo, morabaraba, kgati, sekotjhe and
others were played for entertainment. We thank our ANC Government, through
which it has become clear that everybody's health can improve in different
kinds of games, and we want to stress that people of all races can play all
games, despite the fact that the apartheid regime behaved as if some games
were for white people only.]

Chairperson, we welcome the launch of the indigenous games in 2001. There
are co-ordinators of indigenous games in all the nine provinces. As a
result, there are more indigenous games coming out of the launch of the
indigenous games. Young women and young men with disabilities need specific
support and assistance to ensure that they have adequate access to
opportunities to participate fully in sports and also by removing a
disabling attitude and creating an accessible environment. We urge our
sports federation to play a proactive role in making certain that sport for
the disabled receives attention. We commend athletes like Zanele Situ,
Natalie du Toit and others for their dedication and achievement in sport
despite their disability and urge others to emulate their example.

In rural areas the youth are often more disadvantaged than those in urban
areas. They have less access to opportunities of being involved in sports
and recreation. The young people of South Africa were at a certain point
frustrated by a shortage of availability of sports facilities in rural
areas. We take this opportunity to urge our sports federations to address
the imbalance between the urban and the rural communities.

The broader scope of our youth indulgence in sports and recreation
contributes to personal health and improved wellbeing. Sport instills
creative independence and personal discipline and also plays a distinctive
role in our communities by strengthening social relations.
The involvement of young women and young men in sports redresses other
issues of concern that may hamper the development of our country like
crime, poverty and unemployment. Young women and young men should not have
idle minds as idle minds resort to crimes such as gang violence, theft,
murder and substance abuse.

An integrated track group was established in January 2001 in the Western
Cape to implement the first phase of the strategy. More than 250 suspects
were arrested in connection with gang violence, including 14 arrests for
murder, 10 for attempted murder and 11 for rape. Most of these crimes were
committed by young persons who should have spent time in activities for
sports and recreation.

We are grateful for the making of sports pioneers to move us in action. As
the ANC we have championed the creation of leadership manufacturers of the
Ngcondes and Tshwetes of tomorrow. This happens in Junior Dipapadi for the
age group 3 years to 14 years and supersport for 3 to 16 years, to
introduce the variety of sporting codes through play at beginners' level.
This is to promote physical activities and to enhance self-image.

Schoolchildren are engaged in playing sports that provide the motor skills
of throwing, kicking, ball control and tracking. Junior Dipapadi had a
workshop where all provincial co-ordinators were trained to implement
programmes in the provinces. We also appreciate the launch of the South
African National Recreation Council which was launched in February 1996.
Young women and young men are involved in health recreational facilities
specifically to rehabilitate our youth in prisons and to offer life-skills
to the homeless children, that is, the street children.

Modulasetulo, ona molaetsa o eya ho Letona ka sebele sa hae. Letona, moo ke
dulang teng Bophelong kwana porovenseng ya Gauteng, ho na le sehlopha sa
banana ba bolo ya maoto. Ba ipitsa Bophelong ladies' football club. Ke ile
ka buisana le mokwetlisi wa bona matsatsing ana a fetileng eleng Monghadi
Jabu Khoza. Sehlopha sena se thehilwe ka 1994 mme, se na le bokgoni bo
makatsang. Tse ding tsa bopaki ke tsena tse latelang Monghadi Ngconde
Balfour: Ba fumane dikgau tse 18. ke bahlodi ba sejana sa Godfrey Moloi. Ba
hlgotse dipapading tsa Halala Cup bakeng sa lebatoa la Vaal. Ho bona mono
sebapadi se seng mono ke Rose Ntjane ya bapallang Banyana Banyana. Sehlopha
sena se na le tlhoko ya disebsdiswa tsa dipapadi tsa papadi ena ya cdbona
ya bolo.

Ba hloka diaparo tsa ho bapala, ba hloka dibolo, ba hloka tse ding tse
ngata tseo ba di sebedisang bakeng sa papadi ena ya bona. Ka hoo, ba etsa
boipiletso ho letona hore mohlong a ka kgona hore a ba elellwe a tsebe ho
ba thusa. Le hona mono lekoetjheneng leno le lenyenyane la Bophelong, ho na
le batjha ba bang hape ba ntseng ba bapala Korf ball. Le hoja Korf ball e
se papadi e tummeng hakaalo. Empa ka hare ho lekoetjhene leno le leng
Bophelong Vanderbuijl Park, porovenseng ya Gauteng, di teng dibapadi tsa
Korf ball. Ka hoo tsena kaofela dihlopha tse pedi tsena ha ke ne ke buisana
le tsona ba ile ba re kgele mme mmaMorobi ha ele moo o le kwa palamenteng,
hobaneng ha maemo a rona antse a tshwana le ha eka ha re na motho wa
lekoetjheneng la rona le lenyenyane la Bophelong ka hare ho palamente. Na
ha le ke be le bue ka rona ha le le moo na? Ke ka hoo he, kajeno Letona ke
reng ke lebise molaetsa ona o totobetseng ka hare ho setjhaba. Ke a leboha.
[Mahofi.] (Translation of Sotho paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, this particular message goes to the Minister himself.
Minister, in Bophelong where I come from, in the Gauteng province, there's
a team of girls playing football. They call themselves the Bophelong Ladies
Football Club. In the past few days, I spoke to their coach, Mr Jabu Khoza.
This team started in 1994, and it has amazing potential. Here are some
examples, as proof, Mr Ngconde Balfour: They won 18 cups. They are the
winners of the Godfrey Moloi Cup and they also won for the Vaal Region in
the Halala Cup. Amongst them, there's a Banyana Banyana player called Rose
Ntjane.

This team has a need for football equipment. They need football clothes,
they need balls and many other items of football equipment. Therefore, they
are pleading with the Minister to heed them and help them out. There are
also some youth in the small Bophelong township who play golf. Golf is not
a very popular sport. However, there are some golf players in that township
called Bophelong, in Vanderbijlpark, in the Gauteng province.

When I spoke to both of these teams, they said to me, Mrs Morobi, you are
now in Parliament, but why are we still in the same situation now, as if we
do not have anyone from our small Bophelong township in Parliament? Don't
you ever talk about us in Parliament? That is why I'm sending this clear
message from the community to you today, Minister. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. There is no doubt South Africa has
an affluent supply of talent when it comes to sport and recreation. Having
recently hosted the ICC cricket tournament, South Africa has displayed an
impressive stance globally. The MF takes this opportunity to congratulate,
applaud and thank the Minister and all those who have contributed to the
success of this event.

As noted, cricket, rugby, soccer, racing, marathons and swimming have been
at a peak in the media. The MF, however, feels that sports in general come
in a much larger variety, which media coverage should also focus on.
Secondly, the above-mentioned sports are also all male-dominated and a
focus on female sports is urgent, so as to contribute to gender equality.

Furthermore, it has been found that sports and other recreational
activities act as a strong deterrent to the youth's temptation into drugs,
alcohol abuse, gangsterism and juvenile delinquency. The MF urges the
stronger induction of such activities and programmes into poverty-stricken
areas where such negative behaviour often finds its roots. As mentioned
earlier, the MF is confident of the South African talent and feels that
such talent may strongly be tapped from impoverished areas. This may be
successfully attained through the quota system.
The budget allocated for this department is appropriate, but a greater
contribution should be made to less mediarised sports so as to bring South
Africa into a more globally competitive society.

The MF supports Budget Vote 20: Sport and Recreation.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Agb Voorsitter, dit gaan op die oomblik nie goed met Suid-
Afrikaanse sport nie. Ons rugbyspanne vul die laagste plekke op die Super
12-punteleer. Bafana-Bafana voldoen nie aan die verwagting nie. En die
treurmare van ons nasionale krieketspan, wat nie eers onder die top ses
spanne kon tel nie, is die kersie op die koek.

Wat tog opvallend is, is dat dit in die spansporte is wat Suid-Afrikaners
uitsak, terwyl in die individuele sportsoorte soos gholf en boks, dit veel
beter gaan. 'n Mens kan dus die afleiding maak dat die oomblik wanneer Suid-
Afrikaners kollektief moet optree, dan onderpresteer ons; dat ons wel
talent het, maar dat ons kollektiewe pogings gebrekkig is.
Die vraag is: What went wrong? Waar lê die fout? Ons hoef nie verder te
soek nie as die woorde van president Mbeki self tydens die toekennings van
sportmedaljes verlede jaar. Hy was ontevrede omdat daar te min sportmanne
en -vroue van kleur op die podium was, en het onder andere gesê, en ek haal
aan: ``South Africa should accept losing international sporting
competitions for the next few years in the interest of racial
transformation.'' (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Chairperson, at the moment it is not going well with
South African sport. Our rugby teams are in the lowest positions on the
Super 12 log. Bafana Bafana are not meeting expectations. And the sad
tidings of our national cricket team, which could not even be included
among the top six teams, is the cherry on top.

What is striking, is that it is in the team sports that South Africa is
lagging behind, while things are going much better in the individual sports
like golf and boxing. One could therefore deduce that the minute South
Africans have to act collectively, we underachieve; that we do have talent,
but that our collective attempts are lacking.

The question is: What went wrong? Where does the fault lie? We do not have
to look further than the words of President Mbeki himself during the
awarding of sporting medals last year. He was dissatisfied because there
were too few sportsmen and sportswomen of colour on the podium and said,
inter alia, and I quote: ``South Africa should accept losing international
sporting competitions for the next few years in the interest of racial
transformation.'']

In other words, hon Chairperson, losing on the international sports field
should not be seen as a surprise. Indeed, it is Government policy to lose.
The National Action regards this policy as short-sighted.

Hon Chair, have you got a red card for the Minister? He's disturbing me.

It triggers a vicious downward spiral, to the very detriment of the
sportsmen and sportswomen he wants to see on the podium. The fact of the
matter is that losing national teams will have a devastating effect on the
image of their sport and on the interest of the public. This leads to less
attractive opportunities for sponsors of events, teams and players and less
fees payable for television rights and advertisements. As a result, less
money will be available for sports development and the final victims will
not be sport in South Africa in general, but the very people he wants to
promote.

It is inexplicable that whereas in the field of economics of the country
Government refrains from short-term policies with detrimental effects in
the long-term, in the sports arena it advocates just the opposite. This is
not the right thing to do.

The President's remarks also imply a public recognition that national teams
should not be elected on merit, but along the guidelines of affirmative
action in team selection. This viewpoint contradicts the earlier assurances
that quotas would not be applicable on national teams of South Africa.

Clearly, when looking at the dismal performances of the South African rugby
and cricket teams, these policies stand out as the main reasons for the
failures.

Ja, ek weet dis maklik om die regering vir alles die skuld te gee. As die
kat kleintjies kry is dit die regering se skuld. Tog is dit die standpunt
van die Nasionale Aksie dat daar te veel regeringsinmenging in sport in
Suid-Afrika is. Dink aan die Jacques Rudolph sage in Australië; aan die
Minister se beledigende woorde teenoor Jacques Kallis; aan die kwotas wat
gehef word tot op nasionale vlak.

Waarom moet ons 'n sport Minister hê wat gedurig dreig en blaas. Wat vandag
selfs gedreig het om met sy volle gewig op skole af te kom wat nie sokker
aanbied nie. Wat 'n neerdrukkende gedagte. Maar skyfskiet kan maar in die
slag bly.
Ons doen 'n beroep op 'n oorywerige minister om hom te bepaal by wat sy
wesenlike taak en funksie is, naamlik om 'n raamwerk daar te stel waarbinne
sportliggame as onafhanklike instellings van die burgerlike samelewing
sonder staatsinmenging hulle ding kan doen. Meneer, Suid-Afrika is moeg van
verloor. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Yes, I know it is easy to blame the Government for everything. If the cat
has kittens, it is the Government's fault. Yet it is the position of the
National Action that there is too much Government interference in sport in
South Africa. Think about the Jacques Rudolph saga in Australia; about the
Minister's insulting words about Jacques Kallis; about the quotas being
applied up to the national level.

Why must we have a Minister of sport who is constantly threatening and
huffing? A Minister who today even threatened to bring his full weight down
on schools which do not offer soccer. What a depressing thought. But target
shooting can become a victim.

We appeal to an overzealous Minister to confine himself to what is his real
task and function, namely to establish a framework within which sporting
bodies can do what they have to do as independent institutions of civil
society without state interference. Sir, South Africa is tired of losing.]

Hon Minister, please, let the children play. Create an environment
conducive to excellence, development and free participation. Do not turn
our sports fields into battlefields. It is Ellis Park, Loftus and Orlando
Stadium, it is not Baghdad.

We do not need a national Minister of sport with a red card in his hand or
a whistle in his mouth. We do not need a threatening big brother, but a
friendly facilitator, unless we have settled on remaining losers. I thank
you.

Mr L R R REID: Chairperson, hon members, in his state of the nation address
on 14 February 2003, the President said:


  Last year when we spoke from this podium, we said our country has a
  continuing task to push back the frontiers of poverty and expand access
  to a better life for all.

In this regard, through its Building for Sport and Recreation Programme,
the Department of Sport and Recreation is indeed busy pushing back the
frontiers of poverty by funding the building and upgrading of
infrastructure. In apartheid South Africa the disadvantaged rural areas had
no or very few sport facilities. A large number of unemployed men, women,
youth and the disabled are employed on a temporary basis during the
construction phase. After the completion of these projects others are
employed to manage these facilities. Furthermore, informal traders are
allowed to trade outside these stadia.

Before the unification process of sport our people played nonracial sport
under the various nonracial sporting bodies. As already mentioned, there
was a lack of sport facilities and no sponsorship for nonracial sport at
all. Despite all of this there were vibrant and functioning clubs, which
enjoyed the support of entire communities. A union like Saru rotated their
provincial matches, giving the various towns within a provincial union the
opportunity to host provincial games. Players like Cassiem Jabaar, Salie
Fredericks, Tollie Grootboom, Clemmie Strydom and others became role models
for the youth. They inspired the youth to such an extent that the majority
of the youngsters played rugby and the crime rate at that time was very
low.

Since unification and the introduction of professional rugby the focus has
shifted to provincial teams. Provincial players are no longer playing club
rugby. As amateur rugby clubs are the nursery for future stars, and with no
or very little funding, our clubs in the rural areas are dying. There are
lots of talented youngsters who want to play rugby, but due to the lack of
funding these players are lost to the game. And here I should mention that
in the South Western Districts, on the farms and the forestry stations, all
over you find lots of young people who want to play rugby.

The fact that our clubs are dying means that no youngsters will come
through and later play provincial rugby. I want to urge the Minister to
appoint a commission to investigate the funding of clubs by their national
federations, because quite often the money for development is not used for
development but is used to buy players. And I want to tell hon Lee that
maybe he hasn't read the Smith report, because it is quite clear that only
Boland has completely met the transformation targets and other provinces
are buying their players from Boland. [Applause.] Unless we do that - that
is investigate the funding - I am afraid that the talent out there in the
deep rural areas will be lost to us forever.

Soos aangedui, is amateursport die intreevlak vir alle atlete. Hier moet ek
die Minister en die sportkommissie bedank vir die lootsing van die Inheemse
Spele. Hierdie spele bied nie net ontspanning nie, maar maak ook
voorsiening vir massa-deelname. Dit is werklik die hart van amateursport.
Omdat daar nie om geld meegeding word nie, is die sport skoon en
opkikkervry. En ek wil die sportkommissie gelukwens met hulle besluit om
die Nasionale Inheemse Spele in September in Limpopo te hou.

Wat skole sport aanbetref, is dit moontlik vir ons kinders om nasionale
kleure te verwerf in sportkodes soos rugby en sokker terwyl hulle studeer
aan ons gewone staatskole. Maar sodra 'n kind dieselfde kleure wil verwerf
in krieket moet hy die staatskool verlaat. Hy moet sy eie woonarea verlaat
en gaan inskryf by 'n private skool. Dit vervreem hierdie kinders van die
omstandighede in die areas waarin hulle lewe. Ek voel ook dat die Sport
Akademie moet betrokke raak by skolesport om hulle die nodige afrigting te
gee, en ook te voorsien van die nodige toerusting en geld om daardie
kinders te hou, sodat ons eie skole ook nasionale helde in 'n sport soos
krieket kan oplewer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[As indicated, amateur sport is the entry level for all athletes. Here I
must thank the Minister and the sport commission for the launching of the
indigenous games. These games do not only offer relaxation, but also make
provision for mass participation. They are truly the soul of amateur sport.
Because money isn't competed for, the sport is clean and drug-free. And I
want to congratulate the sport commission on their decision to hold the
National Indigenous Games in Limpopo in September.

As far as school sport is concerned, it is possible for our children to
earn national colours in sporting codes such as rugby and soccer while they
study at our normal state schools. But as soon as a child wants to earn the
same colours in cricket, he must leave the state school. He must leave his
own residential area and enrol at a private school. This alienates these
children from the circumstances in the areas in which they live.

I also feel that the sports academy must get involved in school sport by
giving them the necessary coaching, and also by supplying them with the
necessary equipment and money to keep those children, so that our own
schools can also produce national heroes in a sport like cricket.]

Disabled sport is another amateur sport. The ANC Government has ensured
that all facilities are user-friendly and accessible for the disabled.
Those who are sitting in doom and gloom about our sporting achievements
need to take note of the performance of our disabled athletes in
international competitions. Their achievements were acknowledged by the
President at the Presidential Sports Awards.

The programme Siyadlala on SABC TV caters for minor sports. In the past
year there was an increase in the number of games that were broadcast. I
think that the department, the national federations and the SABC need to
discuss the possibility of allocating prime broadcasting time of about 15
minutes to broadcast Siyadlala during half-time of big matches on TV. This
would enable millions of viewers to watch Siyadlala who would otherwise not
have been able to.

The initiatives of Stephen Pienaar and Jomo Sono to address social issues
in their areas need to be commended, and I hope that other sports stars
will follow in their footsteps.

While professional sport is all about contracts and money, you often find
that, in terms of the category of contracts, blacks more than often find
themselves at the lower end of these categories. This is discrimination.
This practice must stop. I am of the opinion that all contracts should be
performance-related. That would ensure that professional players show
commitment and still regard playing for their country as an honour.

Al is daar baie mense wat pessimisties oor ons sportprestasies is, het ons
sportspanne almal se ondersteuning nodig. Deur meer atlete te betrek by
amateursport sal ons die spelerpoel verbreed en met die nodige afrigting en
verbeterde fasiliteite glo ek daar sal meer spelers deurkom om op hoër vlak
mee te ding.

In my kiesafdeling, die Oudtshoorn-omgewing en die SWD, is daar baie mense
wat die spel gedien het as spelers en as administrateurs deur die donker
apartheidsjare. Baie van hulle was geviktimiseer, maar hulle het vasgestaan
en deurgedruk om nie-rassige sport te laat realiseer. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Although there are many people who are pessimistic about our sporting
achievements, our sports teams need everybody's support. By involving more
athletes in amateur sport, we will extend our player pool and with the
necessary coaching and improved facilities I believe that more players will
come through to compete at a higher level.

In my constituency, the Oudtshoorn area and the SWD, there are many people
who served the game as players and as administrators through the dark years
of apartheid. Many of them were victimised, but they stood firm and
persevered in order to realise nonracial sport.]

There were many sportspeople the likes of Basil D'Oliveira, Eric Majola,
Precious Mckenzie, Eddie Michaels, David Samaai, Humphrey Kosi and others,
who played a big part in bringing about nonracial sport. Since unification
there have been a number of sportspersons, both black and white, who
performed excellently. They need to be acknowledged.

In the past we have used sport as an effective vehicle to isolate both
racist sport and the apartheid regime. We must all join hands and use sport
to unite our nation. In building this nonracial nation we must at the same
time create a new South African patriotism that will take our country to
new heights. Let us all unite and back the 2010 bid.

The ANC supports this Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Chairperson, hon members, in order to heal the divisions
of the past and to establish a society based on democratic values, social
justice and fundamental human rights as per our Constitution, we must all
do our best to see to it that we normalise our sport as soon as possible.

However, to achieve these objectives we must have sports administrators
that are honest and dedicated. It does not necessarily mean that because
you were a good, dedicated comrade during the struggle you will necessarily
become a good and dedicated sports administrator. It doesn't work like
that.

Unfortunately, some of our codes of sport today are bedevilled by sports
administrators with hidden agendas, to the detriment of both the players
and spectators. Some have questioned this Government's role in sport,
accusing the Minister of interfering in sports administration.

However, this could be acceptable in countries where sport is played under
normal circumstances where the role of the government is limited to the
bare minimum. In our country, however, where for centuries sport has been
conducted and played under race restrictions, it will remain necessary for
the Government to be involved in monitoring all sport structures as long as
our sport is not normalised. [Applause.]

The IFP wishes to recommend to the Government through the Minister of Sport
a sound and clear policy and management system. We appeal to the Minister,
firstly, to put in place local community structures in which sport and
recreational clubs and associations fall under the aegis of local
government; secondly, to formulate regional structures in which local
associations form sporting structures which are recognised under the
provincial government; thirdly, to formulate provincial structures which
have sport and recreation councils to advise particularly the provincial
sport Ministers; and finally, to formulate a national structure to be known
as a South African council on sport, which will be a consultative body to
advise both the provincial and national interests. This committee should
attach particular importance to enriching the sports lives of women and
children and disabled people.

We need a sound and clear policy which must, inter alia, send a clear
message to all participants in our sporting and recreational activities at
all levels. I believe that such a policy will help in the many problems
facing our youth today in modern society. This could be resolved through a
vigorous sport policy initiated in the community and vigorously encouraged
in all our sports.

In this regard I also propose to the Minister that the Government should
set aside 20% from the present National Lottery, Uthingo, for funding of
sport and recreational development in our country ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Will you do that, Minister? [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson and hon members, firstly allow me to thank the
hon chairperson of the portfolio committee and my colleagues in the ANC
study group for the opportunity to participate in this important debate.
For me, it is a great opportunity to participate knowing that I can make a
direct contribution and involve myself in the transformation and
development of sport in South Africa.

South Africans should know that the door is open to get involved and help
build to accelerate the social transformation of this country. The ANC is
the only vehicle to address historical imbalances, while firmly focusing on
providing a better future for all South Africans by pushing back the
frontiers of poverty. [Applause.]

The Minister has correctly identified the transformation agenda as a key
priority during his term of office. Although progress has been noted in
certain instances, a lot still needs to be done to address the entrenched
racial, gender and spatial inequalities of the past which still prevail in
society.

The contribution made by the member of the Official Opposition on this
crucial topic of transformation was once again very predictable in its
complete disregard of the immense importance sport must play in
transforming society. Sport and recreation is and will remain part and
parcel of the overall transformation agenda of the ANC.

The racial cleavages and resistance to transformation must be tackled head-
on in order to realise objectives of nation-building, nonracism and
patriotism. We are charged with the responsibility to eliminate the
limitations placed on women, rural communities, youth and people with
disabilities with regard to participation in sport. At the same time, we
must continuously implement intervention programmes aimed at addressing the
backlog in the development of sports facilities in disadvantaged
communities and for people with disabilities as well as women.

Efforts to address these inequalities of the past started with the unity
process of the early 90s. The national federation was formed as a result of
this process, and we were given targets that dealt with the formation of
unified nonracial bodies for all sporting codes. At the same time, they
were mandated to address historical imbalances.

Since unity, a lot of progress has been made in the quest to achieve our
ultimate goal of social transformation. However, it is prudent for
Government and all stakeholders to engage in a process where we need to
measure our progress and establish whether we indeed have achieved the
goals set out with the unification of sport. While we must jealously guard
the progress that has been made, we must remain acutely aware of the
immense challenges that face sport as well as attempts in certain sport
sectors to revert to the old order.

Study tours by the portfolio committee to various provinces, including the
Northern Cape and the Western Cape, have indicated that the unified
sporting bodies that were put in place in rural towns are being put under
severe strain due to withdrawal of certain segments of society. Very often,
the more advantaged members of the society are prepared to travel hundreds
of kilometres at great cost to other towns in order to play against teams
of the same racial group. This results in a repeat of the patterns of
social interaction which were evident in the pre-unity period when sport
was played along racial lines. At the same time, sport facilities in the
established areas are underutilised while the demand for more facilities in
disadvantaged areas is increasing by the day.

Another trend prevalent in these rural towns is that of the formation of
private clubs which only cater for the advantaged members of society. Such
clubs have the privilege to utilise vast tracts of sports fields by means
of 99-year leasehold rights granted to them prior to 1994.

This issue requires urgent intervention in order to allow all communities
in rural areas to enjoy the same benefits as those living in urban areas.
The road to complete social transformation of society was always going to
be a challenging one. It is therefore paramount for all stakeholders to
engage in this process in order to achieve our objectives.

Another challenge facing us is the creation of stability in federations and
their affiliates which have made great progress since unity. The current
turmoil in Eastern Cape province cricket needs to be resolved. The
competing priorities of those involved undermine the great progress that
has been made towards transformation.

This province was once the model of development in South African cricket,
but, disappointingly, it has allowed itself to be sidetracked by personal
squabbles. These challenges must be addressed by all stakeholders to ensure
that we increase mass participation. Very often, certain sectors of society
- and we heard it again today - err by narrowly focusing only on the
performance of our national teams. They fall into the trap of looking for a
scapegoat when South African sports teams do not succeed in the
international arena.

If satisfaction cannot be found in blaming players, coaches, management or
even the Minister for below-par performances and defeats, the fingers are
pointed at transformation. This view must be rejected with contempt. The
message is clear that transformation must continue. We must proceed in our
quest to produce representative teams of patriotic and loyal of South
African men and women who have internalised the principles of
transformation. It must be clear that these teams must be entrusted to
coaches and management officials who are also committed to this goal. Too
often we hear negative comments emanating from former players and coaches
trying to undermine these objectives.

We must continue to work towards the deep integration of sport right down
to clubs at school level, as we have mentioned earlier. The work
done thus far by the SA Sports Commission, the federations and the
department is commendable. In this regard, the hon Minister's department
needs to be commended for the sterling job done in Programme 3, Building
for Sport and Recreation. While the aim of this programme is to contribute
to increased participation in sport, thousands of temporary and permanent
jobs have been created.

At no time in South Africa's history have we witnessed greater commitment
by Government to ensure inclusiveness, fairness and equality. This ANC
Government has translated this commitment into practice by investing some
R450 million over the past nine years on building and upgrading facilities
around our country.

Other notable achievements include the successful bidding and hosting of
international events and also efforts by the sports commission to involve
thousands of disadvantaged athletes in participation. [Interjections.]

I am clever enough to do my own. At this juncture, it is important - and I
hope the hon members will listen now - to clarify exactly the ANC's
position and approach with regard to representative teams. We heard earlier
this afternoon and also last week in the media about the confusion in
certain quarters on the lack of apparent enforcement of quotas in
forthcoming Springbok tours compared to the perceived situation during the
Cricket World Cup.

It is puzzling to see how certain individuals deliberately confuse
themselves as far as this issue is concerned. It must be put on record that
this Government has never prescribed to any federation what their
transformation target should be. Instead, reference to the perceived
interference by the Minister in certain sporting codes by the Opposition is
unfounded and without substance. Federations themselves have been
encouraged towards self-regulation and setting their own transformation
targets.

These targets are then submitted to the department as performance targets
and form the basis for further dialogue and interaction. However, it has
happened that certain federations do not need these intended targets. In
such instances, the federation, the department and the portfolio committee
engage each other to determine the reasons for that. However, Government
has a commitment to intervene when federations deviate from the prevailing
practice and embark on a unilateral course of action. In this regard, it is
prudent that the outstanding business with the UCB be amicably resolved as
a matter of priority. You have correctly pointed out that cricket is one of
the federations that has made the most progress in South Africa. It is thus
important to use this code as a case study to evaluate the progress made
towards the transformation of sport.

The findings of the task team you appointed last year to investigate
cricket challenge certain assumptions of the UCB. This report will form the
basis for interaction between the portfolio committee and the UCB. In this
regard, study tours will be conducted to some of the affiliates mentioned.
We will get a first-hand experience of exactly what the current situation
is. Only then, hon Lee, will we be able to pronounce ourselves on the
preferred vehicle to achieve representivity. [Applause.]

Hon members need to be informed that this process started last Monday in
the workshop held at Parliament. All stakeholders were involved and crucial
steps were taken. Proposals emanating from this workshop will contribute to
the key issues which Government aims to address in the Sport Transformation
Charter. [Applause.]

We in the ANC are convinced that the transformation charter will accelerate
our efforts and put us on course to achieve our objectives. Indeed the tide
has turned in sport and recreation. It is our joint responsibility to
actively contribute to turn that tide into a flood for the benefit of our
people. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: You know, there are times when I want
to sing, like now. I want to sing because I'm an ANC member. And I'm happy
being an ANC member because if I was in any other party, I would be lost.
You see, I don't know; I really don't know.

An HON MEMBER: We know that.
The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: You see, in the ANC there are
principles we uphold and we hold onto these principles even when there is
turbulence. The tide has really turned. [Interjections.] Mr Frolick, the
tide has turned. I am an ANC member and, please God, do me one favour: Let
me die an ANC member. [Applause.]

I want to refer to two things very quickly. I will not respond to most of
the things said by Mr Lee. I will tell you something. There are two things
I will tell you quickly. We had a problem with Karate SA, which is sorted
out, and a member who used to be an executive member of Karate SA who
happens to be a member of the party this side - Adv Paul Swart - was so
damn good in dealing with that issue with me that we really crossed
turbulent waters and got karate back.

The second one is that jukskei had a problem. At that stage Craig Morkel
was still with the New NP ...

An HON MEMBER: Hon Craig Morkel.
The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Craig Morkel. But what I'm trying
to bring attention to is contributions that are positive. He sat with me
and we dealt with jukskei. With jukskei not being a mass-based
organisational sport, we couldn't give colours for it, and they were
recreational more than anything else. But through working with them and
being able to show that jukskei is really growing, we managed to get
jukskei colours. The old farmers and the farmworkers are now playing
jukskei together, and that is what we did. Two people made that
contribution, and I really welcome that kind of contribution.

Mr M J ELLIS: What's your point?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Thank you, thank you. My point. It's
just advice which I think I will regret in the long run. Mr Lee ...

An HON MEMBER: The hon Mr Lee.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: The hon Mr Lee, please try and
contribute something positive to South African sport; that is all I'm
saying. Please, for God's sake contribute something positive.

Dominee Aucamp, hoe kan jy 'n dominee wees en jy praat leuens? Hoekom lieg
jy as jy 'n dominee is? Jy kan nie as 'n dominee lieg nie, man.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Reverend Aucamp, how can you be a minister and lie? Why
do you lie if you are a minister? As a minister you cannot lie, man.
[Interjections.]]

No, sit down! Go and sit down.

Mr C AUCAMP: On a point of order: Is it parliamentary for the hon Minister
to tell me ``ek lieg'' [I am lying]?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: It is. Yes.

Mr C AUCAMP: Hy lieg as hy so sê. [He is lying if he says so.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, it is not parliamentary
to say an hon member is lying. Will you please withdraw?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: The hon member is not biblical.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, will you please
withdraw the words ``he is lying.''

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I am withdrawing the words ``he is
lying.'' He is not biblical.

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: Is it in order for the
Minister to say that I am not biblical? I think it is not in order to cast
reflections on a person's religious convictions. What I've said I'm quite
convinced of. Thank you. I ask you to withdraw that.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Minister, the member finds that
offensive. Can you please refrain from that?
The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I withdraw that. I'm a good
Presbyterian.

Now, these two members, honourable as they are, want to listen to what they
want to hear. With regard to the speech of the President last year, I was
there. They were not at the presidential awards. And they will never come
because we will never invite them. They contribute nothing. Now, you may
find that what they are saying is totally different from what was said, but
all I can say of them is, ``Please go on and listen to what you want to
say. In my mind you are too gullible.''

Let me go on to thank the members who have contributed to this, members who
have a contribution to make. All of them have made wonderful contributions.
And by the way, Chairperson, if you want to put a sanction on the whistle I
blew, you can give me 10 minutes in the sin bin. I'll accept that, if there
is a sin bin here.

Very quickly, I want to refer to a number of issues. I want to thank all
the members who have participated. Sis Ruth, you always are a stalwart, and
you are really the backbone of the committee. [Applause.] You really give
me strength to carry on despite some of the exclusionists this side.
Secondly, the members of the portfolio committee that we have got today
have really grown, given the way the contributions were made. This applies
to all of them, without fail. Tata uReid, it's the first time that you
contributed, and your contribution, Mr Reid, was just fantastic. Keep going
that way. [Interjections.]

The yap-yap he won't listen to.

I must say we have the department, the sports commission, the amount of
work that has gone on, and the sports federation people that are there. I
cannot name all of them, but you can see that the who's who of cricket is
sitting out there: Tobie Titus from Sarfu, Vernon Seymour, Morne du
Plessis, Rushdie Majiet, Goolam Allie, Dr Shoaib Mandra, Peter Higgins, Sas
Bailey, Peter Jooste, Stan Brickwa, Kedi Tshoma. We thank you, Kedi, for
the work you do with the National Lottery. [Applause.] Wilfred Daniels and
Violet Magwaca are here and I understand that Molefi Oliphant is up there
and Mokoena is up there - all of them are here. Vincent Baartjes is here
and I can see John Lane there.

I know the amount of work they put in. And I know that they are not
convinced and they'll never be convinced, all of them, by the
noncontribution of the Official Opposition. They will never be convinced at
all by the Official Opposition. I do want to thank those people, very, very
quickly.

There's one thing I know and that is that we did not take kindly to
management committees during our time of struggle. We did not take kindly
to them because they opposed everything. They did everything to stop our
people from using facilities. They blocked everything, and I am not going
to say who I am talking about here.

We have a good relationship with correctional services in terms of working
with prisons.
There are lots of issues. We are busy with the Broadcasting Act. I want to
thank the three broadcasters and the media for the amount of work they do
for sport in this country. That is e tv, SABC and Supersport. All three of
them are doing an excellent job for us. The print media is also doing an
excellent job. I want to thank them.

And I do think, once we finish here, even though we have been saying things
to one another we still have somewhere to go to, a party to enjoy.
[Interjections.]

Yes, you can come, Mr Ellis. We will not shaya [beat] you. You can come.
You are invited.

But I should also thank utata uDhlamini from the IFP. Your contribution was
wonderful, fantastic. I know uNorman Middleton as an old campaigner and
also the contribution and the advice that hon Middleton is giving is very
good and we welcome that, when people want to contribute positively.
[Interjections.]

Oh, please, hon Seremane. Andazi noma unguSeremane or Semerane. [I do not
know whether you are Seremane or Semerane.] [Laughter.]

Good night. [Applause.]

                    ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES PROHIBITION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you Chairperson, hon members.
Conflict in Africa often involves irregular forces, whose actions
frequently defy the definitions of international law, or happen miles away
from formal state control or international observation. Cheap weapons like
land mines have frequently become the weapon of choice where difficult
terrain, atrocities and skirmishes, used alongside domestic agricultural
implements like machetes or pangas, become lethal in the hands of those
determined to turn them against our brothers and sisters.

We are making great strides to end conflict in our region, and on our
continent. One of the major challenges in the course of that effort is to
overcome the indiscriminate use of cheap weapons as lethal objects, not
least because their effect is excessively injurious to people. The land
mine has been described as the perfect soldier, undetected till too late,
never missing, never sleeping, always silent. Let's pause briefly to
consider the lifespan of these dreadful weapons.

The mine is laid, often as a booby trap. It is put in place often in
agricultural land, frequently by a terrified youngster, who can't wait to
get as much distance between himself and the minefield. He probably recalls
the instructor describing what it can do. Even more probably, he has seen
the amputees or heard his comrades crying out in pain, alone in the dark in
a minefield, where no one will dare to go to his assistance. At a later
stage, often years later, there is an explosion, killing or maiming a
child, who on his or her way to collecting water or fetching wood, looked
at it curiously before trying to pick it up.
He or she may have unknowingly run along a track before stepping on it. If
he or she is lucky, temporary blindness and perforated eardrums, besides
their sheer terror, is all they will suffer. Maybe, but not likely. More
frequently the victim must trek for miles to a clinic, if there is one. In
a rural area there is unlikely to be any extra blood, and probably few
bandages or painkillers. If he or she is lucky enough to survive, a
prosthesis will be fitted. But the child will have to undergo surgery every
three to six months, as the bone continues to grow and causes great
discomfort as it sticks into the artificial limb.

I do not exaggerate the identity of the victim as a civilian, and probably
a child, nor can I even begin to describe the horror of these weapons
sufficiently. The International Committee for the Red Cross reports that
the only purpose for which mines have been used with total success by the
mine layer, and with total impact on the target, is for the containment or
harassment of civilians. The main characteristic of a mine is that it is
designed to be victim actuated. Totally unprepared for these effects of
mine warfare, civilians suffer terribly.

A shocking statistic is that 1 in 470 people in Angola have had one or more
limbs amputated. Even the shortest visit to many of our capital cities like
Luanda or Maputo, or to rural areas in the countries of Rwanda and DRC, or
to northern Namibia, reveals the successful strike of the mine. Compare
this with 1 in 22 000, in mine-free USA. The International Committee of the
Red Cross states that these weapons currently claim some 2 000 victims a
month, and over the last 50 years have probably inflicted more death and
injury than nuclear and chemical weapons combined.

Land mines, which were originally conceived to counter the use of tanks and
other armoured vehicles, have been increasingly designed to target human
beings. The United Nations has reckoned that land mines are at least 10
times more likely to kill or injure a civilian after a conflict than a
combatant after hostilities. Soon after the first democratic elections in
1994, the South African Government took up the issues raised by the fight
against the manufacture and use of anti-personnel land mines.

In 1996 we prohibited the export of all types of land mines. In 1997, we
prohibited the use, development, production, and stockpiling of anti-
personnel land mines. By 1998, 312 000 anti-personnel land mines held by
the Department of Defence had been destroyed. South Africa has sought to
operationalise the Mines Ban Treaty, by preparing the Anti-Personnel Mines
Prohibition Bill, which is before us today. Angola's recent ratification of
the Mine Ban Treaty now means that all SADC countries are on board, and
under the umbrella of the convention.

This must now be taken forward by promulgating domestic legislation and
penal sanctions to give effect to the convention. South Africa's
ratification of this legislation has its roots in the international
campaign to rid the world of anti-personnel land mines. We should be aware
that some of the munitions that are raining down on Baghdad as we speak are
not covered by the definitions contained in this legislation. It is clear
that the cluster bomb in particular, acts in a very similar way to the anti-
personnel land mine. They are small, scattered, silent, and objects of
curiosity to children.

Governments, in conjunction with their defence forces, have to actively
revisit their military doctrine, to eradicate the use of these weapons.
Governments also need to ensure that public awareness is such that if
conflict breaks out, the use of mines or the hacking off of limbs is
considered so repulsive that their use will unconditionally and unanimously
be condemned by all participants in such conflicts. Members would have seen
the child in the newspapers who has lost both his arms. This child has lost
his arms due to the cluster bomb.

The focus of our immediate efforts should now be to rid the SADC of the
scourge of land mines. Nepad's peace and security initiative focuses on
building Africa's capacity to manage all aspects of conflict by
strengthening existing continental and regional institutions that deal,
amongst others, with the combating of the illicit proliferation of small
arms, light weapons and land mines.

South Africa is playing a leading role in demining, in the training of
deminers, and in improving the cost-efficiency of operations. When the
South African Government approved the restructuring of Mechem, Denel's
demining technology powerhouse, Government insisted that the demining
component would neither be shut down nor privatised, precisely because it
is a critical component of humanitarian assistance, that must not be driven
by profit. Local community participation and education are central to this
assistance.

We would also urge the wider demining industry to adopt a code of conduct
that is respected and implemented by all. South Africa remains totally
committed to the banning of anti-personnel land mines, the destruction of
existing stockpiles, mine awareness, the clearance of emplaced mines, and
victim assistance. We would urge those countries which have not yet passed
legislation such as this Bill, to do so urgently.

Peace and security in the region and on our continent must remain a top
priority for all of us, and for South Africa as a whole. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms T R MODISE: Motlatsa Modulasetilo, Maloko a Ntlu e [Chairperson, and hon
members of this House] we consider the Anti-Personnel Mines Prohibition
Bill today, which enacts the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their
Destruction into law. The Bill we consider today is a celebration of the
long campaigns, the lobbies, the tears, the shame, the anger and the
resolute spirit of all people from all walks of lives to stop the maiming
and the killing of thousands of people.

Pictures of women and children hobbling around without limbs and dignity
have often left us angry and ashamed at the immoral use of these mines. We
congratulate all individuals, local and international, the numerous NGOs,
the international Red Cross Society, the Red Crescent Movement and the
international campaign to ban land mines for their tireless efforts to make
sure that today some of us can stand here and celebrate those efforts.

South Africa signed and ratified the convention in September 1997, and as
the Deputy Minister says, we destroyed our stock in 1998, save for about 5
000 which we use for training. South Africa is concerned about human
rights, political and economic stability and development. We know that for
Africa to move forward the development of her human resources must be
prioritised. Anti-personnel land mines cannot tell the innocent from the
guilty, the civilian from the military, the warring factors from women and
children. They kill indiscriminately and take away the dignity of the self-
reliance of people.

Not only are individuals and communities disadvantaged and destabilised,
their collective and communal spirit is broken and the road to healing and
dignity is often hard, bitter and lonely. This Bill demonstrates yet again
South Africa's efforts and commitment to regional, co-operative and
collective security. The provisions of this Bill are applicable to all
South African citizens, residents, juristic people, members of the Defence
Force or those people who are attached to the Defence Force, whether they
are citizens of this country or not.

This Bill makes procurement, possession, manufacture, stockpiling,
transfer, import or export of these mines, their components or even plans
and designs, illegal. The offences will be punishable for up to 25 years in
prison with or without options of fines for natural persons and juristic
persons will be liable to fines not exceeding R1 000 000. The courts can
also decide to confiscate property which has been in any way connected with
the possession of these mines.

The Bill gives the Minister the power to exempt in writing persons or
organs that can possess the mines, components or plans only in the case
where they are going to be developing or conducting training in detection,
clearance or destruction. The Minister may allow public museums, military
museums, and private or public collectors to possess the anti-personnel
mines, components or plans only if these do not contain explosive
triggering mechanisms or explosive material themselves.

The Minister is empowered to stop any exercise, or activity of co-operative
deployment with any other force if that deployment or activity or operation
will in any way go against the provisions of the convention. This
demonstrates how resolute we are to outlaw the use of anti-personnel mines.

Chapter 5 of this Bill deals with the appointment, remuneration, status and
authority of the domestic inspectors. This Bill does not give domestic
inspectors any policy powers and states clearly that they have to be
deployed with the police on the authority of a warrant issued by a
magistrate or a judge. The Bill also recognises in section 19 that often it
is not practical to obtain a warrant before the search if the delay in
obtaining such a warrant will actually defeat the objects of the search
itself.

When South Africa destroyed her mines, it is important to note, we also
said that we will make sure that we monitor the utilisation of the mines
that remain. South Africa needs to report on this convention and on all the
other international instruments via the Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
Secretary-General of the UN. This Bill now provides that a copy of this
report which goes to the Secretary-General, comes to Parliament within two
weeks of the report having been tabled at the UN.

Not only innocent children and women become victims of anti-personnel land
mines. In South Africa there are many people who are going around
physically and mentally scarred. Pictures of Angola and Mozambique showing
persons armless, legless and not too grateful to be alive must not continue
to dominate the images of Africa. We must do everything that we can to
change these pictures and to replace these with the lilting African voices
raised in song and dance. We must plan to see pictures of African youth
full of hope and dreams, complete - ``tone en al'' [toes and all]. Nepad
must be based on solid plans to stop the conflict of ethnic, cultural,
religious, racial and economic sources. Wars of greed and ignorance must
stop. Regional co-ordination and co-operation must be about and for the
benefit of people.

The first challenge is to stop the naming and the killing of the innocent
by setting up projects that utilise South Africa's capability to remove and
destroy these mines. It is not enough just to ban the production, the use,
the stockpiling and the transportation of these mines. It is important to
look at these victims and their rehabilitation. It is never enough to
express shame and regret. It is necessary for the manufacturers and the
users of these mines, past and present, to begin to put their heads
together and to come up with rehabilitation centres for these victims of
these mines and their descendants.
It is nonsensical to hand over a plastic hand to a peasant and not to look
at gainful means to employ this person to look after themselves. A better
life for all in South Africa must extend to the victims of these mines. We
must lead the region in the efforts to better lives. Africa's rebirth and
economic recovery is aimed at the living, not the miserable and the
disempowered. We must make the miserable and disempowered take heart to
stand up, to unite and to defend the ideals of an Africa that is healthy,
dignified, equal and prosperous.

We consider this Bill at a time when there is confusion and debate about
the role of the UN and the concept of multilateralism. We must continue to
believe in collective decisions, in strategies and actions. Unilateralism
creates insecurity and distrust. It is a threat to Africa's ideals of
openness, democracy, good governance and prosocial spending which most
African states now espouse.

When nations feel insecure, expenditure on security-related goods and
services tends to increase. This increase diverts spending from increases
in child grants, old age pensions, education, etc. We must, therefore, work
hard to make sure that all multilateral institutions in the region and on
this continent, and especially the UN, are not rendered useless. We must
use our voice in the UN Security Council to make sure that member states
sign and respect the convention.

It would be wonderful, members, if the United States of America could move
along and ratify the convention and begin to destroy the thousands of anti-
personnel mines that they still possess. Surely, American interest on the
Korean Peninsula can be defended in many other ways if there is any
justification at all for anybody to defend anything in another person's
land. The only way that the UN can be strengthened is if we do as we preach
and not coerce others into disarming while we continue to see military
utility in what we encourage others to destroy.

During the public hearings the Portfolio Committee on Defence was shocked
into another reality that these mines do not only maim and kill
indiscriminately when they are planted, but that many of the victims are
found at the production plants themselves where people have lost their
eyesight and their hands and developed various forms of lung diseases and
died. The committee heard the victims themselves speaking about the safety
measures at the explosives manufacturing plants.

While this Bill is about anti-personnel land mines and not about the
prohibition of explosives, it is important for us to begin to look at
safety. Safety at production and at utility levels. We must make sure that
the rehabilitation programmes that we speak about so loudly regarding
foreigners and victims who are injured in the veld, are extended to those
who help us make these things.

The ANC supports this Bill.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Mr Deputy Chair, this Bill flows from South Africa's
assent on 3 December 1997 to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their
Destruction. It provides for the destruction of anti-personnel mines, the
provision of domestic and international inspections, as well as
international co-operation in respect of all anti-personnel mines.
Universal acceptance against the use, stockpiling and production of anti-
personnel mines exists in that 165 state parties have assented to the
convention, also known as the Ottawa Convention. This Bill, flowing from an
obligation in terms of the convention, forms an important basis in
promoting the New Partnership for Africa's Development programme, or Nepad,
which recognises that combating the illicit proliferation of small arms,
light weapons and land mines is one of the more important conditions for
sustainable development.

South Africa is believed to have destroyed all of its land mines, but for
approximately 4 500 which are intended to be used for purposes of
developing and conducting training in mine detection, mine clearance and
mine destruction techniques. A prohibition is placed on the possession,
procurement, manufacture, stockpiling, transfer, import and export of anti-
personnel mines, component parts or any plan relating thereto. It can
furthermore be stated that South Africa no longer possesses the anti-
personnel land mine production capability due to the fact that its
stockpile of mines was allegedly destroyed by October 1998. The DA
furthermore supports South Africa's contribution to victim assistance due
to injuries caused by land mines.

South Africa has reportedly donated R400 000 in the 2000 financial year to
the International Committee of the Red Cross for the rehabilitation of land
mine victims in the SADC region, and another R350 000 during 2001. During
the financial year 2001-02 the International Committee of the Red Cross
received a further donation of R200 000 for the rehabilitation of land mine
survivors in Angola. These steps are supported wholeheartedly and should be
supported in future. It is noteworthy to indicate that this Bill has been
the product of an extensive consultation process under the guidance of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Workshops were held in
Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban, with various civil society
organisations invited.

This Bill is extraterritorial in nature regarding the prosecution of
alleged offenders. This means that South African citizens may be prosecuted
for offences in respect of offences in terms of this Bill. It is
furthermore important to note that Claymor type, directional fragmentation
mines and antihandling devices are also prohibited. However, allegations
still surface from time to time regarding South Africa's alleged
involvement in the manufacturing of E105 fragmentation hand grenades and
E190 trip-wire activation devices for perimeter defence. The DA therefore
invites the Minister of Defence to state categorically and without any
qualification whatsoever whether such devices are still manufactured,
either with or without licences from abroad or otherwise. Such allegations
should be refuted without hesitation should they be untrue.

No exceptions to the Ottawa Convention or the legislation we are currently
debating are permissible, except as stated previously for purposes of
training in mine clearance, mine detection and mine destruction techniques.
South Africa's participation in the Ottawa Convention in the fulfilment of
its objectives should not be questionable. We accordingly await a reply
from the Minister in this regard. The DA supports this Bill as it does away
with this silent, callous killer and the maiming of very often innocent
civilians. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Chairperson, hon members, in the past personnel mines
were extensively used mainly for defensive purposes. For instance,
fortifying a comparatively weak defensive position against attack. Up to
the last World War, this weapon was known as what we referred to as a booby
trap. Land mines have numerous advantages during war time such as their low
cost, ease of use and the ability to be hidden anywhere on an advancing
enemy. But land mines have one great disadvantage also and that is that it
is not possible to disarm it by a remote system. The end result is that
minefields are therefore not easily cleared and very often military forces
have simply left these mines on their fields when withdrawing from the
battlefields. This has resulted in thousands of civilian casualties as well
as severe destruction of infrastructure and economic activity. Most of this
loss of life and destruction has occurred in developing countries and
countries emerging from conflicts. As a result, economic reconstruction of
these countries has been severely hampered. Southern African examples
include Angola and Mozambique.

As has already been mentioned, in 1997 the United Nations adopted a
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction. South Africa, as
you have already heard, signed and ratified the convention in December
1997. We are therefore obliged to enact national legislation to include the
convention in our laws. This is the principal aim of the Anti-Personnel
Mines Prohibition Bill.

In addition to the principles stated above, the Bill further proposes: to
prohibit the use and stockpiling, production and the transfer of anti-
personnel mines; further to make transgressions by South African citizens
or companies of the prohibitions as already stated an offence with related
penalties; to empower the Minister of Defence to exempt certain persons
from prohibition as long as the mines are used for training or the
development of techniques in mine detection, mine clearance and mine
destruction; to ensure the destruction of South African anti-personnel
stockpile except those mines exempted by the Minister for the purpose
already mentioned; to regulate domestic and international inspections by
the United Nations to ensure compliance with the convention; and finally,
it is there to place an obligation on the Minister of Defence via the
Minister of Foreign Affairs to report on South Africa's compliance with the
convention of the United Nations.

The IFP therefore supports this Bill for the reasons that South Africa has
already signed and ratified the convention, thus approving the convention,
and further that anti-personnel mines represent a humanitarian and economic
disaster particularly for poor, developing countries, particularly those
emerging from civil conflicts. For these reasons the IFP supports this
Bill.

Mna K W MORWAMOCHE: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo le maloko ao a hlomphegago a
Lekgotlatheramelao, maekemišetšo-magolo a Molaokakanywa wo ke go thibela go
hlagiša, go lota le go kgobela le go diriša go thotha dithuthupiši ka mo go
sego molaong.

Ka ge Afrika Borwa e le leloko la Ditšhabakopano, e saenetše tumelano ya go
šomiša dithuthupiši t še kotsi. Molaokakanywa wo o matlafatša batlhatlhobi
ba dibetša ba selegae le ba boditšhabatšhaba go hlahloba le go bona gore
Afrika Borwa le yona e šoma ka fase ga molao wa dithuthupiši.

Molaokakanywa wo o matlafatša maphodisa a sesole le Kgoro ya Maphodisa go
nyakišiša mafelo ao a lotilego le go hlama dithuthupiši ka mo go sego
molaong. Gape o matlafatša maphodisa le masole go hlwekiša mafelo ao go
bego go šomišwa dithuthupiši ka mo e sego ka tshwanelo. O matlafatša
maseterata le moahlodi wa selete go ka fa maphodisa lengwalo la go yo
nyakišiša mafelo ao a gononelwago gore a ka ba a na le dithuthupiši ka mo
go sego molaong. Motho yo a kago hwetšwa a hlama goba a lota goba a thotha
dithuthupiši ka ntle ga tumelelo yeo a tlago be a e filwe ka lengwalo ke
Tona ya Tšhireletšo, o tlo romelwa kgolegong mengwaga ye 25.

Molaokakanywa wo o fa Tona maatla a go fa maphodisa le masole tumelelo gore
a ka diriša dithuthupiši tšeo di lego ka fase ga tše 5 000 ge go hlahlwa
masole ao a šomišago dithuthupisi. Tona o na le maatla a go dumelela sesole
go thotha dithuthupiši ge a e ya go šoma dinageng tša kantle. O fa Tona go
dumelela museamo wa sesole go ka ba le palo yeo e lekanego ya dithuthupiši
tšeo di tlago fela di laetšwa ditlogolwana tša rena gore di kgone go tseba
gore dithuthupiši ke dilo tša mohuta mang.
Molaokakanywa wo o thuša go fokotša digole, difofu, ditšhuana le
ditšhiololo, bahlologadi le bahlolo ka baka la ge ba swarišitše kgoro ya
tša bobotlana mathata a go ba fepa, ka ge ba tlo be ba gobaditšwe ke
dithuthupiši tšeo. Dithuthupiši ga di gobatše fela batho, le diphoofolo le
tšona di ba le mathata a bjalo.

Mogologolo o boletše a re: Pinyana ge a re ping e kwele ping e kgolo. Seo
se ra gore ge molao wo o šetše o beilwe batho ka moka ba tlamegile go o
latela ka ge e le molao wa Afrika Borwa.

ANC e thekga molao wo ka mabaka ao a šetšego a tšweleditšwe. Ke a leboga.
[Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr K W MORWAMOCHE: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the main object of
this Bill is to prohibit the manufacturing, stockpiling, possessing, using
and transporting of land mines without authorisation.

Since South Africa is a member of the United Nations, it has signed an
international agreement on the use of land mines. This Bill seeks to
authorise both local and international inspectors of land mines to ensure
that South Africa complies with this international convention on the use of
land mines.

The Bill also authorises police officials and the SA Police Service to
inspect any premises if there are reasonable grounds for believing that
land mines are being manufactured or stored on them without authorisation.
It further authorises the SAPS and SANDF to clear premises of land mines
used for testing without authorisation. The Bill authorises a magistrate or
a judge who has jurisdiction in the area where the premises in question are
situated to grant written permission to the police to inspect premises if
there are reasonable grounds for believing that some unauthorised land
mines are being kept or stored on them. Any person convicted of
manufacturing, storing or transporting land mines without a written
authorisation from the Minister of Defence is liable to imprisonment for a
period of 25 years.

The Bill further authorises the Minister to grant the police and Defence
Force permission to use land mines - not exceeding 5 000 - when they train
their members. The Minister has the authority to grant the Defence Force
permission to transport land mines into foreign countries when its members
are to perform duties in those countries. The Bill further authorises the
Minister to allow the Defence Force museum to keep a certain amount of land
mines that will be shown to our later generations and great-grandchildren
so that they should have an idea of what land mines actually look like.

This Bill will help to relieve the department of welfare of the burden of
feeding an increasing number of disabled people - cripples, the blind,
orphans, widows and widowers - who may have been maimed by land mines. We
should be mindful that land mines do not endanger human life alone, but
animal life as well.

Our forebears said: ``Pinyana ge e re `ping' e kwele ping e kgolo'' [Just
as adults squeak, so do the young ones]. This means that when this
legislation is enacted, all people are obliged to obey it as a South
African law.

The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, land mines, a fallout from the explosions of
war, must be roundly condemned by all.

We are presently living under the cloud of war in Iraq, which has been
orchestrated by mindless people who live in their comfortable homes and
offices. This war could develop into a world war, endangering the lives of
innocent people, children and women all over our global village. Land
mines, in whatever form they come, should be roundly condemned. Land mines
are an act of gross irresponsibility, bordering on the criminal, by those
who go to war. Innocent people who are not fighting anybody are blown off
without notice.

Land mines are a violation of God's world and environment. Pollution of the
environment, causing global warming, affects the climate and causes drought
and extensions of deserts. Human beings do not have the right to have
dominion over the earth. No, they are given responsibility to care for
God's world. War belongs to the dark ages. It is savagery in the extreme.

No war ends without a peace conference. Now why should we kill thousands of
people, or millions, as happened in Burundi and the Congolese wars and
then, after that, go to a peace conference? Our call to the UN to give
peace a chance was a call to sanity. All the people who declare war should
be in the frontline instead of younger people being sacrificed on the altar
of war.

Land mines add insult to injury. They represent war after war. The UN
should take responsibility to stop war and to protect innocent lives. The
UN has been greatly weakened by the Iraqi war. The PAC will support this
Bill. [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Deputy Chairman, the MF supports the signing of the
ratification of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction.
It is important that we bring ourselves into such standards. The
requirement that, I quote:


  Each state party shall take all appropriate legal, administrative and
  other measures, including the imposition of penal sanctions, to prevent
  and suppress any activity prohibited to a state party under this
  convention undertaken by persons or on territory under its jurisdiction
  or control.

The constitutional provision to enact the international agreement via
national legislation is procedural to ensure good global relations and
efficient inculcation of values and laws in the South African citizenry.
The MF holds firmly onto the belief of the supremacy of our national
Constitution and hereby supports the provision made in this Bill. To
address transgressions by South African citizens and others and thus bring
it in line with the national Constitution, is necessary. The MF supports
the Anti-Personnel Mines Prohibition Bill. [Applause.]

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, today we are debating yet
another humble contribution that South Africa is making for world peace.
The Bill needs to be supported since it is a living testimony of humanity's
quest for an alternative, new and peaceful world order. The anti-personnel
mine is a human-made weapon and it will take human beings to destroy such.
In order for the dream of a just and peaceful world order to succeed,
Africa and South Africa in particular, is posed with a challenge to address
human suffering caused by anti-personnel mines.

In 2001, we as South Africans, led by the people's movement - the ANC -
declared that year as the year of the African century for democracy, peace
and development. One of the concrete steps is therefore being taken through
this Bill in front of us today, and many other initiatives, to realise this
dream. The destruction of these weapons of war underlines this Government's
resolve to end wars in the entire world, which breed poverty, diseases,
ignorance and such social ills.

The debate on this came at an appropriate time, barely days after the
agreement has been sealed in the inter-Congolese dialogue. Again this
demonstrates to all on our continent and throughout the world that Africa's
time has arrived - ke nako. The ANC-led Government is showing in practice
that which has been professed by its founding fathers in Bloemfontein -
that Africa must rise from the ashes of wars of dispossession and claim her
place amongst the progressive nations of the world. The Freedom Charter
states that there shall be peace and friendship.

About 48 years since the congress of the people, this is still as relevant
as it was then. In the contemporary epoch, we still pursue this noble goal.
With regard to this Bill, it means that generations to come would be happy
to learn that their forebears cleared any possibility to trample on any
such weapons and lose life and limb. It means that younger generations
would not have to worry about their environment which may be destroyed by
some hidden anti-personnel mines, neither would they have to worry about
their peaceful, stable society and the future.

The Act will begin the process, if passed, as I hope it will be, of
bringing into practise and reality the South African signing of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction. It will also
empower the Government in terms of its foreign policy objectives of
achieving peace and stability globally and more importantly, in Africa. The
main danger with respect to the mines, however, is very clear. There is no
certainty as to where the mines are, because land mines are buried
explosives which shift like stones in running water and tend to move
downstream, following gravity.

Markings of the mined areas may have been swept away or destroyed. The rain
and flooding may have exposed buried mines. Mines may have shifted in the
flood waters and end up in areas that were previously considered safe and
clear. Therefore, these mines will present a more serious risk for deminers
and civilians alike. Fear of mines has already delayed significantly the
repair of powerlines taken out by floods. The UN estimates that there are
some 110 million land mines scattered in 70 countries. Of those, about 44,8
million are buried in 11 African countries, and by far the worst affected
are Angola, Egypt and Mozambique. The mines in Angola and Mozambique are
among the legacies of bitter civil wars in those countries.

The bulk of those in Egypt were laid during the Second World War with
others laid during Arab-Israeli wars that took place between 1948 and 1973.
In conflicts, the mines are mostly deployed by being buried in the ground
and are detonated when stepped upon or moved in any way. According to the
statistics, in Angola in particular, six to eight mine provinces cover
roughly 50% of the country. There are 1,47 land mines for every individual.
An estimated 70 000 Angolans became amputees as a result of land mines,
including both civilian and military victims.

In Mozambique, the largest number of mining injuries or deaths occurs while
farming or felling trees for construction. The need to expand farming areas
to resettle persons has led to an increase in victims. The National Mines
Clearance Commission estimates that at least 40 people are killed by land
mines each month.

In conclusion, I hope we all agree with the views expressed by the UN
Secretary-General, hon Kofi Annan, when he says that we must make land
mines a weapon of the past and a symbol of shame. With the same breath, the
UN Security Council in particular, has an ongoing task on the
implementation of the spirit and letter of the convention. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Deputy Chairperson, I just want to thank
all the members that have participated in this debate and have demonstrated
once more our country's commitment to end the scourge of destruction by
this particular weapon. Maybe I must say that we must continue to celebrate
our achievements as a young democracy. Members will remember that our
country was at the forefront of passing the Mine Ban Treaty. And now again
we are at the forefront of making sure that we implement our commitment to
this treaty.

Parties present in this House have shown that as a country we are united in
this. I just wanted to respond to hon member Schmidt that with regard to
his concern and the rumours that he has referred to, we have confirmed that
all South African firms are already complying with the requirements of this
Bill. Denel does not produce the grenades referred to. The only tripwire
devices are for elimination flares that are not lethal. So indeed, our
country and the industry are committed and showing their commitment to
implementing this treaty. In terms of victims assistance again, I think the
hon member Schmidt showed that our country is committed not only to the ban
of anti-personnel land mines, but also to assist those who have been
victimised.
In concluding this debate, again I just also want to bring this issue very
much to the forefront of the members' minds as they go home. I want to
bring to your attention that during the course of this debate, somewhere in
the world, someone or an animal has detonated plus-minus 30 anti-personnel
mines. That's how serious this problem is in the world and therefore this
shows the contribution that our own country is making in making sure that,
indeed, this scourge is removed from the surface of the earth. Somewhere
then there are more deaths, mutilation, tears and more sorrows. Indeed,
these must end and members of this House have demonstrated this. I thank
all of you for your contribution. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                            MONDAY, 7 APRIL 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Finance:


         (i)     Petroleum Pipelines Bill [B 22 - 2003] (National Assembly
              - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 24584 of 14
              March 2003.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 8 April 2003.
         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159:


     (1)    Petroleum Pipelines Bill, 2003, submitted by the Minister of
         Minerals and Energy on 1 April 2003. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following is the number of seats allocated to each party
     represented in the National Assembly and the name of, and party
     represented by, each member, as at the expiry of the window period for
     crossing the floor in terms of the Constitution:


     (1)    STATE OF PARTIES REPRESENTED IN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY: (as at 5
         April 2003)


     Note: The abbreviation in brackets after the name of a party is the
         abbreviation used for such party later in this document.


     PARTY
     NUMBER OF SEATS


     1.     African National Congress (ANC)
        275*
     2.     Democratic Alliance (DA)
     46*
     3.     Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP)
     31*
     4.     New National Party (New NP)
     20*
     5.     African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP)
     7
     6.     United Democratic Movement (UDM)
     4
     7.     Freedom Front (FF)
     3
     8.     United Christian Democratic Party (UCDP)
     3
     9.     Federal Alliance (FA)
     2
     10.    Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC)
     2
     11.    Alliance for Democracy and Prosperity (ADP)
     1
     12.    Azanian People's Organisation (Azapo)
     1
     13.    Independent African Movement (AIM)


     14.    Independent Democrats (ID)
     1
     15.    Minority Front (MF)
     1
     16.    National Action (NA)
     1
     17.    Peace and Justice Congress (PJC)
     1
     TOTAL
     400


         *These figures include the following vacancies as at 5 April 2003:
        ANC: three vacancies.
        New NP: one vacancy.


       (2)LIST OF MEMBERS OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
       (as at 5 April 2003)



SURNAME
INITIALS
PARTY
ABRAHAMS
T
ANC
ABRAM
S
ANC
AINSLIE
A R
ANC
ANDREW
K M
DA
ARENDSE
J D
ANC
ASMAL
A K
ANC
AUCAMP
C
NA

BAKKER
D M
NEW NP
BALFOUR
B M N
ANC
BALOYI
M R
ANC
BALOYI
S F
ANC
BAPELA
O
ANC
BELL
B G
DA
BENJAMIN
J
ANC
BEUKMAN
F
NEW NP
BHENGU
F
ANC
BIYELA
B P
IFP
BLAAS
A
ACDP
BLANCHÉ
J P I
FA
BLOEM
D V
ANC
BOGOPANE-ZULU
H I
ANC
BOOI
M S
ANC
BORMAN
G M
DA
BOTHA
A J
DA
BOTHA
N G W
ANC
BRUCE
N S
DA
BUTHELEZI
M G
IFP
CACHALIA
I M
ANC
CAMERER
S M
DA
CARRIM
Y I
ANC
CASSIM
M F
PJC
CHALMERS
J
ANC
CHAUKE
H P
ANC
CHIBA
L
ANC
CHIKANE
M M
ANC
CHOHAN-KHOTA
F I
ANC
CINDI
N V
ANC
CLELLAND-STOKES
N J
DA
COETZEE-KASPER
M P
ANC
CRONIN
J P
ANC
CWELE
S C
ANC
DA CAMARA
M L
DA
DAVIDSON
I O
DA
DAVIES
R H
ANC
DE LANGE
J H
ANC
DE LILLE
P
ID
DELPORT
J T
DA
DHLAMINI
B W
IFP
DIALE
L N
ANC
DIDIZA
A T
ANC
DITHEBE
S L
ANC
DITSHETELO
P H K
UCDP
DLALI
D M
ANC
DLAMINI
B O
ANC
DLAMINI-ZUMA
N C
ANC
DOIDGE
G Q M
ANC
DOMAN
W P
DA
DOUGLAS
B M
NEW NP
DUDLEY
C
ACDP
DUMA
N M
ANC
DURAND
J
NEW NP
DU TOIT
D C
ANC
DYANI
M M Z
ANC
EGLIN
C W
DA
ELLIS
M J
DA
ERWIN
A
ANC
FANKOMO
F C
ANC
FARROW
S B
DA
FAZZIE
M H
ANC
FERREIRA
E T
IFP
FIHLA
N B
ANC
FRASER-MOLEKETI
G J
ANC
FROLICK
C T
ANC
GELDENHUYS
B L
NEW NP
GEORGE
M E
ANC
GERBER
P A
ANC
GIBSON
D H M
DA
GILLWALD
C E
ANC
GINWALA
F N
ANC
GOGOTYA
N J
ANC
GOMOMO
P J
ANC
GONIWE
M T
ANC
GOOSEN
A D
ANC
GORE
V C
DA
GOUS
S J
NEW NP
GREEN
L M
ACDP
GREYLING
C H F
NEW NP
GROBLER
G A J
DA
GROENEWALD
P J
FF
GUMEDE
D M
ANC
GXOWA
N B
ANC
HAJAIG
F
ANC
HANEKOM
D A
ANC
HEINE
R J
DA
HENDRICKS
L B
ANC
HENDRICKSE
P A C
ANC
HERANDIEN
C B
NEW NP
HLANGWANA
N L
ANC
HLENGWA
M W
IFP
HOGAN
B A
ANC
HOLOMISA
B H
UDM
HOLOMISA
S P
ANC
JANKIELSOHN
R
DA
JASSAT
E E
ANC
JEEBODH
T
ANC
JEFFERY
J H
ANC
JOEMAT
R R
ANC
JORDAN
Z P
ANC
KALAKO
M U
ANC
KALYAN
S V
DA
KANNEMEYER
B W
ANC
KASIENYANE
O R
ANC
KASRILS
R
ANC
KATI
J Z
ANC
KEKANA
N N
ANC
KGARIMETSA
J J
ANC
KGAUWE
Q J
ANC
KGWELE
L M
ANC
KOMPHELA
B M
ANC
KOORNHOF
G W
ANC
KOORNHOF
N J J van R
DA
KOTA
Z A
ANC
KOTWAL
Z
ANC
LAMANI
N E
ANC
LANDERS
L T
ANC
LEE
T D
DA
LEKGORO
M K
ANC
LEKGORO
M M S
ANC
LEKOTA
M G P
ANC
LEON
A J
DA
LE ROUX
J W
DA
LISHIVHA
T E
ANC
LOBE
M C
ANC
LOCKEY
D
ANC
LOUW
J T
ANC
LOUW
S K
ANC
LOWE
C M
DA
LUCAS
E J
IFP
LUDWABE
CI
ANC
LUTHULI
A N
ANC
LYLE
A G
ANC
MABANDLA
B S
ANC
MABE
L L
ANC
MABENA
D C
ANC
MABUDAFHASI
T R
ANC
MABUZA
D D
ANC
MADASA
Z L
ACDP
MADIKIZA
G T
UDM
MADIKIZELA-MANDELA
N W
ANC
MADUNA
P M
ANC
MAGASHULE
E S
ANC
MAGAZI
M N
ANC
MAGUBANE
N E
ANC
MAGWANISHE
G B
ANC
MAHLANGU-NKABINDE
G L
ANC
MAHLAWE
N
ANC
MAHOMED
F
ANC
MAIMANE
D S*
ANC
MAINE
M S
ANC
MAKANDA
W G
ANC
MAKASI
X C
ANC
MALAHLELA
M J
ANC
MALONEY
L
ANC
MALULEKE
D K
DA
MALULEKE-HLANEKI
C J
ANC
MALUMISE
M M
ANC
MANIE
M S
ANC
MANUEL
T A
ANC
MAPISA-NQAKULA
N N
ANC
MARS
I
IFP
MARTINS
B A D
ANC
MASALA
M M
ANC
MASEKA
J T
UDM
MASERUMULE
F T
ANC
MASHIMBYE
J N
ANC
MASITHELA
N H
ANC
MASUTHA
M T
ANC
MATHEBE
P M
ANC
MATHIBELA
N F
ANC
MATLANYANE
H F
ANC
MATSEPE-CASABURRI
I F
ANC
MATTHEWS
V J G
IFP
MAUNYE
M M
ANC
MAYATULA
S M
ANC
MAZIYA
M A
ANC
MBADI
L M
ANC
MBETE
B
ANC
MBOMBO
N D
ANC
MBULAWA-HANS
B G
ANC
MBUYAZI
L R
IFP
McINTOSH
G B D
DA
MDLADLANA
M M S
ANC
MENTOR
M P
ANC
MESHOE
K R J
ACDP
MFUNDISI
I S
UCDP
MIDDLETON
N S
IFP
MILLIN
T E
AIM
MKONO
D G
ANC
MLAMBO-NGCUKA
P G
ANC
MLANGENI
A
ANC
MNANDI
P N
ANC
MNCWANGO
M A
IFP
MNGOMEZULU
G P
ANC
MNGUNI
B A
ANC
MNUMZANA
S K
ANC
MODISE
T R
ANC
MODISENYANE
L J
ANC
MOEKETSE
K M
ANC
MOFOKENG
T R
ANC
MOGOBA
M S
PAC
MOHAMED
I J
ANC
MOHLALA
R J B
ANC
MOKOENA
A D
ANC
MOLEBATSI
M A
ANC
MOLEWA
B G
ANC
MOLOI
J
ANC
MOLOTO
K A
ANC
MONGWAKETSE
S J
ANC
MONTSITSI
S D
ANC
MOONSAMY
K
ANC
MOORCROFT
E K
DA
MOOSA
M V
ANC
MORKEL
C M
DA
MOROBI
D M
ANC
MOROPA
R M
ANC
MORUTOA
M R
ANC
MORWAMOCHE
K W
ANC
MOSS
M I
ANC
MOTHIBA
L C
ANC
MOTHOAGAE
P K
ANC
MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN
S D
ANC
MPAHLWA
M B
ANC
MPAKA
H M
ANC
MPONTSHANE
A M
IFP
MSHUDULU
S A
ANC
MSOMI
M D
IFP
MTHEMBU
B
ANC
MTHETHWA
E N
ANC
MTSWENI
N S
ANC
MUDAU
N W
ANC
MUFAMADI
F S
ANC
MULDER
C P
FF
MULDER
P W A
FF
MUTSILA
I
ANC
MZONDEKI
M J G
ANC
NAIR
B
ANC
NASH
J H
ANC
NCINANE
I Z
ANC
NDOU
R S
ANC
NDZANGA
R A
ANC
NEFOLOVHODWE
P J
Azapo
NEL
A C
ANC
NEL
A H
DA
NENE
N M
ANC
NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN
W S
ANC
NGALEKA
E
ANC
NGCENGWANE
N D
ANC
NGCOBO
N
ANC
NGCULU
L V J
ANC
NGEMA
M V
IFP
NGIBA
B C
IFP
NGUBANE
B S
IFP
NGUBANE
H
IFP
NGUBENI
J M
ANC
NGWENYA
M L
ANC
NHLANHLA
J M
ANC
NHLEKO
N P
ANC
NHLENGETHWA
D G
ANC
NIEMANN
J J
NEW NP
NJOBE
M A A
ANC
NKABINDE
N C
UDM
NOBUNGA
B J
ANC
NONKONYANA
M
ANC
NQAKULA
C
ANC
NQODI
S B
ANC
NTOMBELA
S H
ANC
NTSHULANA-BHENGU
N R
ANC
NTULI
B M
ANC
NTULI
J T
ANC
NTULI
M B
ANC
NTULI
R S
DA
NTULI
S B
ANC
NWAMITWA-SHILUBANA
T L P
ANC
NXUMALO
S N
ANC
NZIMANDE
L P M
ANC
ODENDAAL
W A
NEW NP
OLCKERS
M E
NEW NP
OLIFANT
D A A
ANC
OLIPHANT
G G
ANC
OLIPHANT
M N
ANC
OMAR
A M
ANC
OOSTHUIZEN
G C
ANC
OPPERMAN
S E
DA
PAHAD
A G H
ANC
PAHAD
E G
ANC
PHADAGI
M G
ANC
PHALA
M J
ANC
PHEKO
S E M
PAC
PHOHLELA
S
ANC
PIETERSE
R D
ANC
PILLAY
S
NEW NP
PRETORIUS
I J
DA
RABIE
P J
DA
RABINOWITZ
R
IFP
RADEBE
B A
ANC
RADEBE
J T
ANC
RAJBALLY
S
MF
RAMAKABA-LESIEA
M M
ANC
RAMGOBIN
M
ANC
RAMODIKE
M N
ADP
RAMOTSAMAI
C M P
ANC
RASMENI
S M
ANC
RATSOMA
M M
ANC
REDCLIFFE
C R
DA
REID
L R R
ANC
RHODA
R T
NEW NP
RIPINGA
S S
ANC
ROOPNARAIN
U
IFP
ROUTLEDGE
N C
ANC
RWEXANA
S P
ANC
SALOOJEE
E (Cassim)
ANC
SCHALKWYK
P J
DA
SCHIPPERS
J
NEW NP
SCHMIDT
H C
DA
SCHNEEMAN
G D
ANC
SCHOEMAN
E A
ANC
SCHOEMAN
R S
NEW NP
SEATON
S A
IFP
SEECO
M A
UCDP
SEKGOBELA
P S
ANC
SELFE
J
DA
SEMPLE
J A
DA
SEPTEMBER
C C
ANC
SEPTEMBER
R K
ANC
SEREMANE
W J
DA
SHABALALA
T
IFP
SHABANGU
S
ANC
SHOPE
N R
ANC
SIBANDE
P M
ANC
SIBIYA
M S M
IFP
SIGCAU
S N
ANC
SIGCAWU
A N
ANC
SIGWELA
E M
ANC
SIKAKANE
M R
ANC
SIMMONS
S
NEW NP
SISULU
L N
ANC
SITHOLE
D J
ANC
SKHOSANA
W M
ANC
SKOSANA
M B
IFP
SKWEYIYA
Z S T
ANC
SMITH
P F
IFP
SMITH
V G
ANC
SMUTS
M
DA
SOLO
B M
ANC
SOLOMON
G
ANC
SONJICA
B P
ANC
SOSIBO
J E
ANC
SOTYU
M M
ANC
SOUTHGATE
R M
ACDP
SWART
P S
DA
SWART
S N
ACDP
TALJAARD
R
DA
TARR
M A
ANC
THABETHE
E
ANC
THERON
J L
DA
TINTO
B
ANC
TOLO
L J
ANC
TSHABALALA-MSIMANG
M E
ANC
TSHEOLE
N M
ANC
TSHIVHASE
T J
ANC
TSHWETE
P
ANC
TUROK
B
ANC
TWALA
N M
ANC
VADI
I
ANC
VAN DEN HEEVER
R P Z
ANC
VAN DER MERWE
A S
NEW NP
VAN DER MERWE
J H
IFP
VAN DER MERWE
S C
ANC
VAN DEVENTER
F J
DA
VAN JAARSVELD
A Z A
NEW NP
VAN NIEKERK
A I
FA
VAN WYK
A (Anna)
NEW NP
VAN WYK
A (Annelizé)
ANC
VAN WYK
J F
ANC
VAN WYK
N
ANC
VEZI
T E
IFP
VOS
S C
IFP
WATERS
M
DA
WOODS
G G
IFP
XINGWANA
L M T
ANC
XULU
M
IFP
ZITA
L
ANC
ZONDI
K M
IFP
ZONDO
R P
ANC
ZULU
N E
IFP
ZUMA
J G
ANC

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Government Notice No 847 published in Government Gazette No 24587 dated
     14 March 2003: Notice of Intention to adopt regulations, made in terms
     of section 7(1)(a) of Immigration Act, 2002 (Act No 13 of 2002).


     Please note: This is a correction of a tabling recorded on the
     Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, dated 24 March 2003.

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises:
     Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Limited for 2002.

3.    The Minister of Social Development:


     (a)    Government Notice No R 460 published in Government Gazette No
         24630 dated 31 March 2003: Amendment to Regulations regarding
         grants and financial awards to welfare organisations and to
         persons in need of social relief of distress, made in terms of
         section 19 of the Social Assistance Act, 1992 (Act No 59 of 1992).


     (b)    Government Notice No R 461 published in Government Gazette No
         24631 dated 31 March 2003: Increase in respect of social grants,
         made in terms of the Social Assistance Act, 1992 (Act No 59 of
         1992).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Sixth Report of the Working Group on the African Union, dated 7
         April 2003:


         Sixth Report of the Working Group on the African Union
         1. Introduction


              The Working Group has since tabling its fifth report on 20
              September 2002 had five meetings. On 12 November 2002 the
              Working Group received a detailed briefing by the Minister of
              Foreign Affairs specifically on the establishment of the
              organs of the African Union and NEPAD. The Deputy Minister of
              Foreign Affairs briefed the Working Group on 11 March 2003 on
              the Protocol to the Treaty Establishing the Peace and Security
              Council of the African Union.


         2. Research projects


              The research projects as outlined in the Fourth Report of the
              Working Group to the National Assembly, tabled on 20 May 2002,
              have been completed and the Working Group will now consider
              the reports. The researcher who was assigned to do the project
              on "developing a comprehensive strategy for public awareness
              and civil society involvement in the AU" has withdrawn from
              the project. The Working Group will now be using resources it
              has received to facilitate public awareness of the AU.


         3. Third Seminar on the African Union


              The Working Group convened a seminar on 5 and 6 February 2003.
               The purpose of the seminar was to provide an opportunity for
              members of Parliament to develop a clearer understanding of
              the issues relating to the African Union. Among other things,
              the seminar focused on discussions relating to progress on the
              establishment of the AU and its organs, civil society
              involvement in the AU and the role of national Parliaments in
              relation to the AU. The seminar report is available on
              Parliament's website www.parliament.gov.za.


         4. Establishment of the Pan-African Parliament


              The establishment of the Pan-African Parliament has been
              delayed due to the slow ratification of the Pan-African
              Parliament Protocol by some countries. In this regard, the
              Working Group has agreed to:


              (1) Once again raise the matter of ratification at the
                  forthcoming meeting of the SADC-PF and other
                  international meetings of African parliamentarians;
              (2) Communicate with African Parliaments and/or regional
                  Assemblies urging ratification;


              (3) Convene a seminar for countries that have ratified the
                  Protocol to begin to develop a common vision and
                  understanding; and


              (4) Follow up with the African Union on the establishment of a
                  representative steering committee of parliamentarians
                  that will support and co-ordinate the steps necessary to
                  achieve the ratification of the Protocol.


         5. Recommendations


              The National Assembly should consider -


              (1) Producing brief inserts in different languages for radio
                  broadcast aimed at popularising the AU and its organs,
                  particularly the Pan-African Parliament;


              (2) Convening a seminar for African Parliaments in May 2003
                  with a view to interacting with other African Parliaments
                  and Regional Parliamentary formations, including the SADC
                  Parliamentary Forum, in order to:


                  a.   strategise on strengthening ratification of the Pan-
                       African Parliament Protocol by those countries that
                       have not ratified yet;


                  b.   build a common vision and understanding around the
                       establishment of the Pan-African Parliament;


                  c.   create an enabling environment for the political
                       process around the establishment of the Pan-African
                       Parliament to gain momentum; and
                  d.   enable Parliaments that have ratified the Protocol
                       to build momentum around the political processes for
                       initiating and consolidating the establishment of the
                       organs of the AU, particularly the Pan-African
                       Parliament.

                            TUESDAY, 8 APRIL 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent:


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 8 April 2003:
         (i)     Pensions (Supplementary) Bill [B 11 - 2003] (National
               Assembly - sec 77).
        (ii)     Usury Amendment Bill [B 1 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec
               75).

2.    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


         (i)     Liquor Bill [B 23 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 76)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 24628 of 27
              March 2003.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 9 April 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:


     The Intergovernmental Fiscal Review for 2003 [RP 27-2003].

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises:


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2003-2006.

