---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 June 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-06-04
---

                           WEDNESDAY, 4 JUNE 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS see col 000.

                             LAND RIGHTS ISSUES

                             (Notice of motion)

Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, I move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that property rights are enshrined in the Constitution and that
       section 34 gives everyone the right to have any dispute heard by the
       courts;


  (2) believes that the issue of land needs to be dealt with as sensitively
       and transparently as possible; and


  (3) therefore resolves to debate the issue of the mechanisms used to give
       effect to land reform in South Africa.

              DRAFT RESOLUTION BY MS R TALJAARD ON 28 MAY 2003

                             (Notice of Motion)

Mr V G SMITH: Madam Speaker, I move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the written notice of a draft resolution given by Ms R Taljaard
           of the Democratic Alliance on 28 May 2003.

The SPEAKER: Order, order, Mr Smith.

Mr D H M GIBSON: On a point of order, the hon member said that he is moving
this motion. You are at the moment asking for notices of motion. I assume
he is moving an unopposed motion?

The SPEAKER: Are you giving notice, or are you moving a motion?

Mr V G SMITH: I am giving notice.

The SPEAKER: Then please proceed.

Mr V G SMITH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr V G SMITH: Madam Speaker, I move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the written notice of a draft resolution given by Ms R Taljaard
           of the Democratic Alliance on 28 May 2003 in which she alleged
           that the Auditor-General had stated that he had no choice in
           editing the JIT Report due to section 4(6) of the Auditor-
           General Act, 1995;


       (b)  that in making this allegation, Ms Taljaard is misleading the
           House as this assertion is factually incorrect, because -


           (i)   section 4(6) of the Auditor-General Act requires the
                  Auditor-General to consult with the President, the
                  Minister of Finance and the responsible Minister
                  regarding certain accounts ``provided that the reporting
                  on any unauthorised expenditure or other irregularity
                  shall not be so limited'' - the requirement in the Act is
                  therefore that the Auditor-General must consult, but
                  there is no requirement that he must edit the report;


           (ii)  in a press statement dated 26 May 2003 the Auditor-General
                  reiterated the statutory requirement of consultation and
                  the fact that he did not have a choice as far as ...

Mr D H M GIBSON: On a point of order, is this a substantive notice of
motion that the hon member is giving, or what?

The SPEAKER: Can we come to the resolve part before we resolve this?

Mr D H M GIBSON: It's a very long motion as well. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: I don't know that the Rules provide for a length of notices of
motion, but they do require an actual resolution, which will resolve this.
So, I will wait for that before we deal with it.

Mr V G SMITH: Shall I start again, Madam Speaker?

The SPEAKER: No, don't start again! [Laughter.] You will only promote more
points of order! Please will you continue.

Mr V G SMITH: ... as far as consultations were concerned, but the Auditor-
General did not state or even imply that he was forced to edit the report;


       (c)  that in her motion Ms Taljaard of the Democratic Alliance claims
           that section 4(6) of the Auditor-General Act was used by the
           apartheid regime, but that this is a chronological impossibility
           as the Act was passed in 1995 and the democratic order began in
           1994; and


       (d)  that Ms Taljaard's motion casts aspersions on the Auditor-
           General by stating as a fact that the statement confirms that
           key issues were edited out or glossed over by the JIT Report,
           and that this is in violation of Rule 66, as it reflects on the
           competence or honour of a person whose removal is dependent upon
           a decision of this House; and


  (2) therefore resolves to call on -


       (a)  Ms Taljaard to withdraw her motion and to apologise for
           misrepresenting both the Auditor-General Act and the Auditor-
           General's statements as well as for casting aspersions on his
           competence or honour; and


       (b)  the Democratic Alliance to stop distorting the facts in the
           pursuit of cheap electoral political gain.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you. I will look at both the original motion and this
one with a view to whether we publish these motions at all, and if not, we
will withdraw one or the other accordingly.

I will look into it, but notice of motion has been given ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to bring
it to your attention that the motion of 28 May has been published.

The SPEAKER: I am aware of that. That was the point I was making - that we
will then consider whether it should be expunged if it meets those
criteria.

   SENTIMENTS EXPRESSED BY DEPUTY PRESIDENT IN BONTEHEUWEL ON 3 JUNE 2003

                             (Notice of Motion)

Ms T E Millin: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice of the following motion:


  That the House -


  (1) warmly commends the hon Deputy President of the Republic for his
       comments yesterday at the Bonteheuwel civic centre while visiting
       members of the community who are directly affected by the current
       tidal wave of criminal gangsterism, resulting in the killing of many
       young, innocent children;


  (2) notes that, if he is correctly quoted, the hon Deputy President has
       hit out at aspects of the Constitution, which protect the rights of
       vicious criminals at the expense of the innocent law-abiding citizens
       of our country; and
  (3) therefore endorses these sentiments and calls for an urgent review of
       those sections in the Constitution which favour the rights of the
       individual without balancing those rights with obligations of the
       individual, thereby placing a disproportionate emphasis on the rights
       of the lawbreakers at the expense of similar rights for the victims
       of criminal activity.

Thank you, hon Deputy President.

The SPEAKER: I want to tell hon members that a notice of motion really
implies a debate that follows where we take a resolution on one thing or
another.

We will look at that, and I assume that the Deputy President is not going
to claim he was misquoted. [Interjections.]

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                           (The late Mr E Mogale)
Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and profound sadness the untimely death of the hon
       Ephraime Mogale, who passed away on Tuesday 27 May 2003;


  (2) recognises that Ephraime Mogale was a South African patriot who,
       throughout his life, demonstrated deep commitment to the struggle for
       the liberation of our country;


  (3) recalls that he played an active and leading role in the development
       of student and other progressive movements in this country, beginning
       from the 1976 student mass protests, rising to become first COSAS
       president in 1979, serving in SAYCO, UDF and SACP;


  (4) acknowledges the dynamic contribution that the hon Mogale made to the
       House in the period 1999 to 2001, before his redeployment to
       Mpumalanga Provincial Legislature;


  (5) believes that he leaves a legacy of dedicated service to our country;


  (6) expresses its condolences to his wife, children and the entire Mogale
       family.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: I take it there are no objections to this motion? The motion
has been adopted.

We will convey the condolences to the family.

                          DISTRICT HOSPITAL IN ZOLA

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN (ANC): Madam Speaker, my constituency is called
Zoja Zem, in deep Soweto. A district hospital is to be built in Zola. The
Mandela-Sisulu Brixton Clinic will also be constructed this year at a cost
of R2,7 million. In addition, R10,3 million will be spent on the upgrading
of Hillbrow Community Health Centre.

The second-phase construction of the Stretford Clinic in Orange Farm and
that of Stanza Bopape Clinic begins this year also at a cost of R5 million.
This good news concerning the health of our people was recently delivered
by Gauteng MEC for Health, Gwen Ramogopa.

In May 1992, the ANC asserted in its ready-to-govern policy guidelines that
access to basic health care was a basic human right. We expressed then in
no uncertain terms the urgent need to reduce inequalities in access to
health services, and to encourage and develop delivery systems and
practices that are in line with international norms and standards.

These measures constitute some of the steps we continue to take in the
cause of destroying the apartheid/colonial legacy and in the pursuance of
the goal of health for all.
Phambili ngempilo yabantu phambili! [Forward with the people's health,
forward!] [Applause.]

                              ARMS DEAL INQUIRY

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms R TALJAARD (DA): Madam Speaker and hon colleagues, the Government's
legal adviser has reported that there are sufficient grounds for the arms
deal inquiry to be reopened. This opinion confirms concerns about the JIT
report itself and strengthens our calls for a new inquiry.

The DA has called for an ad hoc committee of Parliament to be established
to use section 56 of the Constitution to investigate the whole deal and
spotlight differences between the draft and final JIT report.

The role of the President and members of the executive in the doctoring of
the report needs to be investigated, and we call on all the Ministers
concerned and the President to co-operate fully with this committee, so
that the truth can finally be known. [Applause.]

                            WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr U ROOPNARAIN (IFP): Madam Speaker, tomorrow, 5 June 2003, marks World
Environment Day. It is the day for all of us to reflect on our dependence
on the environment. Clearly, the wellbeing of the peoples of the world can
never be served until the environment and the ecosystem that sustain all
life on earth are secure. The environment knows no frontiers, no
territorial borders. It does not recognise any north/south divide or
east/west distinction. As in a family, every element of nature, however
small, is part of a whole. Every animal and plant species known and unknown
has a place, role and function, deserving of our protection.

There is no chance of protecting the environment without a greater sense of
mutual responsibility, especially in an age of interdependence and
especially since the environmental footprint left by some societies is so
much larger than others.

I hope that all of us will use this opportunity to raise environmental
consciousness and awareness and not leave it solely with the Minister for
Environmental Affairs. Let us all do our bit.

           CO-OPERATION BETWEEN UNIONS AND JALI COMMISSION NEEDED

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr D V BLOEM (ANC): Mevrou die Speaker, met verwysing na die mediaberigte
oor die onttrekking van Popcru aan die bedrywighede van die Jali kommissie
van ondersoek, wens ek hiermee 'n baie dringende en ernstige versoek tot
Popcru en al die unies betrokke by die Departement van Korrektiewe Dienste
te rig om hulle volle samewerking te gee aan die Jali kommissie wat in
2000, op versoek van Minister Skosana, deur die President aangestel is.

Dit is kontraproduktief vir die Regering om 'n kommissie van ondersoek aan
te stel wat geboikot word deur die personeel wat vir die departement werk.
Indien ons daarin wil slaag om korrupsie uit te roei, het ons alle
rolspelers se samewerking nodig. Dit is net in die belang van Popcru self
om deel te neem aan die werksaamhede van die kommissie. Baie beweringinge
word voor die deur van dié unie gelê, en hulle het 'n gulde geleentheid om
dit te betwis of te weerlê. Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM (ANC): Madam Speaker, with reference to the media reports
about the withdrawal of Popcru from the proceedings of the Jali Commission
of Inquiry, I hereby wish to address a very urgent and serious request to
Popcru and all the unions involved with the Department of Correctional
Services to give their full co-operation to the Jali Commission that was
appointed in 2000 by the President at the request of Minister Skosana.

It is counterproductive for the Government to appoint a commission of
inquiry that is being boycotted by the staff that works for the department.
We need the co-operation of all role-players if we want to succeed in
eradicating corruption. It is only in the interest of Popcru itself to take
part in the activities of the commission. Many allegations are being laid
at the door of this union, which they now have a golden opportunity to
dispute or refute. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                    UNROADWORTHY BUSES REMOVED FROM ROAD

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr J J NIEMANN (Nuwe NP): Mevrou die Speaker, die Nuwe NP was geskok om te
hoor dat Bellville se verkeersdepartement verlede Donderdag ses Golden
Arrow passasiersbusse en twee insleepwaens van die pad afgehaal het omdat
hulle onpadwaardig was. Boonop beloop die agterstallige lisensiegeld van
een van die businsleepwaens R67 000. Die busse was onder meer ongeskik vir
verdere diens weens swak remstelsels, olielekplekke, swak en foutiewe
ligte, defektiewe stuurmeganismes of stukkende onderstelle.

Volgens 'n woordvoerder van die verkeersdepartement kry hulle al vir 'n
geruime tyd klagtes oor die swak toestand van die maatskappy se busse, en
het hulle dus op verrassingsoptrede besluit om die omvang van die probleem
te bepaal.

Die Nuwe NP wil Bellville se verkeersdepartement gelukwens met hul
positiewe optrede om Suid-Afrikaanse paaie te beveilig. Daarteenoor vind
ons dit heeltemal onaanvaarbaar dat 'n groot maatskappy soos Golden Arrow,
wat boonop deur die Regering gesubsidieer word, hulle skuldig maak aan
sulke ernstige oortredings van die padreëls. Dit lyk soos 'n geval van die
Regering wat nie toepas wat hy self predik nie.

Daarom doen ons 'n beroep op die waarnemende Minister van Vervoer om
onmiddellik die situasie te ondersoek en die skuldiges aan die pen te laat
ry. Ek wil ook dadelik daarby sê dat dit nie net in die stad Bellville is
waar busse nie voldoen aan die verkeerswet nie, maar in alle ander stede
kan busse ook om hierdie selfde redes ondersoek word. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr J J NIEMANN (New NP): Madam Speaker, the New NP was shocked to hear
that last Thursday six Golden Arrow passenger buses and two tow-trucks were
taken off the road by the Bellville traffic department because they were
unroadworthy. In addition to this, the arrears in licence fees for one of
the bus tow-trucks amounted to R67 000. Among other things the buses were
unfit for further service as a result of poor brake systems, oil leaks,
poor and faulty lights, defective steering mechanisms or broken chassis.

According to a spokesperson for the traffic department they have been
receiving complaints about the poor condition of some of the company's
buses for a considerable time, and they therefore decided on surprise
action to determine the extent of the problem.
The New NP wants to congratulate the Bellville traffic department on their
positive action to render South Africa's roads safe. On the other hand, we
find it completely unacceptable for a big company such as Golden Arrow,
that is furthermore subsidised by the Government, to be guilty of such
serious contraventions of the traffic regulations. It would seem to be a
case of the Government not practising what it preaches.

Therefore we appeal to the acting Minister of Transport to investigate the
situation immediately and to bring the perpetrators to book. I also want to
add immediately that it is not only in the city of Bellville where buses do
not comply with the road traffic law, but buses in all the other cities can
also be examined for the very same reasons. I thank you.]

                     THE NEED FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM

                            (Member's Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Speaker, most South Africans agree with the
statements that we saw in the media today that are attributed to the Deputy
President, who is alleged to have said that our Constitution protects
criminals. The ACDP also agrees with the Deputy President that our
constitutional values need to be reviewed so as to be in line with the
values of the majority of South Africans.

The human rights framework that we have in our Constitution is too liberal,
and protects the perpetrators of crime more than the victims. This
framework has compromised the capacity of the police to combat crime. The
fact that about 60% of the police officials that were killed did not defend
themselves because of the uncertainty in their minds about what their
constitutional rights were compared to those of the perpetrators of crime,
is a case in point.

The ACDP therefore calls for an overhaul of the Constitution through an all-
inclusive constitutional reform assembly.
             INTERNATIONAL AWARD FOR SA CHILDREN'S TV PROGRAMME

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr Z KOTWAL (ANC): Madam Speaker, Takalani Sesame, the popular children's
educational series, a joint venture between the Department of Education and
SABC Education, recently scooped the Intermedia Globe Award at the World
Media Festival 2003 in Hamburg, Germany. As a consequence thereof, it
contended for the grand award which it duly won. At least 24 countries
participated in this competition. Takalani Sesame achieved this feat
through a special episode dedicated to World Aids Day in the children's
category.

The fact that the winning educational series is rich in local content is
significant in the light of the calls we have consistently made for matters
of local content, gender sensitivity and culture to feature in our
programmes. The ANC congratulates Takalani Sesame, the Department of
Education and the SABC on this memorable occasion and hopes that this
achievement will give further impetus to all efforts aimed at strengthening
early childhood development.

Let us create the future in children today. [Applause.]

              SECURITY GUARD AT COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE KILLED

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM extends its sympathy to the
family and friends of the security guard who was struck dead while on duty
at the Khayelitsha Community Health Centre. The needless killing of this
guard led to the closure of the clinic until yesterday, and the trauma unit
will be closed at night until such time as a security gate has been
installed.

This highlights the high level of crime in many South African
neighbourhoods. It is a sad indictment of the Government's failure to
address crime that security guards are necessary, in the first place, at
clinics and hospitals. Now a community in desperate need of health care
will not be able to access the nearest trauma facility due to the impunity
with which some in our country resort to violence, often through the deadly
use of firearms, to resolve situations that do not suit them.

The community is a mere stone's throw from this House, yet they and most
other communities live in perpetual fear of murderers, rapists and
hijackers. It is time for the Government to say: Up to here and no further.
Only then can we call on all South Africans to contribute in the fight
against crime. Without that unequivocal acknowledgement of Government's
constitutional responsibility to protect its citizens, people will merely
take the law into their own hands. I thank you.

        CUBAN ENGINEERS IN PROCESS OF COMING TO WORK IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF): Mevrou die Speaker, die Regering is op die oomblik
besig om op grond van 'n ooreenkoms met die Kubaanse regering 50 Kubaanse
ingenieurs na Suid-Afrika te bring om hier te kom werk.

Die VF verwerp die Regering se standpunt dat daar 'n nypende tekort aan
Suid-Afrikaanse ingenieurs is en dat die Regering daarom gedwing word om
Kubaanse ingenieurs na Suid-Afrika te bring. Baie Suid-Afrikaanse
ingenieurs word gedwing om in die buiteland te werk of is tans werkloos as
gevolg van 'n tekort aan werk in Suid-Afrika en dan ook vanweë regstellende
optrede. Suid-Afrikaanse ingenieurs wat tans nie werk in Suid-Afrika kan
vind nie, kan met reg die billikheid van hierdie regeringsoptrede
bevraagteken.

In die lig hiervan het die VF Maandag met 'n twee weke lange veldtog begin
waarin ingenieurs wat tans nie in hul beroepsveld werk kan kry nie, of in
die buiteland werk moet soek, genooi word om die VF by 0861 700 700 te
skakel of die VF se webwerf by www.vf.co.za te besoek en te kliek op die
skakel ``Sê jou sê''. Die eerste paar dae het alreeds 'n ongekende reaksie
ontlok, en talle werklose ingenieurs hier en in die buiteland het van hulle
laat hoor.

Die inligting wat gedurende hierdie veldtog versamel word, sal 'n
aanduiding gee of daar werklik 'n tekort is en of die ANC bloot groter
waarde aan sy vriendskap met Kuba heg as aan die belange van sy eie
burgers. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF): Madam Speaker, at present the Government is
bringing 50 Cuban engineers to South Africa to come and work here in terms
of an agreement with the Cuban Government.

The FF repudiates the Government's point of view that there is a serious
shortage of South African engineers and that the Government is therefore
compelled to bring Cuban engineers to South Africa. Many South African
engineers are compelled to work overseas or are at present unemployed as a
result of lack of employment in South Africa and also due to affirmative
action. South African engineers who cannot find work in South Africa at
present can justifiably question the fairness of this government action.

In the light of this the FF started a two-week campaign on Monday in which
engineers who cannot find work in their own field at present, or who must
look for employment overseas, are invited to phone the FF at 0861 700 700,
or to visit the FF's website at www.vf.co.za and to click on the link ``Sê
jou sê''. During the first few days there has already been an unprecedented
reaction, and many unemployed engineers here and overseas have been in
contact.

The information gathered during this campaign will be an indication of
whether there really is a shortage and whether the ANC simply values its
friendship with Cuba more than the interests of its own citizens.
[Interjections.]]

                 COMBATING ILLEGAL DRUGS AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
                            (Member's Statement)

Ms D M MOROBI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the SA Police Service has been making
considerable strides in intercepting drugs from reaching the streets of
South Africa.

Recently, three people were arrested at Johannesburg International Airport
after having been found in possession of Ecstasy tablets and cocaine to the
value of R4 million. In an unrelated incident, a woman and a foreign
national from Nigeria were arrested for having in their possession Ecstasy
tablets worth about R3,6 million. The SAPS, in tackling the war on drugs
head-on, are registering momentous victories, proving that crime does not
pay. The war on illegal drugs and substance abuse must continue.

The ANC congratulates and supports fully our women and men in uniform as
they fight to rid our country of the scourge of illegal drugs. We further
call on all communities to work with the police in eliminating the illegal
drug trade and substance abuse from our communities. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                    COMBATING CRIME - DA POLICY DOCUMENT

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr J T DELPORT (DA): Madam Speaker, Deputy President Zuma yesterday by
implication admitted that the Government fails to combat crime. In his
response he showed a lack of respect for the Constitution and a lack of
understanding of how to fight crime.

It is not the law which is failing the public; it is the Government. You
cannot fight crime by undermining the basic rights enshrined in the
Constitution. Criminality, and especially crimes involving arms and
violence, must be met with deeds.

The DA's anticrime policy document shows how South Africa can win the fight
against crime. Amongst others we need a properly staffed, equipped and
trained SAPS with 150 000 police officers on the streets protecting the
public, investigating crime and arresting criminals. We need an effective
court system; one that jails and keeps the guilty in jail where they
belong. We also need a support system for victims of crime.

The fight against crime can only be won through determined action. Laws
without the will and infrastructural support will never be the solution.
That is what the Deputy President must address. [Interjections.] I thank
you. [Applause.]

                         MISS UNIVERSE 2003 PAGEANT

                            (Member's Statement)

Mrs L R MBUYAZI (IFP): Madam Speaker, the Miss Universe 2003 pageant was
held in Panama yesterday. In this most prestigious pageant our own Cindy
Nell was selected as second runner-up. This 21-year-old child of the soil
was among the 70 contestants competing for the honours.

Miss Universe is not just about external beauty and flaunting of women's
bodies, which is sometimes interpreted as exploitation of women. The
pageant seeks to advance young women's careers, and personal and
humanitarian goals, as well as to play a critical role in making the next
100 years a century of women.

It is therefore encouraging to see our own young women take up the
challenge and make their mark in this pageant. This puts our country and
the continent as a whole on the same footing as the rest of the world as
more young women from our continent take part in these competitions.

We therefore want to thank Cindy Nell on behalf of the country for taking
up the challenge and making a mark for the country. We are very proud of
her and wish her all the best in her future endeavours. I thank you.

        WESTERN CAPE PROVINCIAL CRIME PREVENTION STRATEGY - RECRUITS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr M S BOOI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Western Cape provincial crime
prevention strategy has recently been boosted by the arrival of 3 212 new
recruits who began their duties on 30 May 2003. An additional number of
2 850 constables are due to arrive next year. This year also, 1 718 new
recruits graduated from the police college in Pretoria and were
subsequently deployed to various provinces.

The ANC welcomes these positive developments and many others that, on a
daily basis, take place across the length and breadth of our country. As we
continue as a people to address in a meaningful and honest manner the
problems that confront our country, the prophets of doom will gradually run
out of nightmares with which to scare us. Let us continue to march forward,
creating a future in which there shall be peace and friendship. Thank you.
[Applause.]

        SA CAPE CORPS - INCORPORTATION OF FORMER MEMBERS INTO ECONOMY

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr J DURAND (New NP): Madam Speaker, the New NP has for some time now
concerned itself with the plight of former South African Cape Corps
members. The Government has invested a lot in these members' training and
their skills can be used to the advantage of our economy.

With the demobilisation of the former SA Defence Force, large numbers of
these members should have been taken up in the economy. At present, many of
these former members are struggling to make ends meet. The changeover from
the commando system to a new system, which will be manned by more than
100 000 members, has brought about the opportunity to integrate these
members, members whose expertise can still be applied effectively.

These members can also be integrated with the reserve forces to assist when
the permanent force is occupied elsewhere, for example during peace
missions in Africa. They can play an important role in maintaining the home
front.

Currently, the New NP is in discussion with the Government to explore these
possibilities. The long-term solution lies in drawing these members into
the economy and therefore they have to be organised into a viable economic
entity. Empowerment and training is essential. This aspect is also being
discussed with the relevant departments.

The New NP also lends support in terms of guidance in order for former SA
Cape Corps members to develop such an economic entity. At present these
people are suffering and it is inexcusable that parties like the DA are
using this situation as a political football. I thank you. [Interjections.]

                              ARMS DEAL REPORT

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Speaker, it would seem that the hon
member Taljaard specialises in trying to make distortions and I hope that
the process of examining whether she has, in fact, incorrectly impugned the
reputation of the Auditor-General will continue. [Interjections.]

Once again in this House, a moment ago, she distorted matters, did not say
what the opinion was, did not give any indication of what scope I actually
discussed today and deliberately used the word ``doctoring''. You must know
that that is an allegation against the Auditor-General and I really wish to
bring that to the attention of the House. If you accuse someone of
``doctoring'', you are accusing them of being dishonest. And that is the
Auditor-General that you are talking about. [Interjections.]

It never ceases to amaze me how this party, that purports to be liberal and
stand for the Constitution, impugns the integrity of constitutional
appointments whenever it suits them and persistently attempts to find ways
of finding dishonest people where there are no dishonest people. I really
think they would make a greater contribution to this country if they did
not, with gay abandon, impugn the reputation of each and every
constitutional appointment and everyone else in this House. [Applause.]
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members. Order! Order!

                              ARMS DEAL INQUIRY

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, the issue of the arms procurement
is with us again. I think that it is important, it is very important, that
as we develop and advance our new democracy, we take careful steps and
watch carefully what precedents we put in place, because some of those
precedents will catch up with us and annul a lot of the good work and
efforts that have been made in the past. And in this regard it is important
to take into account the fact that the behaviour of our courts is also a
critical element in assisting us to put in place instructive precedents,
and not ones which will undermine the work we have already done.

Now one of the most disturbing issues with regard to the current uproar
surrounding the arms deal is the fact that a document that is a draft
report can be raised to the status upon which national decisions may be
based. There has never, in history, been a situation where a draft document
is given such status upon which decisions are based, especially in the
search that was being conducted around the arms deal. Three agencies were
involved and the draft report had to be built out of the reports of three
agencies. So to take any one of the drafts and upon it allow for decisions
to be taken, to be made now, decisions based on submitted reports, is
therefore a dangerous precedent. I think that is really the challenge
before us at this time. [Applause.]

                  DA POLICY DOCUMENT ON COMBATING OF CRIME

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The
Democratic Alliance, Madam Speaker, is hoping that there will come a time,
as they continue to say things that are not true, when there will be people
who will believe what they are saying.

They have a document that they call a `policy document.' Do you know what
it says? It says they want special courts in South Africa, and they believe
that it is a profound statement.

They do not know - and this is very sad for anybody who is serving our
people from this platform - that we have so many specialised courts in our
country. We have `Saturday courts' to start with, but apart from that,
there are commercial courts, there are central courts, we have even child
courts. All these courts are dealing with these matters as special courts.
They do not know that. [Interjections.]

But let me come to this matter of crime. They say - you should shut up and
listen - that we do not know how to deal with crime. They have never dealt
with crime at any point. They have always been in the opposition - a small
opposition. They do not know how to handle any of the things that I am
raising. [Interjections.]

They will not be able to handle crime, because, among others, what they say
is their policy is actually what is embedded in our own policy documents.
So I do not understand what they mean when they talk about their own
policy. They are not going to be in government; they are not going to be
able to deal with crime. Someone should actually take them into our
specialised courts so that they see these specialised courts that they are
talking about. [Applause.]

                    ALLEGED COMMENTS BY DEPUTY PRESIDENT

                            (Minister's Response)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just rising to help
the members who are very excited, who saw the very excited headlines this
morning, because the headlines were not saying what the Deputy President
said. And this morning they were late to follow the news, because early
this morning a correction had been made.

The Deputy President talked about the criminals who do not respect the
Constitution of this country when they commit crimes against citizens of
this country when they kill them, when they do all sorts of things. As soon
as they are arrested as criminals, they then remember the Constitution and
say that the Constitution must protect their rights when they do not
respect the rights of other people.

And that is the point that we made when we were talking at the Cape Flats
yesterday. And there is a statement we made today - the members could help
to educate themselves with the statement. Thank you. [Applause.]

           CO-OPERATION BETWEEN UNIONS AND JALI COMMISSION NEEDED

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think
the hon member Bloem was simply sharing fundamental advice with the House.
Judging from the response of the House, he was saying that a head of state
cannot appoint a judicial commission of inquiry and subsequently have it
undermined by civil servants. They all need to co-operate. I think this is
what he was saying.

    THE NEED TO ACCELERATE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT THROUGH PARTNERSHIP AND
     ACTIVE PARTICIPATION IN ORDER TO PUSH BACK THE FRONTIERS OF POVERTY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and colleagues,
this debate takes place ahead of the Growth and Development Summit, or GDS,
which is scheduled to take place on 7 June, next Saturday. None of us who
will participate in this debate will be in any position to comment in any
meaningful or definitive way on the detailed contents of the agreements
that will hopefully be adopted on Saturday. At this point, when these
agreements are still being fine-tuned, it would be inappropriate for us to
do so. What this debate will hopefully be able to achieve is to allow us as
parliamentarians to reflect on the broad strategic context within which the
GDS will take place and also on some of the challenges that the GDS might
pose for us in our work here at Parliament.

In looking at the strategic significance of the GDS for our national effort
to build a better life for all our people, it is perhaps necessary to begin
by dealing with two common misperceptions that have emerged in various
quarters regarding the GDS. The first of these places excessively high and
unrealistic expectations of what is, after all, a one-day event, expecting
it to provide an instant panacea for all our challenges and problems. The
second misperception, which appears to be characteristic of the approach of
the DA, is to dismiss the GDS up front as a mere talkshop or nonevent.

The GDS will, in fact, be neither a panacea nor a nonevent. It needs to be
recognised as an exercise in social dialogue. Social dialogue can help
build a national consensus on priorities for sustainable growth and
development and it can also mobilise concrete commitments from social
partners to work together to contribute to advancing this strategy. Those
who are sceptical are perhaps ignorant of the important contributions made
by social dialogue processes in other countries, for example in the case of
Ireland.

It is, in my view, important for this Parliament to give a clear signal,
among other ways through this debate today, that we are looking forward to
a successful outcome to the summit on Saturday. More than that, though, the
agreements that will hopefully be reached at the summit will inevitably
require a work programme of follow-up activities to give effect to
framework agreements. It will be important for us in Parliament to find
ways to engage creatively with such processes, thereby helping to ensure
that the GDS agreements realise their full potential in practice.
The GDS takes place against the background of increasing agreement, not
necessarily on every detail but on the broad direction and priorities for
economic and developmental policy in the period that lies ahead. The key
thrusts have been enunciated by the President in successive state of the
nation addresses in recent years. In 2001 the President spoke of a shift in
the focus of economic policy from macroeconomic stability to microeconomic
reform. This shift envisaged a greater focus in our efforts to promote
growth and development on real economy issues, such as infrastuctural
development and the integrated manufacturing strategy. This year the
President spoke of a concerted effort to roll back the frontiers of
poverty. More specifically, he spoke of creating a society in which our
people rely for their wellbeing and income on normalised participation in
economic activity.

Our current reality, as the President also acknowledged, is that many of
our people, through no fault of their own, do not and cannot earn their
income through normal participation in economic activity. Official figures
indicate that 29% of our working age population are unemployed, according
to the strict ILO definition. If we drop the requirement of actively
seeking work, the percentage according to the so-called expanded definition
of unemployed rises to 40%. While we have more recently seen a small sign
that the tide may be turning, with positive net job creation being recorded
in the manufacturing sector in the third quarter of 2002, these figures
highlight the enormity of the challenge that lies ahead.

How we understand the unemployment challenge facing us is critical in
determining an appropriate and workable response. A number of analysts have
pointed out that our challenge is not to deal with an unemployment problem
that is fundamentally cyclical in nature. It is not something, therefore,
that will disappear with growth alone, if that is understood simply as the
expanded reproduction of the existing structures and relations of
production. Nor is our unemployment problem, as the careful study of the
1996 report of the Presidential Commission on Labour Market Policy
underscored, the product to any significant extent of rigidities in the
labour market. As many analysts have argued, what we face is rather a
problem of structural unemployment that has its origins in the crisis of
the accumulation model that developed under colonialism and apartheid, and
which has been exacerbated by perhaps inescapable adjustments to the new
realities created by globalisation.

It is worth reminding ourselves of the central features of the apartheid
accumulation model. It was based on the brutal exploitation of large
numbers of low-paid unskilled labourers, drawn from the oppressed black
population. This model was developed in the primary product sectors of
mining and agriculture and was later carried over into manufacturing. It
depended on racially discriminatory, oppressive and coercive measures to
draw large numbers of black people into unskilled jobs, ensuring that their
wage rates were kept low. Pass laws, closed compounds, racially
discriminatory labour laws and the migrant labour system were all integral
to this model of accumulation. The fact is that this model began to unravel
and enter into crisis in the context of the world economic downturn of the
mid-1970s. My comrade Arthur Moloto will expand on this.

For the moment, all I want to point out is that structural employment,
falling particularly on the unskilled, has been a central feature of the
South African reality since the mid-1970s. Pressures of globalisation from
the mid-1990s onwards added a new dimension. Our country, along with
others, came under pressure to reduce tariffs and expose our previously
highly protected manufacturing sector to competition from abroad.
Competitive pressures were seen by Government as requiring an inescapable
major restructuring if we were to avoid the imminent possibility of
deindustrialisation. This restructuring, which saw a shift from Fordist
assembly line methods of production to more flexible and knowledge-based
methods of organisation, succeeded both in raising competitiveness and in
increasing export performance by the manufacturing sector - both key
objectives. But this came at the cost of adding to the tendency to reduce
the demand for unskilled workers, particularly those in activities
peripheral to the core business of manufacturing enterprises.

When we say that we face an unemployment crisis that is structural in
nature, what we mean in short is that over the past 30 years or so there's
been a process which has seen a sharp contraction in demand for unskilled
labour linked to processes of restructuring within the branches of
production in the formal sector of our economy.

Correctly understanding the nature of the unemployment challenge we face is
central to defining a way forward. Recognising the problem as structural in
nature means acknowledging that there is no solution from growth alone,
understood as simple expanded reproduction of what we have. Of course, we
need to raise growth rates, but we cannot do so without addressing the
constraints created by poverty and underdevelopment. Ever since the
drafting of the RDP, we have hence emphasised that growth has to be linked
to development. Nor does the view that the key problem is labour market
rigidities capture the fundamental reality of structural unemployment.
Recognising this reality means acknowledging the need for a raft of
responses, targeted in particular at overcoming structural constraints.
These need to include both short and long-term interventions.

Linked to the infrastructure development challenge that has been identified
as key to overcoming several of the real economy constraints to increasing
growth, we need significantly to expand the National Public Works
Programme. At our 51st congress in Stellenbosch the ANC resolved that an
expanded Public Works Programme should involve a deliberate choice in
favour of labour-absorbing techniques, particularly in developmental public
works programmes. Linked to this there must be an expansion of training and
skills development programmes. This will need to be complemented by a
social security expansion, particularly to create conditions for the
poorest of the poor to engage in productive activity.

In established formal sectors of our economy we need to encourage and
provide incentives for labour absorption and job retention. The Integrated
Manufacturing Strategy, or IMS, has identified the need to promote dynamic
linkages between big projects and small business, and between downstream
and upstream activity through the concept of integrated value matrices.
These linkages are not automatic and won't be achieved, in my view, by
focusing on the large anchor investment alone. More attention needs to be
focused on directly empowering smaller enterprises, and upstream and
downstream activity, and in interventions to actively promote beneficial
linkages.

But even if all our efforts in this regard were to succeed, we need to
accept that our quest to end the scourge of unemployment and poverty must
be broader than expanding wage labour employment in the formal sector. Many
of our people are obliged to seek their livelihood in informal sector
activities, but these, as studies by Stats SA have underscored, are at
present overwhelmingly low income and low quality in nature. Our quest to
end the scourge of unemployment and marginalisation must embrace a broader
concept of promoting sustainable livelihoods and raising the quality of
alternative economic activity. This must involve an accelerated push to
support SMME development with more attention on the very small and micro
enterprises that are currently marginal to many existing programmes. Co-
operatives are an accessible collective form of economic activity which
must have particular significance and which merit priority attention and
support.

All of these are key thrusts of ANC and Government policy. The Growth and
Development Summit can contribute and add value to all of these. The summit
on Saturday will hopefully produce an agreement that will draw support from
the social partners for expanded public works programmes. These will
hopefully include agreements on a strategic choice in favour of labour-
absorbing techniques and on the modalities for the implementation of such
and agreement. The GDS will also hopefully include agreements for social
partners to support an extension of training and skills upgrading, SMME
support and support for co-operatives.

A particular challenge will be to unlock and mobilise resources in the
hands of private capital to support increased investment of a developmental
nature, which has as its objective economic and social development,
increased job creation and is not driven by narrow considerations of profit
maximisation alone. In this respect it has to be hoped that the GDS will
build on and give impetus to the important Agreement on Capital Markets and
Investment, reached at the Financial Sector Summit in August last year.
This laid out a process and defined clear tasks for the social partners to
promote increased private sector involvement in developmental investments.
Importantly too, the Financial Sector Summit agreed that:


  The Financial Sector commits itself to the disclosure of its investments
  and to engagement around the establishment of realistic targets for this
  type of investment.

The GDS, finally, will have to take all of this down to local level and
make the agreements have real meaning for the inhabitants of townships and
rural areas, where the majority of our poor, marginalised and currently
unemployed reside.

The GDS will challenge us in Parliament to find creative ways to engage
with the process. The GDS is not an event that will take place on one day.
Rather, we need to see next Saturday's event as the launch of a process
which will require much follow-up activity to implement what will
inevitably be framework summit agreements.

Yesterday, in the debate on development funding, we began to speak of the
need to fund new models and modes to conduct parliamentary oversight,
reaching beyond the silos that we are accustomed to operating in. The GDS
will, I believe, similarly challenge us to find new ways to engage and
oversee processes arising from it. Perhaps we will need to engage Nedlac on
an appropriate mechanism for this.

In conclusion, on behalf of the overwhelming majority in this House I am
sure, I want to wish those involved in the GDS all the best for a
successful summit on Saturday. They, and we, have much work to do to ensure
that we turn the tide of poverty in our country and create a better life
for all. We dare not fail our people. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Speaker, I can remember a very different South Africa, a
country at war with itself, a time when the infamous P W Botha presided
over an imperial apartheid republic, where we lived under a state of
emergency, where good men and women were banished and banned and where
students of Natal University were baton charged, brutalised and detained or
simply disappeared in the night. Today we live in a far better country than
at any time in our past. We must never forget our terrible history, but we
cannot keep on living in it or blaming it for everything that happens
today.

Today, despite our nation's achievements and advances, South Africa is not
working. One in every three South Africans, over seven million people, is
either looking for a job or has given up looking, realising that they are
not going to find one. Government has failed to grasp job creation as our
most urgent national priority and the latest unemployment statistics,
structural or otherwise, are an appalling indictment of the ANC's failure
to deliver on the one thing that it promised so vehemently to do - to
provide jobs. Even this year's Budget, which provides some measure of
poverty relief and awards tax rebates to those lucky enough to have
employment, avoids or evades the key question: Where are the jobs?

There are no new jobs. Like the long-awaited but seldom seen broad-based
black economic empowerment policy, jobs too have failed to materialise
under an ANC regime that chooses dogma over doing well, floundering in the
murky darkness of joblessness, unsure, unwilling and unable. After nearly a
decade of ANC rule, we have one million jobs lost. Nearly 42% unemployed
with nearly 27 million South Africans living below the poverty line. The
reason for this lies squarely at the door of this Government, precipitated
by a President who has failed to demonstrate moral leadership or instil
confidence in a country crying out for foreign investment, a crisis of
confidence caused by his attitude to Zimbabwe, his stance on Aids, and a
crisis of confidence created in a country awash with corruption and crime -
a country living and dying in fear.

How dare we talk of a better life for all when 7 million of our people
cannot find a job. For the truth is that along with the much-promised
better life for all, there is another South Africa - unemployed with hungry
children, with people living in fear of murderers and learning more
everyday of nepotism and corruption that exists and goes unchecked,
pointing to ANC cronyism and secret deals reaching up into the very highest
reaches of Government, where spectacular empowerment deals serve only to
further enrich the already fabulously wealthy, leaving the majority of
South Africans just as marginalised and as impoverished as ever they were.
And how has Cabinet met this job crisis, our country's greatest challenge?
Not by making investment and growth a single-minded obsession, or by
recognising that small business - not big business, and certainly not
Government - will be the only generator of new job opportunities.

Instead, they remain arrogant and intransigent, ever more remote and
unyielding, always looking backwards and blaming the past, not forward in
embracing the future, determined to hang on to their rigid and inflexible
labour dogma. As last week's Labour Budget debate showed, not only does the
ANC not know what they need to do about the mounting job crisis, but by
their words and their actions, they simply don't give a damn.

And so to the much-heralded but now strangely silent Growth and Development
Summit, only days away with embarrassing topics like the HIV/Aids and Gear
swept under the carpet while Cosatu threatens to reject any pre-arranged
jobs pact that Government may already have settled with the other two
alliance partners.

South Africa cannot afford another failed summit like the Presidential Job
Summit of 1998. It cannot afford a Government that only looks after the
employed, leaving the jobless defenceless and destroyed. Frankly, South
Africa cannot afford another 10 years of ANC rule, for until they deliver
on jobs, the ANC has delivered on nothing at all. No amount of spinning or
posturing or even silence this Saturday in Johannesburg will change that
one simple fact. Thank you. [Applause.]

Prof H NGUBANE: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon colleagues, I want
to use this opportunity to examine more closely the requirements for
meaningful partnerships. The relative equality between partners is the
cornerstone of the relationship, to the extent that the partners are
convinced that they each have something to gain from the partnership.

There is also another requirement that is, in fact, a precursor or
prerequisite to the formation of meaningful partnerships. That is the
existence of goodwill and mutual trust. Almost ten years after the first
democratic Government in South Africa, there are small indicators that a
relative measure of goodwill exists across the racial divide in different
parts of the country, but it is still very fragile and tends to crumble at
the slightest disturbance. What we all need to do is to encourage and
promote such goodwill whenever we come across it, and all of us need to
attempt to indicate our goodwill, spreading over everything we do to
encompass everyone around us.

The recent publicity given to Happy Sindane's story carries within it an
example of goodwill. Betty Sindane, who brought Happy up after he had been
abandoned as a young child, is obviously poor, but was prepared to share
her meagre means of life with her son and Happy. The indications are that
the two boys grew up as brothers, speaking Isindebele and observing the
relevant cultural behaviour. Betty Sindane illustrates a fountain of
goodwill in having taken in a little boy who had nowhere to go, giving him
love without question in spite of the hurt and pain that many black people
still carry within them as a result of the apartheid experience.

On the other hand, what is reflected through the media is a sense of shock
that a white child could have been stolen by the maid and later abandoned
in the heart of poverty with black people. The Cape Times on Tuesday, 27
May reported that ``Happy's claim that he had been abducted by his family's
domestic worker caused an international media frenzy''. No doubt, if it was
a black toddler who had been abducted and abandoned, there would probably
have been no international media frenzy.

As South Africans, we are constantly faced with interference of a racist
nature in situations that appear not well disposed to the interests of the
white people. We need to be vigilant and close ranks to be truly South
African in order to dissuade racist responses that may emanate outside of
our country. Because of outcries based on race, the good relations that
Betty and Happy had forged together over the years are overlooked -
especially the beautiful expression of Ubuntu by Joana towards Happy.

There are various instances of goodwill if we care to look around us and
take note. Two weeks ago, on a Saturday preceding Mother's Day, I was doing
my shopping. While I was walking along within the mall, a white girl of
about 10 years old gave me a rose, wishing me a happy Mother's Day. I was
very elated by this gesture. I made up my mind that as soon as I returned
home, I would write an article about this episode, which I would send to
the Cape Times to tell the young person what her kind act did for me and to
thank all those around her who might have encouraged her in her endeavour.

As you know, good intentions are not always matched by fortuitous
opportunity. I became obstructed on my way home and never wrote the
article. I suppose I am not the only one with the problem of
procrastination. Yet, acts of goodwill such as the one mentioned above need
to be given the maximum publicity to encourage one another and to promote
endeavours of goodwill in our young democracy.
With regard to partnerships, in order to push back the frontiers of
poverty, a good example has recently been provided with the setting up of
the Unemployment Insurance Fund. This fund is meant to enable those who are
on the lowest rung of labour, such as the domestic servants and
farmworkers, to be registered so that, if they lose their jobs or are
unable to continue working, they could be covered for some time through
this insurance fund.

To put this process into operation, there is a need for co-operation
between the employers and the Department of Labour. These two sectors
become partners in their efforts to assist the employees within the
particular category to gain benefits from insurance. These benefits would
be set out by contribution of a small sum of money from the employer and
then topped up by the Department of Labour to make it worthwhile for the
relevant employee thus registered. No doubt the Department of Labour has
been satisfied by the relatively good co-operation in this partnership.

Nonetheless, reports of exceptions, where some of the employers are said to
have reduced the wages if they were above R800 basic wage and placed the
employee in the R800 bracket, making an argument that the Department of
Labour has so ordered. Other cases are reported where the hours of work
have been reduced in order to pay less wages and cases of summary dismissal
are also plentiful. Other instances include reduction in the employee's
wages in order to pay the sum of money required by the Department of Labour
from the employer every month.

As said earlier on, not everybody is imbibed with the goodwill that is a
prerequisite for workable partnerships. If these employers found that the
procedures in setting out the UIF were vague, or had a lot of loopholes
that could give rise to unintended interpretations, they could at least
have contacted the Department of Labour to alert it of such shortcomings.

I want to congratulate the Minister of Labour - hon Mdladlane - on taking
up the thorny question of the domestic servants and farm labourers. I only
hope that the co-operation to ease the lives of these employees will
flourish to contribute in pushing back the frontiers of poverty. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr W A ODENDAAL: Mr Chairman, the subject of today's discussion neatly
encapsulates the central policy challenge confronting all of us who care
about South Africa. How do we accelerate growth and development to enable
us to push back the frontiers of poverty? The short answer is by raising
the standard of living across the board. No government can allow the wealth
gap between rich and poor to keep on widening. Only irresponsible
governments will try to close the gap by implementing policies that will
leave everybody equally poor.

The means to achieve the goal of raising living standards across the board,
however, is no simple task.

The only sustained way in which to eradicate poverty over time and empower
breadwinners to regain their dignity and care for their own families is to
provide enough jobs. There is no other way to win the war against poverty
than job creation through growth and development. Safety nets like grants
and free health care will alleviate poverty but it will not roll it back.
South Africa's economic growth rate has now been hovering around 3% for a
number of years, a remarkable achievement amongst developing countries. All
this resulted from sound fiscal management and a disciplined financial
system for which the South African Government should be commended.

It has been acknowledged worldwide that South Africa needs a sustained
annual growth rate of more than 5% to be in a position to reduce the
unacceptable persistently high unemployment rate of more than 35% by 50 %
by the year 2020. The current rate of economic growth will not roll back
poverty.

The basic challenge of any government wishing to accelerate economic growth
is to create an environment of confidence and predictability in which
investors will feel comfortable enough to risk capital and expand their
businesses. It is, however, not the formal sector and big business alone
that have to contribute to the creation of job opportunities. The major
role small and medium enterprises have to play in providing new jobs that
will serve as a training ground for future successful entrepreneurs in all
spheres of economic activity is often overlooked and underestimated by many
people, also in our country. South Africa will depend on subsistence and
small-scale farming to pave the way towards generating a meaningful number
of successful black commercial farmers. The same process has to take place
in commerce and industry to provide the number of black captains in the
industry who will be able to create the much-needed job opportunities in
the formal labour sector.

Medium and small enterprises, however, suffer severely from rigidities in
the existing labour market. The policy of minimum wages and the highly
centralised collective bargaining procedures pose a major obstacle to these
small entrepreneurs. They cannot all afford the enforced minimum wages
while bargaining only take place between big business and big labour. The
small employers are not allowed to bargain with their own employees. The
result is that emerging entrepreneurs shy away from expanding their
businesses and employing more workers.

The problem of a slow growth rate is further exacerbated by the chronic
skills shortage amongst the unemployed.

One of the solutions should thus indeed be to accelerate skills transfer to
previously disadvantaged entrepreneurs by means of partnerships and active
participation in enterprises in all sectors of the economy, agriculture,
commerce and industry. It should be supported by an aggressive training
programme specifically aimed at the unemployed.

South Africa must learn from the experiences of the Pacific Rim Tigers. In
countries like Taiwan, South Korea, Malaysia and others, massive training
and skills transfer programmes empowered future entrepreneurs who advanced
via the route of small and medium and often, informal economic sectors to
develop into the champions of agriculture, industry and commerce.

The secret to the acceleration of economic growth and job creation lies in
the ingenious stimulation of entrepreneurship within the informal economic
sector. Labour market rigidities should therefore be removed and
centralised collective bargaining procedures relaxed to enable the SMMEs to
fulfil their pivotal role in reducing the unemployment rate and eventually
weeding out poverty.

South Africa can do it. The New NP looks forward to being part of the
solution to our country's problems, not to being the problem itself.
[Applause.]

Mr K A MOLOTO: Chairperson, any person can mention unemployment statistics
without providing a penetrating and useful analysis of the challenges. It
is much easier to avoid engaging in putting things in their proper context
and only offer vote-catching phrases. That is what is called intellectual
laziness. That is what hon Lowe did this evening. I do not agree with his
thesis that South Africa is not working. This argument cannot be sustained
in any debate.

A systematic analysis of the origins of the socioeconomic problems of South
Africa and the challenges it faces today warrants the attention of this
House. It is only through such an analysis that this House will appreciate
the efforts taken by this Government to unlock the growth potential of this
country and create a better life for all our people. We need to engage in
serious discussions on this matter without the fashionable vote-catching
phrases.

The current challenges South Africa faces have a historical background that
needs an exposition. The interwar years provided the pact Government of
1924, which was constituted by the National Party and the Labour Party to
create employment opportunities for a large number of poor whites and to
create an economic base that would take over mining when gold reserves got
depleted. The National Party represented Afrikaner farmers, public servants
and working-class Afrikaners. The Labour Party represented the English-
speaking section of the working class.

This pact Government was based on job-reservation for whites, support for
the agricultural marketing system and co-operatives of Afrikaner farmers
and a total denial of trade union rights for blacks.

With regard to black workers, one can safely characterise this period as
one of extreme labour market inflexibility. Heaven forbid, I hope that the
hon Lowe is not crying for a return to this era. This labour market
flexibility provided no improvements in the quality of life of black
people. It denied them access to skills training.

It was during this period that minimum wages were set for workers in
various industries where there was no collective bargaining. Wage
legislation established the Wage Boards to achieve these goals. Colour bar
legislation excluded Africans and Indians on the mines from most categories
of skilled and semi-skilled work.
These measures had disastrous and far-reaching consequences for this
country. This is a point I will continuously come back to during my speech.
This is a very critical matter. Failure to realise this will result in ill-
conceived economic strategies and exploitative sweat shops.

The outbreak of the Second World War provided an even faster economic
expansion in industrial activity. There was an increase in production of
military goods for South Africa and the Allied forces. There was also a
growth of industries that produced goods that could not be imported because
of disruptions caused by war.

According to John Pampalis, a distinguished academic, factories started to
manufacture armoured cars, artillery guns, ammunition, soldier boots,
uniforms and other equipment. The local steel industry grew as a result of
these developments. There was also a rapid growth in mining production and
building construction. The engineering, chemical and textile industries
also experienced a rapid growth.
The National Party appealed for the economic interest of Afrikaners. Its
policies appealed to white farmers who resented the large-scale movement of
blacks to cities which increased pressure for an increase in agricultural
wages. Agricultural wages were much lower than urban wages at that time. It
provided the Afrikaner working class with skills-training opportunities.

According to John Pampalis, a distinguished academic:


  The nationalists frightened whites with the spectre of swart-gevaar and
  promised to deal ruthlessly with black opposition of any sort. They
  critised the Smuts government for its failure to deal with high crime
  rates, rising prices and white unemployment.

This sounds very familiar. Indeed there are certain things that have not
changed. I think I have heard these messages during the 1999 elections. I
can predict with certainty that we will still hear these statements again.
You also see posters featuring very angry men, asking voters to keep the
ANC out of power. Let me just offer you one piece of advice: Please smile
on these posters! There is a bright future ahead of this country. The tide
has turned.

The 1950s is a period that can be characterised by an unprecedented
economic boom in South Africa. The reduction of wages of black workers as a
result of repressive laws by the National Party government resulted in
super profits for all sections of the capitalist class. These super
profits, arising from super exploitation of black workers, attracted
massive foreign investment from Britain, the United States of America and
Western Europe. There was massive investment in manufacturing and mining.
South African mining houses started to invest heavily in manufacturing and
it was during this period that manufacturing began to be dominated more and
more by only a few very large firms.

The whole economy was particularly given a boost by the development of the
newly discovered Free State gold fields. The state also intervened directly
in the economy by establishing Sasol, expanding production of Iscor and
establishing an industrial finance corporation of mining and manufacturing.

The National Party provided farmers with favourable prices for their
products. It is recorded that these prices increased by nearly 50% in the
first five years of National Party rule.

During the 1960s, the apartheid regime consolidated its power militarily.
There was a sharp increase in military spending, which gave a massive boost
to the economy, with particular reference to factories producing goods for
the South African Defence Force. Foreign investors had all the confidence
in the might of the regime. The assault on the rights of unskilled black
workers continued unabated. Cheap labour continued to ensure super profits.
This was a period of sustained economic growth.

Towards the end of the 1960s, there was increased consolidation of farm
sizes. Big farm owners started to buy smaller farms to consolidate their
farm holdings. Agriculture became heavily mechanised. It relied heavily on
machines for production. Mining became capital-intensive. It should be
noted that previously, these two sectors were labour-intensive. Massive
unemployment occurred as a result, and Bantustans became the dumping
grounds for this surplus labour.

It is also ironic that the capital-intensive method of production was
allowed to take place by the government in the midst of surplus labour and
massive unemployment. It is therefore correct that the ANC calls for labour-
intensive production methods where possible in other sectors of our
economy.

Hon members, let us take this moment to reflect briefly on the sources of
these contradictions: Firstly, you had a manufacturing industry that was
uncompetitive and protected from imports by use of tariffs and other
measures. The manufacturing industry could not even produce products that
could compete in the export market. Secondly, you had this high
unemployment rate among black people, who constituted the majority in this
country. In brief, the economy suffered from a lack of internal or domestic
demand for goods produced by the South African manufacturing sector.

The gold price fell sharply in 1975 and in the 1980s. This resulted in
massive retrenchment of workers. Prof Servaas van den Berg of the
University of Stellenbosch indicates that:


  In this period - 1975 to 1988 - the labour force grew by 3.9 million
  whilst formal employment grew by only 900 000, leaving an increase in the
  excess labour force of 3 million to seek a living in the informal sector
  or subsistence agriculture or to remain unemployed.

The drop in the price of gold caused further complications beside
retrenchments in the mining sector. Gold accounted for 44% of export
revenues. This put major pressures on the balance of payments and caused
the rand to depreciate sharply.

According to Jonathan Leape of the London School of Economics, the rand
value of the South African foreign debt rose from R12.6 billion in 1980 to
R60.1 billion - an increase ten times that in dollar terms. This resulted
in the debt crisis of 1985. The debt crisis put the squeeze on economic
growth.

Hon members, we can clearly see that this was a house of cards. It was
bound to implode. The critical question that has to be posed is: What has
the ANC Government done to resolve these internal contradictions in the
South African economy?

The interventions made by the ANC Government have ensured that the
manufacturing sector is not wiped off the map by the process of
globalisation. The ANC Government moves from the premise that cheap labour
can no longer be a source of competitive advantage in the global economy. A
broad national skills base has to be built to enable this country to take a
premier or strategic place in the global value chain. It also acknowledges
that commodities are traded on an international level and possession of
such can no longer be considered a competitive advantage.
For South Africa to be a solution hub in various sectors of the economy, it
needs a broader skills base. Skills training and learnerships will ensure
that this country marches forward in the world of innovations. The
development of skills had an impact on all sectors of our economy. Of
course, there is the challenge of how to accommodate this large pool of
unskilled workers.

This has been a difficult task. It is like building in a storm. The forces
of globalisation have the potential to cause major dislocations in the
economy. It has not been an easy task. However, one can state with
conviction that the ANC Government has put in place measures to rebuild the
South African economy, with particular reference to the manufacturing
sector.

Public works programmes, land reform, small business development and
financing are such measures that will address some of these challenges.

Lastly, during the public hearings on the budget, it was established that
the private sector is sitting on R300 billion of surplus cash, just lying
idle. I am convinced that the different role-players, in our economy and
during the Growth and Development Summit will address all obstacles towards
the deployment of that surplus cash in a productive economy. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We must not talk about pushing back
the frontiers of poverty. To me, this is a very ugly phrase. We should
rather talk about the elimination of poverty, instead.

The real challenge that the country faces is how to ensure global
competitiveness and local benefits. At the moment, there is undue focus on
competitiveness with less emphasis on development. What is needed is shared
growth, not just profitability. Ironically, if growth is increased and
shared, there will be more profits and accelerated competitiveness.

Economic growth does not, per se, precipitate more jobs, although it
definitely increases profits. On the other hand ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I think, hon members, you are
drowning out the speaker here. Could you please come to order. Order,
please! Hon member, you may now proceed.

Adv Z L MADASA: Economic growth does not, per se, precipitate more jobs,
although it definitely increases profits. On the other hand, a lack of or
less economic growth causes more job losses. Acceleration of growth
unaccompanied by strategies to ensure development will not be beneficial to
a growing economy.

Our challenge is how to ensure increased participation in the economy by
the majority of South Africans who are still on the periphery of economic
activity. Most people are marginalised from the economy, not only through
job losses, but also through a lack of skills and equal opportunities to
become entrepreneurs. The economy cannot grow to ideal levels when so many
people are living off the existing economy without contributing to its
growth.

We also need to bridle the tempo of deregulation and privatisation in order
to ensure that we are not too far ahead of the pack and to consider the
social impact. Where markets fail to deliver on development, the Government
needs to intervene swiftly. Such an approach will also enhance the capacity
of our negotiators at the World Trade Organisation by giving them enough
leverage or ammunition so as not to have to argue merely on fairness.

Our industrial strategy must include support for the downstream and labour-
intensive industries. More investments, maintenance and building of the
infrastructure is crucial to stimulating growth.

In order to ensure competitiveness and shared growth, the Government must
ensure better co-ordination and spending of all available development
funding, which is a matter we dealt with yesterday.

Partnerships between the developed and the developing worlds are crucial to
support development and the elimination of poverty. Nepad is a welcome
concept in this regard. Partnerships between the governments in the
developing world and the private sector and civil society are also
indispensable.

But partnerships only work when the partners are committed to the
partnership. Corruption and greed weaken partnerships. We must act swiftly
to remove the few remaining corrupt, yet influential, freedom fighters on
the continent and replace them with fighters for freedom and development.
Thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, the unemployment crisis
threatens to undo everything that democracy offers this society. Rightly,
therefore, the need for accelerated economic growth and development is
recognised by all here, but to speak of achieving this goal, and I quote,
``through partnership'', is disingenuous.

This topic is brought to this House whilst no party here, aside from the
ruling party, will be represented at the Growth and Development Summit. Is
this the level of consultation that the ruling party intends to accord to
others on this vital issue?

The ANC Government is saying that they are willing to recognise that there
is a problem, perhaps because the elections are coming, but what it won't
acknowledge is that, after years of implementing its policy, nothing has
really changed. Therefore, even those who are important or pliable enough
to attend the summit are told beforehand that the Government's policy is
not up for discussion.

A debate, a proper discussion involving the entire South African society,
is required. Proper in length - certainly. One day cannot achieve anything.
Proper in participation - certainly. All stakeholders should be involved.
Proper in content - certainly. All issues of economic policy must be open
for discussion.

In short, this country needs an economic Codesa. I thank you.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Chair, there is no doubt that the eradication
of poverty remains a major challenge for the democratic Government. It is
this state of poverty that denies our people the opportunity to enjoy our
hard-won democracy. We have to act as a matter of urgency to push back the
frontiers of poverty. The challenge we all face is how to respond to this
pressing situation, whose responsibility it is to address poverty and what
has been done already.

As much as social grants are desirable as part of the overall strategy to
combat poverty, we would not regard them as the panacea to solving our
social problem. What we need in our country is to harness our human
potential of youth and women, who are in the majority. We need to get them
into our mainstream economy. Their participation in a transformed economy
is long overdue if we are to seriously fight poverty. We have to prepare
them for the realities of the global economy, through accelerated
innovative education and training programmes.

Whose responsibility is it to address this challenge? It is every South
African's responsibility to fight poverty with whatever means at our
disposal. We have to encourage active participation by the private sector,
civil society and Government in devising and jointly implementing
programmes aimed at addressing the issues that contribute to the state of
poverty in our country. The Government cannot fight poverty without
involving other stakeholders.

It is hoped that the planned Growth and Development Summit will, indeed,
provide an opportunity for South Africans to come forward with concrete
steps to ... [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Deputy Chairman, the need to accelerate growth and
development is not in doubt. However, the monotonous repetition of
``pushing back the frontiers of poverty'' can be shouted until horses grow
horns, but poverty will not vanish.

The eradication of poverty will not happen until there are economic
policies in place which seriously confront poverty. Gear and the
privatisation of state assets are destroyers of jobs. They aggravate
poverty. Section 25(7) of the Constitution is inimical to the eradication
of poverty. It has consolidated the land dispossession of the Africans and
their poverty.

The enormous wealth of this country is in minority hands and more of it is
daily getting concentrated in their hands. Mineral wealth that ought to
have radically raised the standard of living of all the people of this
country is enjoyed by the minority rich, who see Africans only as employees
owning nothing. The result is that 98% of our country's economy is
controlled by the minority.

When it comes to poverty, it is the Africans who are suffocating in the
quagmire of poverty. Their country is like the one which was described by
Prophet Jeremiah, when he said: ``Our inheritance has been turned over to
the foreigners. We buy our water to drink''.

To eradicate poverty, land must be equitably redistributed, not as from
1913. The wealth of the country must be shared. There must be a bottom-top
approach to development and spending of more money and training on the
poor. The Government must not abdicate its responsibility to eradicate
poverty by allowing laws and policies which perpetuate the economic
servitude of the majority population of this country. Thank you.

[Time expired.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Chairperson, Deputy President, hon members, friends and
comrades, we are addressing a very important topic today in the House. It
is important because we are nearing the Growth and Development Summit. This
summit is important because it is an indicator of the consensus and
progress made by our society that includes all of us, Government and
private sector. Stakeholders will come with varied perspectives, but the
objective is to find common ground so that all can benefit from the outcome
of the summit.

The importance of this debate in the House is to support the process,
provide guidance and encourage stakeholders to find one another.

Our deliberations today will provide a map of various challenges to unlock
the development opportunities of our communities and increase participation
by the disadvantaged people of South Africa in the economic mainstream. Our
role as MPs should give effect to the central task that is given to us by
the statement of 8 January, the 51st national conference resolutions, the
President's state of the nation address and the lekgotlas that underpin the
ANC strategy towards a better life for all.

This includes the elimination of poverty, boosting of productivity,
stimulating economic growth on a sustainable basis and improved social
conditions. We should aim to bring about economic and social transformation
that would create a broad-based pattern of income-generating and wealth-
creating opportunities for the poor and the closing of the inequality gap.

The Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programmes seek to improve the
lives of the poor people, especially the rural poor, and particular efforts
will be made to target women, youth and the disabled. These programmes
would enhance income generation, local economic development, improved
infrastructure, social cohesion and physical security within rural
communities. Through these programmes, local people and all stakeholders
are committing themselves to trying to find solutions to the current job
crisis that rural areas are facing.

To advance the struggle against poverty, a number of obstacles need to be
overcome. Some of these obstacles are: ensuring higher rates of growth in
the economy to remain competitive as a country and to increase both
domestic and foreign investment - that is very important; to generate
sustainable employment in the rural areas in particular, and to develop
SMMEs, women organisations and the involvement of community organisations
and church groupings; to raise the skills level amongst our people through
the Setas, Abet and on-the-job training; to improve the outreach of our
microcredit programmes by implementing the apex funds; to develop the co-
operative sector in all agricultural areas for emerging farmers; to
implement Integrated Sustainable Rural Development and Urban Renewal
Programmes and advance black economic empowerment programmes aimed at
sustainable development; and, of course, to build an efficient competitive
agricultural sector to support the emergence of successful smallholder
farming enterprises.

In South Africa, the current growth in the economy takes place in the
context of job-shedding. The relationship between joblessness and
unemployment must be looked at. Large numbers of our people live in
poverty. In the early 1990s approximately 17 million people lived in
absolute poverty, of which approximately 95% were African and 75% were
rural. The unemployment rate was 16% in 1995 and just over 27% in 2002. The
number of unemployed is increasing amongst the unskilled section of our
labour force and in our rural areas. This was created by those who seem to
forget that they are the architects of this poverty.

In this regard, Setas can play a vital role in training and skilling our
workers so as to increase productivity. In terms of unskilled labour in the
rural areas, we would like to see more land available in this sector to
empower black people so that they can have an asset base and are encouraged
to become employers of themselves. We must involve agriculture extension
officers to give their full support to emerging farmers through in-field
training. In this regard, retraining of our extension officers is vital in
the area of marketing and managerial skills.

We would also like to see more labour-intensive industries that can absorb
the excess labour, for example agro-industries in rural areas, small-scale
mining and processing of our agricultural produce and adding value to our
minerals in the country. Through this effort, productive employment
opportunities are opened for new work seekers, including school-leavers.
This would improve the effectiveness of our labour markets and increase
investment in skills development and training, so that we can have a
productive workforce.

We acknowledge the establishment of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund to provide
training for young people to become entrepreneurs. However, we see the slow
process of engagement and implementation as an issue that needs to be
relooked at. Government needs to unlock the limited resources to create
more infrastructure to improve the delivery of effective services and to
achieve the set target of halving unemployment by 2014 through public works
programmes that will eradicate poverty and address the legacy of apartheid,
ensuring the economic participation of blacks, disabled, youth and women;
promoting investment and creating low-skill jobs and jobs for unskilled
labour; ensuring the benefits of the trickle-down effect across sectors and
value matrices.

The Department of Trade and Industry must bring the SMMEs into the
mainstream of the economy. SMMEs can absorb unemployment in the micro and
survivalist sector and create linkages with large firms in terms of
contracts, outsourcing and networking.

South Africa has become increasingly capital-intensive over time, and this
capital intensity is relatively high by international standards. Many job
losses are associated with low skill levels in the labour force. Policy-
makers should therefore focus on developing proper skills and training for
entrepreneurs and speed up the BEE policy. This is very important.

Most of the SMMEs are situated in the rural areas, producing simple goods
for local demand. However, the poor infrastructure hampers their
competitiveness and increases the urban-rural bias. In addition, the high
interest rates influence consumption patterns in the SMME sector.

SMME support programmes should therefore be fine-tuned and tailor-made for
the disadvantaged areas. They should address managerial skills,
information, communication and technology. Finance institutions in these
areas, banks in particular, do not fulfil the needs of SMMEs in terms of
access to finance and the provision of collateral. Some intervention by the
Government would be helpful, but as we know, there is always room for
improvement - room for improvement does exist.

We hoped that the amended National Small Business Bill, which provides for
a small business advisory council, would address many of the problems that
SMMEs are facing. However, we all know by now that there is no easy and
quick solution to the unemployment problem. We therefore need to engage
constructively and responsibly to change the conditions to achieve a better
life for all.

I-ANC ayikahluleki ukuvula amathuba emisebenzi. Ukuze sibe nale nhlupheko
engaka kwadalwa ukuthi sathathelwa umhlaba yilaba ababesibusa ngaleso
sikhathi. Okunye-ke, ukuze abantu bahlale bahlupheke ngale ndlela
abahlupheka ngayo abazenzanga, babesebenza kodwa besebenzela ize. Abanye
babesenzela ukuhlala endaweni lapho babehlala khona. Abanye babesebenzela
ukuphiwa impuphu ukuze badle, bedla impuphu yodwa njengamagundwane.
Akuzange-ke kuthathwe umhlaba kuphela. Senziwa izigqila ezweni lobaba,
ezweni lethu. Sasisebenzela laba asebehlumule namhlanje abizibona ukuthi
bangcono, abazibona ukuthi ngaphandle kwabo ngeke siwavule amathuba
emisebenzi thina.

Manje simemezela kubo bonke abantu, simemezela kuzo zonke izifundazwe
ukuthi abantu abasukume bazenzele ngoba akekho omunye umuntu ozobenzela.
Laba abakhuluma kakhulu kangaka, basebenzela izikhwama zabo. Babevele
bekwenza lokhu ngoba babethatha bathumele lapho bevela khona, ngoba vele
banamanye amakhaya ngaphandle kwaleli khaya esinalo thina.

Sekuyikhathi-ke sokuthi azibuye zonke emasisweni. Awubuye umhlaba, ayibye
imisebenzi iphathwe ibe sezandleni zabantu bendawo ukuze abantu bakwazi
ukuzithuthukisa. Omama, abantu abasha, abantu abakhubazekile nathi sonke
muzi onsundu e-Afrika asisukume sizenzele. Akekho omunye umuntu ozosenzela.

Ngiyanxusa-ke koNgqongqoshe bonke ukuthi bambisanani. Uma unokuthize
ngakolwakho uhlangothi, hlanganisa nokuthize ngasohlangothini lukababa
uNgubane ukuze sidale amathuba omsebenzi, siwadalele abantu bakithi, ngoba
empeleni abakithi abantu abahluphekayo. Laba abakhuluma kakhulu
abahlupheki. Lokhu abakwenzayo bakwenzela nje ukuthi bazobiza abantu
bakithi ukuthi babavotele, kuphela nje into abayenzayo.

Ngiyacela-ke bakwethu ukuthi asibambisaneni ukuze sithuthukise izwe
lakithi, sizithuthukise nathi uqobo lwethu, nabantwana bethu baze bafike
banyathele lapho thina sihambe khona, babone ukuthi kunyathelwa kule
ndlela, umuntu uyazithuthukisa, umuntu uyazenzela. AbeSuthu bathi:  Ntho
tse ntle motho o a iketsetsa

[One does good things for oneself.] Ngiyabonga kakhulu. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC has not failed yet to create job opportunities. The reason why we
have so much suffering is because we were forcibly removed from our land by
those who were governing us at the time. Another thing, people did not
bring this suffering onto themselves. They worked, but for nothing. Others
worked in order to stay where they lived. Others worked so that they would
be given maize meal to eat. They would eat only that maize meal, like mice.

Not only were we forcibly removed from our land, but we were also enslaved
in our forefathers' land, our land. We were working for those who are well-
established today and who also think they are better. They think that,
without them, we can't create job opportunities.
Now we call upon everybody, and all provinces, to ensure that people take
the initiative because nobody will do it for them. Those who have big
mouths work to benefit themselves. They were already doing this, because
they took things and sent them to where they had come from, since they also
have other homes outside this country other than this that we have.

It is now time to bring those things back. The land must be given back to
its rightful owners. Jobs must be given to indigenous people in order to
develop them. Mothers, fathers, the youth, the disabled and all of us, the
black nation in Africa, let us take the initiative.

I appeal to all the Ministers to work together. If you have an idea, share
it with the hon Ngubane, for example, so that we create job opportunities
for our people because in fact it is our people who are suffering the most.
Those who have big mouths are not suffering at all. What they are doing now
is just to woo our people so that they vote for them. That is all they are
doing.
I appeal to everyone that we work together in order to develop our country,
ourselves and our children so that they follow in our footsteps and see the
way. One develops oneself and does things for oneself. The baSotho say:
Ntho tse ntle motho o a iketsetsa [One does good things for oneself.] Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers.
Poverty is one of our greatest challenges, and we have embarked on many
projects, policies, programmes, plans and efforts to tackle it. But often
it seems as though the more we fight it, the more it fights back.

However, we have come a long way. Though the media often do not portray us
that way as a governing body, we have an excellent system in place which,
if utilised efficiently, could produce a successful battle against poverty.

Poverty is influenced by many factors to which our horrific past has been
the major contributor. However, to attain progress, we need to focus on our
future, and not waste time mourning the past, though we should use it as a
reminder of what we would never want to be again.

As a Government for the people by the people, public participation in
Government is crucial. A strong relationship between Government and our
people is crucial to advancement. We need to reach into our constituencies
and physically partake in our community so that our people know that we are
committed to delivery.

The thought of the gravy train needs to be done away with. Deputy Chair,
the train may be there but unfortunately the gravy is gone with the
apartheid regime.

The MF calls for all members' increased involvement and visibility in
poverty-stricken areas, not just in the form of public meetings, but in
physically making a constructive contribution to society.

By Government actively participating in communities, partnerships may be
built, with the incorporation of the private sector too. This would
certainly contribute to accelerating growth and development, which would
assist in pushing back the frontiers of poverty. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Agb Voorsitter, die Nasionale Aksie plaas 'n belangrike
premie op die makroprobleme van Suid-Afrika en die makronasionale
uitdagings. Daarom is dit ook vir ons belangrik om aan hierdie tipe debatte
deel te neem.

Benewens misdaad, en die bekamping daarvan, is werkskepping en die
bevordering van ekonomiese groei van die hoogste prioriteite op ons
Nasionale Aksie-plan. Ons glo daaraan hoe groter die koek gemaak word, hoe
minder gaan ons onderling baklei oor hoe die koek verdeel moet word. Daarom
steun ons ook planne om armoede te beveg en om die grense van armoede terug
te skuif.

Daar is twee maniere hoe dit gedoen kan word, gesien van die Regering se
kant af. Die een manier, dis die verkeerde manier, is die Staat as agent.
Dat die Staat deur ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Chairperson, the National Action places an important
premium on the macroproblems of South Africa and the macronational
challenges. Therefore it is also important for us to participate in this
type of debate.

In addition to crime, and combating it, the creation of jobs and the
promotion of economic growth are amongst the highest priorities in our
National Action plan. We believe that the larger the cake is made, the less
we are going to fight among one another about how it is to be divided.
Therefore we also support the plans to combat crime and to push back the
frontiers of poverty.

There are two ways in which this can be done, seen from the side of the
Government. The one way, which is the wrong way, is the state as agent.
That the state gives ...]

... hand-outs, becoming a welfare state, taking foreign loans. That is not
sustainable - only to give hand-outs and become a welfare state. Even a
basic social grant would fall in this category. We don't support that. The
other way is ...

... die Staat as fasiliteerder, die Staat as katalisator wat moet sorg vir
'n omgewing wat belegger-vriendelik is sodat die broodnodige kapitaal kan
instroom. En daarom moet ons sê dat die manier waarop die huidige Regering
die Zimbabwe-krisis hanteer totaal kontraproduktief is. Ek kry ons
President amper jammer. Hy sit daar en by die G8-vergadering in Frankryk om
'n mooi voet voor te sit vir beleggings in Suid-Afrika, en Mugabe is besig
om alles hier agter te verwoes. En ons hoor nie 'n woord daarvan van ons
eie Regeringsmense se kant af nie. Dit trek 'n streep deur alles.

Ons glo ook dat werkskepping alleen bevorder kan word as die
arbeidswetgewing meer toeskietlik gaan wees, en as daar ook 'n geleentheid
gaan wees vir kleinsake-ondernemings om te kan groei. Dan wil ons ook sê
aan die agb Pheko om grondhervorming terug te vat tot 1652 gaan presies
armoede in hierdie land bevorder. Ek wil hom daaraan herinner, hoe
emosioneel hulle ookal oor grond voel, mens kan nie grond eet nie. Daar
moet produksie kom. Mens kan kos eet en daarvoor het ons boere nodig wat
wel kan produseer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... the state as facilitator, the state as catalyst that has to ensure an
environment that is investor-friendly so that the essential capital can
flow in. And therefore we have to say that the way in which the present
Government is handling the Zimbabwean crisis is totally counterproductive.
I almost feel sorry for our President. He sits there at the G8 meeting in
France to create a good impression for investments in South Africa, and
Mugabe is destroying everything behind the scenes. And we do not hear a
word about that from our own Government's people. This negates everything.

We also believe that job creation can only be promoted if labour
legislation becomes more flexible, and if there will also be an opportunity
for small business undertakings to grow. We would also like to tell the hon
Pheko that taking land reform back to 1652 will, in fact, promote poverty
in this country. I want to remind him, no matter how emotional they may
feel about land, that one cannot eat the soil. There has to be production.
People can eat food and therefore we need farmers who can, in fact,
produce.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Ek dank u. [I thank you.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Hon Deputy President, colleagues, in a recent Article IV
Consultation document the IMF states that the central policy challenge
facing South Africa remains the quest for higher growth and lower
unemployment. The IMF notes:


  Success in meeting these goals hinges on maintaining a sound and stable
  financial environment, which will require implementing the inflation-
  targeting strategy, maintaining fiscal restraint, and rebuilding
  international reserves. But growth performance is also dependent on
  attracting foreign investment, which in turn is dependent on undertaking
  further structural reforms in the areas of privatisation and trade
  liberalisation. In addition, more ambitious labour market reforms would
  help to ensure that investment absorbs rather than displaces labour.

The challenges are therefore clear: attracting investment; continued
structural reforms in the areas of labour market flexibility, trade
liberalisation and privatisation. The challenge of seeking consensus on
these politically divisive driving factors of fixed foreign direct
investment is also clear. But they must be overcome.

South Africa has a dual economy. As Reserve Bank Governor, Tito Mboweni,
has elegantly captured it:


  South Africa is regarded as having a dual economy. On the one hand it is
  an emerging market with its fair share of challenges regarding economic
  growth, wealth distribution, and inflation. In particular, we face the
  challenges of high unemployment, low savings levels, a high HIV/Aids
  infection rate, and a volatile currency. We are also severely affected by
  commodity prices, especially oil and gold. On the other hand, South
  Africa is blessed with a sophisticated, privately owned, financial system
  comparable in many respects with the best of the developed economies ...

Our dual economy faces a dual challenge: firstly, it has to continue
modernising; continue structural reform; lure foreign investors and
increase productivity at a time when Government, sensitive to social
pressures, faces increasing demands for the living standards of the very
poor to be raised in a resource-constrained environment. Secondly,
inequalities have to be reduced as a priority and poverty alleviation
strategies have to be emphasised. A recent study by the SA Human Rights
Commission has emphasised that Government is failing the poor in rolling
out service delivery and social relief fast enough, despite having the
available resources to do so.

These are the twin priorities of our country as we leave behind political
upheaval nearly ten years after democratisation and move our focus to
continued economic and social reform.

It is clear that the nature of our dual economy calls for a more intensive
debate on the balance to be struck between export promotion strategies and
stimulation of domestic demand and the respective roles of the public and
private sector in this process. The core functions of Government and
business must not be confused. Government's primary responsibility is for
social investment. Business must be an active social partner, yes, but must
pursue its core business: commercial returns and the broader goal of
sustained and higher levels of economic growth. There will be a natural
limit to what social role business can reasonably be expected to play.

These are the areas of discussion that should receive the bulk of attention
at the upcoming Growth and Development Summit. This Summit must not be a
repeat performance of the 1998 Job Summit. If it is, it will be a
questionable endeavour.

While a social accord based on the Dutch and Irish experience may not be
forged and may not be the outcome of this Summit, what is clearly required
is a greater understanding of what needs to be done to attract fixed
investment as a first prize.

The condictio sine qua non for any agreed job creation ``road map'' must be
the question of how we catapult our economy to a higher growth rate in
excess of 6% and what enhanced response we craft to correspond to the
skills challenge we face. For Government some of this may require a more
courageous step in terms of structural reform. For business it may entail a
more comprehensive social partnership role, sensitive at all times to the
constraints of commercial realities. For labour it could mean pressures for
productivity increases and wage moderation in an inflation-targeting
context.
The Growth Summit offers an opportunity for consensus-building not only
about the hard economic challenges facing South Africa, but also about the
social challenges facing us, particularly in terms of HIV/Aids. Regrettably
these social challenges have fallen off the agenda and will constitute a
missed opportunity.

The social development challenges facing our country are critical to
attracting fixed foreign direct investment. Long-term investors assess the
socioeconomic risk profile of any country it assesses for long-term
investment opportunities.

While we may have made strides in macroeconomic management and fiscal
policy, social investment has often been lagging. While no one would
advocate a ballooning deficit, it is clear that we should spend more
efficiently and prioritise better. Unless social development indicators are
treated as part and parcel of an investment strategy, fixed investment will
lag.

Investors want to see a comprehensive response to HIV/Aids ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Ms R TALJAARD: ... and poverty. In short, investors want to see a clear
untrammelled vision and a fundamental political commitment ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! Order, hon member. Order, hon member!

Ms R TALJAARD: We do not need a Summit ... [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! Hon colleagues, in spite of asking for your
co-operation, you are continuing to make conversation. That's in order, but
for you to be turning your back and to be making conversation with those
behind you, is completely out of order. Now a number of you are doing it.

This morning we discussed at a meeting on decorum what would constitute
decorum in the House. Now speaking to your neighbour behind you is
something, definitely, that will not be permitted. If you need to make that
conversation, please move across to your neighbour and make that
conversation, but in a manner that's not going to disturb the House. Now if
you are going to persist, then I will have no option but then to call you
to order.

Ms S B NQODI: Chairperson and members of the House, our survival and
prosperity as a nation, our enjoyment of our hard-won victories and
liberties following our liberation struggle and our claim of emancipation
from the chains and bondages from colonialism and imperialism physically,
mentally, socioeconomically and politically can never be comfortably
acknowledged and realised if we forget our historical past and the essence
of our liberation struggle.

It is because of these facts that we have decided, as this Government, to
adopt a holistic and integrated approach to the solution of both the social
and economic ills that continue to infest the very fabric of our moral
being, our existence, including our co-existence with other people here at
home and beyond the borders of our country.

Having heard so much from the previous speakers about what we mean by
growth and development here at home, the remaining question to be answered
perhaps is: What are we doing in the region to promote growth and
development?

My input in this debate moves from the premise that says that as a nation
or a country, we co-exist with other people. For effective domestic
sustainable growth and development to bear any of the desired outcomes, it
is essential for us to recognise the importance and necessity of the
multilateral approach as encapsulated in the aims and objectives of the
regional blocs such as SADC and Sacu.

This is where the thrust of my debate will be. Guided by our foreign policy
objectives, which seek to promote democratisation and respect for human
rights, prevent conflict, promote peaceful resolution of disputes, advance
sustainable development and alleviate poverty and, lastly, build a better
Africa and world, we can take pride in realising that as an upper middle
economy, our country has so far performed excellently and responsibly as a
regional economic powerhouse in elevating the status of the region and
strengthening South-South trade relations.

Yes, as the last politically emancipated African country, even nine years
down the line from our liberation, we are still experiencing all the
teething problems associated with an emerging economy or market. What is
encouraging however is the confidence we are beginning to enjoy on a daily
basis from the people of this region because of what we are doing for them
internationally.

Our progressive Constitution is an example of, and has laid a foundation
for, deepening democracy and respect for human rights in this region. Our
sound economic fundamentals have earned us positive ratings from the
monetary institutions such as the IMF, the World Bank and Standard and
Poors, which makes it easier for us to raise cheaper capital abroad and to
be a favourite investment destination.

Our positive GDP growth and improved savings have attracted business
confidence in the region. Our healthy balance of payments accounts, falling
debt-servicing costs and the closing down of net open forward position
recently have all contributed positively to the economic growth and
prosperity of SADC countries. We have all the reasons to celebrate. For the
first time since the 1970's, this economy has never experienced the
positive growth that we see under the ANC-led Government. The backlog of
high unemployment that we are confronted with even today is an inheritance
we carry from the past which, amongst others things, was also characterised
by double-digit inflation.

Our influence and leadership in chairing such important organisations as
the Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth, the OAU which is now the
African Union, and the Women's Portfolio Desk of both SADC and IPU should
enable us to push the agenda of commitment, promotion and implementation of
sustainable regional development and economic co-operation. We have to take
the lead in turning the tide on the African continent.

I am certain that no one in this House can ever doubt or deny the fact that
ever since our coming into power, as the ANC-led Government, we continue to
be a visible and active player and participant in all socioeconomic,
cultural and political levels, debates and foras in our region and on
international platforms in our determination to try and promote growth and
development. This is not only working well for us as a country, but it is
also contributing to the profile and economic prosperity of our regional
member states within SADC. An example of this is that, quite recently, as a
country, the House will remember that we hosted a number of regional and
international conferences such as the World Conference on Aids; the World
Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance; the WSSD; the Media and Social Responsibility Conference; the
Inaugural Summit of the AU; the first Pan-African Parliament and so on.

All these events have definitely raised our international profile and
leadership credentials within the region. Indeed, we are turning the tide
as far regional development is concerned.

Who but a political imbecile or idiot would doubt the good work done by
Government when it comes to conflict resolution and the promotion of peace
and security within our region and the continent, including our peace-
promoting interventions internationally? In as much as we cannot claim to
have offered lasting peaceful solutions to the political turmoil and
economic crises that continue to plague our region and the continent, we
must however take pride in acknowledging the fact we have been instrumental
in opening dialogue and offering guidance to otherwise long-warring enemies
and belligerents, who in reality are supposed to be friends and sometimes
relatives, instead of foes.

We have witnessed with appreciation and pity the long exhaustive hours of
round table negotiations spent by our leaders in Government in their
genuine and responsible efforts of trying to secure peace settlements in
countries like Zimbabwe, the DRC, Burundi, Lesotho, Swaziland, Angola and
so on. This was a step in the right direction towards promoting sustainable
growth and development on our continent.

Through the protocols, treaties and agreements we have entered into with
our neighbouring states and through the massive developmental projects we
have initiated and supported in the region, such as the Great Limpopo and
the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Parks, the Maluti-Drakensberg Transfrontier
Conservation Area, the Lesotho Highland Water Project and the Maguga Dam
Project in Swaziland and so on, South Africa has, no doubt, contributed
positively towards targeting poverty-reduction initiatives, promoting
health care, water purification and sanitation, job creation, promoting a
clean environment and encouraging responsible and accountable governments,
and by making use of the comparative advantage strategy amongst SADC
members, we have liberalised and strengthened regional trade and economic
co-operation.

Last but not least, we would be failing in our oversight function as
Parliament if we did not express our unreserved acknowledgement and
appreciation of our President's foresight, statesmanship, integrity and
international diplomacy in carrying out his political mandate with zeal and
responsibility.

He has managed to turn the tide in as far as promoting and restoring the
dignity, self-respect, integrity, assertiveness and the ability of the
African people is concerned in handling their own affairs in relation to
the international community. He has improved, promoted and corrected the
negative image and perception that the world held about African people. By
spearheading the African Renaissance, which gave birth to the establishment
of the African Union and Nepad, he has put Africa in the spotlight of
global politics.
We can say with confidence that South Africa has opened a window of
opportunity for North-South interaction and dialogue. Our region and the
African continent today is represented in some of the meetings of the G20
and the G8 countries and the Bretton Woods institutions. All these have a
bearing on the promotion and implementation of sustainable growth and
development within SADC.

In conclusion, indeed in spite of all these achievements, as a region and
continent, the challenges facing us remain insurmountable. The political
destabilisations, the HIV epidemic, exacerbated by abject poverty due to
the rising statistics of unemployment to which we remain subjected remain
are, definitely, a threat to our prosperity and economic emancipation.
[Applause.]

Mr C R REDCLIFFE: Deputy Chairperson, the Government and its Nedlac social
partners have a profound responsibility to ensure that this Growth and
Development Summit is not a repetition of the 1998 Job Summit, which
essentially degenerated into a glorified talk-shop. We hope this summit
will be about action. In the light of our high unemployment rate and
increasing unequal income levels, it simply must deliver on investment,
growth and jobs. It is in the interest of all the people of this country
that all the stakeholders forge a national consensus to tackle the issues
of poverty, job creation and economic growth.

The challenges become more urgent if one considers a survey done by the
economist intelligence unit, which projects a significant rise in the
unemployment rate during the next five years. It also states that the Gini
coefficient has been worsening in recent years. In other words, our income
inequality has been worsening. Last week, during the debate on the hon
Minister of Labour's budget Vote, I referred to rigid and onerous labour
legislation, particularly as it affects SMMEs, a sector which is
universally regarded as being potentially the biggest contributor to job
creation. If the coming Growth and Development Summit is serious about job
creation, it will revisit some of our labour laws, especially for SMMEs to
create jobs.
However, I wish to speak about one of the themes to be discussed at the
summit, namely, skills and equity. The DA agrees that our high unemployment
rate in South Africa can be attributed, in part, to the skills mismatch in
the economy. South Africa's human resource development record has been
rated as one of the poorest in the world - the poor quality of basic
education and systematic exclusion of black South Africans from decent
training opportunities being major contributors. Our illiteracy rate is
high and the level of schooling among the majority of our people is
generally low. The DA also believes that skills development should enjoy a
very high priority. We must invest in our human capital, and training
should be largely by the market for the market.

Last year, the Director-General of the Department of Trade and Industry, Dr
Allistair Ruiters, stated that we have an estimated skills shortage of 500
000 people which this country does not possess. The question we need to
pose is this: If the Government has identified the skills shortage, what is
being done to address the issue? Surely this is something that can be done
immediately. Why do we need to have a summit to do this? If we urgently
recruit 500 000 people, it has been estimated it will, firstly, raise our
growth rate between 0.5% to 1%. Secondly, we will have a multiplying effect
because for every one of those skilled persons, two unskilled persons will
almost immediately be employed. That is a total of 1.5 million people that
can be absorbed into the economy immediately.

Does the right hand know what the left hand is doing? To what extent is
there co-ordination in Government? To what extent are our immigration laws
hampering the importation of these skills? This country has made it
difficult for skilled foreigners to obtain work permits with delays of
eighteen months or longer not being uncommon. If South Africa wants
economic development, we have to accept that there is a vital need to open
our borders to human capital skills. It will be a mistake to think that
this could be done at the expense of our own people.

To obtain short-term results, the DA proposes that we firstly abolish the
whole principle of quotas. They are expensive to implement, are cumbersome
and an irrational form of bureaucracy, and do not relate in any way to
dynamic business situations. Secondly, we should actively encourage skilled
immigration and discourage skilled emigration by having a new open-door
migration policy and by launching an intensive campaign in other countries
to attract skills to South Africa. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R M MOROPA: Chairperson, I must say that from the answers, the DA again
has used a very important debate to do this country disservice. They are
raising issues that attack, prematurely, the Growth and Development Summit
opportunistically, and want to send a message of despair to our people that
this summit is not going to achieve anything. I think we have to try and
respond to that in this speech that I am making.

To suggest that a summit of such a high-level discussion regarding rate of
investment and growth to push back the frontiers of poverty is a talk-shop
is an insolent insult, not only to Government, but to organised labour,
business and civil society.

Since the country came under the new political management of the ANC in
1994, the task of post-apartheid reconstruction and development for
accelerating economic growth and sustainable development has begun in
earnest. Also of significant importance was the launch of the institution
for social dialogue - Nedlac - which socioeconomic partnership for the
historical task of an active engagement with issues of governance and
development is something this country has never seen before. A process that
makes Government more accessible has been instituted.

Considerable progress with Nedlac in regard to laying down the foundation
for economic growth and a developmental framework has been attained. Today
this particular debate has been occasioned by the need for our country and
its people to respond to the call made by the President in his state of the
nation address this year for all South Africans, and that included this
opposition here, to lend a hand to accelerate the pace of change and
increase access to a better life for all.

Some of us are greatly honoured to respond to such a clarion call and
participate in a debate which takes place just 22 days before the 48th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter. It is also just 12 days before the 27th
anniversary of the uprising in Soweto, which marked a turning point in the
history of our national democratic struggle in this country.

This debate therefore seeks to make strategic interventions with regard to
issues of the economy in relation to challenges of meeting the basic needs,
alleviating poverty and creating employment for our people. Through Nedlac,
social partners have engrossed themselves in the principal objective, which
is to push back the frontiers of poverty. The nation is waiting in suspense
to see social partners united in action for a better life for all.
We must be mindful of the painful, protracted path that we have overcome.
To have passed such a struggle is indeed a huge achievement that could only
have come about because the political leaders of our country did the things
they could do, however limited, to move forward and provide confidence, and
an effective tonic for our country's political dispensation. The main aim
of this struggle and why it had to be taken forward was firstly to
establish the strong and people-centred democratic state that the Freedom
Charter envisaged 48 years ago.

In the Freedom Charter, a crucial point is made when it asserts -


  ... that only in a democratic state, based on the will of the people, can
  secure to all their birthright without distinction of colour, race, sex
  or belief ... that our country will never be prosperous or free until all
  our people live in brotherhood, enjoying equal rights and opportunities.

That democratic political dispensation has been achieved and is now being
consolidated. The struggle for economic change to achieve meaningful labour-
absorbing growth and development to push back the frontiers of poverty,
inequalities and underdevelopment becomes inescapable. We are aware of the
expectations our people have, which are based on the past experience they
have had with their brave national democratic movement, of enormous
integrity and capabilities to tackle these socioeconomic challenges, of
which job security tops the list.

We want to caution, however, that such work requires social partners to be
united in action for socioeconomic change. Painless quick-fix solutions to
South Africa's unemployment and aggravated social problems are not an
option in our long-term developmental agenda in the historical and global
context which underpins the dual economy and society in our country.

The issue of flexibility that is been reiterated by the opposition only
looks at one side of the equation, which is the side of firing workers, not
at the side of hiring workers, and irresponsibly so, not looking at our
workers and how they actually spend their income. Our workers have extended
families, and we have people to look after, unlike those who have not and
are only looking after themselves, and not after other members of their
families.

Our macroecomomic fundamentals and democratic culture are now in place and
the necessary socioeconomic partnerships in policy engagement are being
achieved. We wish the Nedlac constituency success in their deliberations at
the Growth and Development Summit that is taking place two days from today.
Our Government has the necessary policies and programmes to further
strengthen our position, firstly as a nation and secondly as an
international role-player. These objectives are in line with the
Reconstruction and Development Programme.

Labour market reforms had to be introduced to remove the legislation and
the legacy of the past inequalities within the labour force of our country.
We had to redefine an employee to include black workers, who were excluded,
for the first time in this country. Black unions could not be registered,
as the labour market laws prohibited them. The then government's official
Yearbook of 1978 reported as follows and I quote:


  According to the Black Labour Relations Regulations Act, black unions
  cannot be registered and are not officially recognised. An investigation
  has indicated that machinery of the Industrial Conciliation Act which is
  intended for traditional trade unions is alien to black man. In fact the
  whole concept of trade unionism is foreign to him.


Surely, these labour market policies have highly rigidified the labour
market environment, and it is not the ANC that has made this labour market
unequal. Removal of such legacies must constitute the bulk of our
transformation agenda. The legacy is responsible for the entrenched poverty
crisis, and is a fetter to further economic growth and sustainable
development.

However, comprehensive transformation of public policy and its
implementation has brought us to this position where we can call for urgent
local action with a programme with the greatest possible impact in the
shortest possible time for accelerating growth rate, investment and job
creation. These progressive policies desire to stimulate national effort to
ensure that economic progress goes hand in hand with social progress.

These transformational measures that redress the imbalances of the past are
described by the DA, with its simplistic notion and lack of analytical
capacity, as rigid and unfavourable to investment. Let me tell the DA that
such a notion is scientifically groundless and further aggravates the
condition of the unemployed and the poor. The notion that workers are
responsible for their unemployment is irresponsible and politically
insensitive.

The other area of achievement that enhances our growth platform as South
Africa is the productivity improvement we have scored in the past years.
The last world competitiveness report recorded that, out of the 49
participating countries, South Africa currently ranks 39; a rise of three
places over our previous position of 42.

As our socioeconomic lives connect with the rest of the world, how we are
perceived globally is a key issue in promoting economic growth and
investment for sustainable development, part of an overarching framework
for visible service delivery. The necessary legislative measures are
already in place and reduction in the skills deficit in South Africa is
taking place. A new skills development paradigm and stabilisation of the
labour market has been achieved which will provide additional growth and
investment opportunities in our country.

Although problems are being experienced by some of our Setas thus far, we
are equally overwhelmed by the outstanding work done in regard to
learnership programmes. The Minister of Labour is attending to the areas of
weakness. He announced his legislative measures necessary to improve the
skills training and human resource development in regard to the weak Setas.
We must target the youth in areas of skills scarcity in this regard, both
as a skills development and affirmative action strategy to achieve the
necessary progress in employment equity. There is no doubt that our success
in qualitative skills production will result in the improvement of labour
productivity and enhanced economic growth and development.

National productivity institutes should be commended for lifting our
country, region and continent to the podium that is shared by the winners
of the world. Their productivity, capacity-building programmes on SMMEs,
with all their limitations, contribute hugely to fostering employment
creation and economic growth in this country. The NPI's schools debate
campaign makes a good start to what is a challenge to cultivating a culture
of productivity, behaviour and productivity practice amongst our people.

The ability of South Africa to ratify, implement and practice international
labour organisation conventions, which member states are obliged to comply
with, is an additional point for our international credibility and
standing. Equal opportunity and equal treatment for men and women in
employment is not only a requirement in line with the national
Reconstruction and Development Programme; rather, it is also an
international obligation. The new labour market regime that we have created
today in this short space of time is based on the broader international
labour market trends, and the ANC is respected as an architect of the South
African labour market.

New vigour for social partners with strong emphasis on techniques of labour-
intensive programmes at all levels of Government and society will be
required, especially in the rural areas. The principle of vigorous labour-
intensive community-based public works programmes will serve the urgent
call for local action that will make the greatest possible impact at the
earliest possible time.

In conclusion, although a lot of ground has been covered towards the
attainment of noble goals as set by the Freedom Charter, issues of economic
growth and development remain core to our strategic task as fundamental
components of transformation of our country. We want to inform our people
that the ANC-led Government is proceeding with urgency to attain
qualitative advances on this complex and difficult plan. We will succeed in
turning the tide. We call on labour, business and community constituencies
to intensify their commitment to genuine partnership with Government in
ensuring that the South African economy and political positions are
consolidated both nationally and internationally, a task the Government
cannot achieve alone.

The ANC fully supports the establishment of community development workers
to carry out tasks that would extend the work in terms of Government policy
and programmes towards economic growth and development. This will enhance
our achievement of more milestones in pushing back the frontiers of
apartheid legacy. Building on the excellent work we have so far achieved in
areas of clean water supply, access to educationÿ.ÿ.ÿ. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:31.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 20 - 2003] (National Assembly
     - sec 75), dated 28 May 2003:


         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the subject of the National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 20 -
         2003] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 20A - 2003].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on
     Hearings on Budget Vote 34, dated 21 May 2003:


    The Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry, having
     considered Budget Vote 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry, referred to it,
     reports as follows:

    A. INTRODUCTION

    The Committee held hearings on Budget Vote 34 on 11 March, 31 March and
    2 April 2003. The Committee wishes to express appreciation to all
    participants for their contributions. Written presentations submitted
    by participants form part of the records of the Committee Section. The
    Committee also wants to express gratitude to the Director-General and
    his staff for their presence and contributions during the hearings. A
    list containing the names of all who had made oral submissions is
    included in the Report.

B.    OVERVIEW OF BUDGET

1.    Main Functional Areas

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) is responsible for
three main functional areas, namely water resource management, water
services and forestry. In managing these three functional areas, the aim of
the Department is to ensure the availability and supply of water at
national level, to ensure the equitable and efficient provision of water
services at local level and to promote sustainable forestry management. A
description of each of these functional areas was given.

2.    Programme Developments in 2003/04


During the 2002/03 financial year the Department went through a process of
restructuring the programme to bring it in line with the main functional
areas. The budget structure is now divided into four programmes on the
Exchequer Account and two Trading Accounts, namely the Water Trading
Account and the Equipment Trading Account.

3.    Expenditure 2002/03


The 2002/03 expenditure is shown in the table below, where the allocation
for the three main functional areas as well as the support function is
indicated. The Adjustment Estimates have been included and it is expected
that further minor adjustments will still be made when the books are
finally closed at the end of the financial year.


  Expenditure 2002/2003 (Amounts in million Rand)


  Functional  Adjusted Appropriation      Expected  Deviation
  Area          Voted                  Expenditure


  Administration    227 927              226 743         1 184
  Water Resources 5 398 658            5 394 355         4 303
  Water Services    822 052              805 447        16 605
  Forestry          399 161              399 008           153
  Total             847 798            6 685 485        22 245


  Apart from the Exchequer Account, the Department also operates two
  trading accounts, the Water Trading Account and the Equipment Trading
  Account. In these trading accounts expenditure is offset against revenue
  and in the case of a deficit, augmentation is made from the Exchequer
  Account. Information on expenditure and revenue at the end of the
  financial year is given below:


  2002/03 Budget(R million)
  Trading Account   Expenditure  Revenue  Deficit/Surplus


  Equipment     31 917                     49 077     17 160
  Water      2 933 271                   1 838 601 1 094 670)


  The Department has transferred the water services projects from the
  former administrations into the Water Trading Account. Currently cost
  recovery on these schemes is very low and this is the reason for the
  deficit shown above.


  4. Budget 2002/03 to 2005/06


  The Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) budgetary allocation for the
  three years for the three main functional areas and administration (which
  is considered as an overhead) is given in the table below. For
  convenience the 2002/03 allocation is also shown.


  Exchequer Account: Budget 2003/04 to 2005/06


  Functional Area     2002/03    2003/04     2004/05                2005/06


  Administration      225 917     237 071   251 129    267 210
  Water Resources   1 161 485   1 056 113   768 061    827 376
  Water Services    1 944 155   2 439 722 2 287 241  2 487 539
  Forestry            401 134     353 637   347 935    371 410


  Total             3 732 961   4 086 543 3 654 366  3 953 535


  Reasons for significant changes from 2002/03 to 2003/04 in the various
  functional divisions are given below. Inflation and improvements of
  service conditions account for many of the increases.
  3.


  Programme 1: Administration - Increase of R11, 154 million


  The allocation increases by 5,7% a year over the medium term, having
  grown by an average of 7.3% a year between 1999/00 and 2002/03. The
  increase reflects the increase in the costs of IT management and
  restructuring.


  Programme 2: Water Resources Management - Decrease of R105,372 million


  Expenditure increases by about 28% between 1999/00 and 2002/03 as a
  result of the implementation on the National Water Act, particularly in
  relation to resource information management, licensing, improving water
  quality and building water resources (in partnership with neighbouring
  states like Swaziland). However, expenditure on this programme will
  decrease by about 9% in 2003/04 and by 27% as the poverty relief
  allocations for Working for Water will cease to exist, pending the review
  of the entire poverty relief programme.


  Programme 3: Water Services - Increase of R465 567 million


  Expenditure between 1999/00 and 2002/03 has increased by about 7%, driven
  by the urgency to eradicate the backlog in basic water services, and
  especially the need to speed up the delivery of basic sanitation.
  Expenditure will increase by about 24% in 2003/04 due to the
  refurbishment of water schemes to be transferred to local authorities,
  and the acceleration of sanitation and basic services. In terms of
  government policy, the capital grant should be transferred to the
  Department of Provincial and Local Government in 2004/05.


  Programme 4: Forestry - Decrease R47,497 million


  The allocation will decrease by an average of 2,2% a year over the medium
  term as state-owned forestry assets are restructured.


  Spending is expected to decrease over the MTEF period, due to the human
  resource costs involved in restructuring. There has also been a shift in
  expenditure towards community and indigenous forestry management to
  compensate for past underfunding.


  Summary of 2003/04 expenditure


  The total budget is R6 033903 000, of which R3 291 045 000 comes from the
  Water Trading Account and R2 742 858 000 from the Exchequer Account. Of
  the Water Trading Account, R1 947 360 000 is from own revenue and R1 343
  685 000 is augmented from the Exchequer Account.


  Of the monies from the Exchequer Account 59% will be spent on Water
  Services, 26% on Water Resources Management, 9% on Forestry and 6% on
  Administration.


  From the Trading Account 27% of the monies will be spent on Water
  Services, 63% on Water Resources management and 10% on the Working for
  Water Programme.


  5.  Provincial Distribution
  The distribution per Province per programme of the Department's Budget
  and Water Trading Account was also presented.

C.    RESPONSES TO THE BUDGET

1.    Civil Society Organisations

1.1.  Transfer of Schemes to Municipalities

      DWAF has not budgeted adequately for the transfer of schemes. Extra
      funds must be made available for DWAF's sustainability budget.
      Substantial funds must be made available for refurbishment of
      infrastructure and the setting up of viable water institutions. The
      budget should be increased by an extra R80 million over the next four
      years, to provide for an average of R400 000 per project.

Local and institutional and development support budgets must be increased
on medium term of another five years for the communities and the local
government in order to ensure skills development and capacity to local
communities.

1.2.  Free Basic Water

      DWAF must ensure that sufficient finance is mobilised and catered for
      in the budget to cover the following points:


      Review of Free Basic Water and Indigent policy
      Ensure that DWAF is a stronger regulator regarding tariffs
      To implement a comprehensive water leakages policy

1.3.  African Support

      The government has embarked on NEPAD with little consultation with
      interested and affected parties, which make it difficult for civil
      society to support NEPAD. The budget provision for African Support
      show that NEPAD is inserting itself into the budget, which means an
      emphasis on the building of big dams, without using the
      recommendations of the World Commission on Dams.

1.4.  Water Resource Protection Measures

      Only a small portion of the budget is allocated to protection
      measures. Because DWAF does not place a priority on protection
      measures, companies like Thor Chemicals and many others are able to
      continue to pollute water resources.

      The Green Network also highlighted the problems of stream water
      pollution by industrial dumping into rivers, broken sanitation pipes
      and build-up of algae, as well as the fact that communities downstream
      have to use polluted water. There is a lack of monitoring, and the
      budget needs to look at the costs of monitoring. Although the budget
      provides for stakeholder empowerment it does not reach the right
      constituencies. Communities are therefore not empowered to participate
      in forums like catchments management agencies and cannot make inputs.


      Dr Mike Whitcutt of the Highveld Biological Association also informed
      the Committee of research that was done on the evaluation of the
      quality of water on the East Rand. He expressed concern that very good
      legislation is in place against water pollution, but that it is not
      backed up by strong action by politicians. Business interests are
      being looked after and according to business clean water will cost
      more and will therefore reduce employment and trade. However, there is
      no proof that this is the case, and government should take a stronger
      approach and implement the legislation.


1.5   Consultants

      The budget vote shows that 44% of the budget will be spent on
      consultants in the medium term. It was questioned, because DWAF needs
      to build its own capacity rather than using consultants.

1.6   Dam building

      Programme 2 on Water Resource Management is geared on the building of
      dams. This section rotates around the building of 18 new dams and
      inter-basin transfers, which shows that it is business as usual rather
      than a new strategy. This stands in direct contrast to the World
      Commission on Dams, which DWAF has been involved in.

      The budget should make provision for reparations/compensation for
      those who have been displaced because of the construction of dams.
      Finances should be released to affected communities for workshops and
      information dissemination and accumulation.

1.7.  Promotion of Productive Uses of Water for the Pool


      The Rural Women's Association gave input on the use of water for
      domestic food production. They recommended that the budget should
      provide for the following:


      DWAF should promote and extend schedule 1. Promote productive uses of
      water by the poor. The Department should publicly provide permission
      for people to harvest, store and use water and it should allow the use
      of pumping devises for free.


      DWAF should assist in promoting the use of water for productive uses
      by the poor by providing information and technical support.


      All punitive measures should be removed. Information on alternative
      sources of water should be promoted. The Department should also
      develop collaborative relationships with civil society organisations.

1.8   Water Leakages and Cut-offs

      The Ilithe Lomso Children and Youth Organisation of Khayalitsha noted
      that the organisation had conducted its own research to try and find
      strategies and solutions for water issues. They had established forums
      to address issues like water cuts and household leakages. To address
      problems the budget should focus on projects that target the youth and
      unemployed women. The budget should promote the funding of community
      research and training, and investing in user skills to attend to
      household water leaks.

1.9.  Water Services Backlog

    The concern of the South African Water Caucus is that Programme 3 on
    Water Services does not address the main problems in this sector.
    DWAF's assertion that 10 million more people have received access to
    water since 1994 is incorrect, as many of the projects that were set up
    have since collapsed. In addition, many communities that previously
    received water for free, now have to pay. This lack of access to water
    has resulted in the emergence of problems such as cholera. The budget
    vote comes to problematic conclusions - it talks about extending access
    to all, but then later reduces the targets to 7 million for access to
    water and 18 million for access to sanitation.

1.10. Privatisation of Water Services

      The South African Water Caucus expressed concern that the mention of
      National Water Utilities for provision of water services was in fact a
      major step toward privatisation. They further note that the budget
      vote endorses public sector delivery in theory but does not show any
      ways of strengthening it. It encourages privatisation in the sense
      that there is an assumption that if the local authority cannot provide
      a service, it should be privatise, rather than improve the capacity of
      local authorities.

      Other organisations, like the Rural Development Services Network,
      echoed these sentiments. They requested that government should halt
      all privatisation initiatives and prioritise public sector delivery.
      The restructuring of the public sector should be prioritised to build
      the capacity of development-oriented local authority to deliver more
      effective services while reducing costs and redistributing existing
      resources.

7.2   SALGA (South African Local Government Association)

2.1.  Implementation of Free Basic Water

      Sound progress has been made with 765 municipalities providing to 26
      704 348 people. The 2003/04 budget makes provision for R2,7 billion
      for Free Basic Water, sanitation and refuse. It is envisaged that this
      allocation will increase over time.

2.2.  Sanitation Delivery

      SALGA has identified the delivery of sanitation as one of the key
      priorities. SALGA has currently a special focus on bucket eradication
      in support of the ministerial target set for 2007.  For ease of
      reference, it would be proper to indicate specifically the budget
      allocation for sanitation implementation.


2.3.  Transfer of DWAF's Water Assets

      Significant progress has been made in this critical area, which shall
      see the transfer of 321 bulk schemes and 3 027 rudimentary schemes
      transferred to 84 Water Service Authorities. DWAF, SALGA, DPLG and
      National Treasury have finalised a Joint Transfer Policy to guide
      implementation. SALGA notes the additional budget allocations made to
      the transfer programme, but wish to see an increasing trend in this
      regard.


      Further, a dedicated grant to fund the transfer programme is welcome
      as it provides better planning, transparency and accountability. It
      further noted that the timeframe outlined in the 2003 Division of
      Revenue Bill under this grant, may not be feasible given the complex
      nature of the programme.

2.4.  Water Boards

      Transfer payments to Water Boards are noted, and the allocations over
      the three budget cycles with a gradual phasing out of the transfer
      totals R301 million. It is, however, anticipated that in the next
      budget, there will be more specific information on these transfers to
      better inform policy.

2.5.  Catchment Management

      Although SALGA supports the goal of managing our scarce water
      resources effectively, concerns exists regarding the governance of
      these agencies and the role of the local sphere of government.
      Concerns regarding the financial impact of the implementation of the
      national pricing strategy on municipalities are heightened by the
      expenditure trends noted in the budget, which indicate a significant
      decrease over the next budget cycle.

2.6.  Water Services Project Grant

      This programme showed an increase of about R103 million from the
      2002/3 allocation, to the present level of R1 102 812. The DWAF
      Transfer Programme makes special provision for the transfer of 375 out
      of 1003 completed RDP projects.


      It would be proper for DWAF to ensure that the transfer of the balance
      of these schemes and those under implementation are sustainably
      transferred to Water Services Authorities.

2.7.  Sectoral Investment

      SALGA commends DWAF and National Treasury for recognising the
      constraints under which some municipalities operate, as evidenced in
      the increased allocations. The additional budgetary allocations and
      financial certainty that they brought to the sector are most welcome,
      but it is clear that to meet delivery targets even greater investment
      will be required.


      Current challenges facing municipalities, including reducing the
      infrastructure backlog, and eventually targeting subsidies to those
      most deserving, need to be addressed through the budget. Commitment is
      therefore necessary from DWAF to continue to increase budget
      allocations to improve service delivery.

3.    NAFU (National African Farmers Union of South Africa)


 NAFU does not believe that adequate attention has been given to the
 requirements of the emerging Black farming sector in DWAF's strategy and
 the budget.


 NAFU also raised the following concerns:


  One of the primary reasons for the inability of Black farmers to develop
  from emerging to commercial status relates to the imbalances that
  continue to exist in the allocation of water usage rights.


  The decrease in subsidies for charges for water provided from government
  water schemes to emerging farmers over a period of five years will have a
  negative impact on a sector that battles to achieve commercial viability.


  Capital costs subsidies are available to emerging farmers who are members
  of water user associations. Very few emerging Black farmers have been
  enabled to participate in such associations.


  White farmers are now moving from water-intensive activities, e.g. game
  farming, but they still hold water rights. The Department should come up
  with an audit of these water rights so that they can be reallocated.


  The budget allocation to address these issues is not sufficient, and the
  Minister and Committee need to review the amounts.

D.ISSUES RAISED BY THE COMMITTEE MEMBERS

1.    Changing Role of DWAF

    As a result of legislative and policy changes, DWAF's role is changing
    from implementation agency towards providing the national policy and
    regulatory framework within which other institutions will manage the
    water resources, water services provision and forestry resources.
    DWAF's focus will therefore be more on developing policy and
    implementing policies, implementing monitoring and evaluation
    mechanisms and providing support. The Committee is comfortable that
    this changing role of the Department is reflected in the budget.

2.    Transfer of Water Schemes

    The Committee welcomes the increased budget in 2003/04, which provides
    for the refurbishment of water schemes to be transferred to local
    authorities and the acceleration of the delivery of basic water
    services. We further note the finalisation of the Joint Transfer Policy
    to guide the implementation of the transfer of water schemes, but want
    to express the concern that the time-frames indicated in the Division
    of Revenue Act may not be feasible, given the lack of capacity at local
    government level.

3.    Sanitation Backlog

      Although the additional money for sanitation delivery is welcomed the
      Committee wants to urge the Department, as leading agent in the
      National Sanitation Task Team, to remove capacity and other
      constraints which hamper the eradication of the huge sanitation
      backlog.

4.    Poverty Relief Programme

      The Committee notes the decrease in the allocation to Programme 2 -
      Water Resources Management, because of the termination of the poverty
      relief allocations during the review of the entire poverty relief
      programme. We want to question the necessity to cease poverty relief
      allocations during the review of the programme, as it will have a
      negative impact on the beneficiaries of these allocations. Our
      question is whether the findings of the review should not determine
      the nature and extent of changes to poverty relief allocation, instead
      of terminating all allocations prior to finalisation of the review.

5.    Free Basic Water

      The Committee takes note of the issues raised by the civil society
      organisations about free basic water, including the revision of the
      policy, increasing the lifeline (25 to 50 liter per day), influence of
      tariff structures, choices of technology, water leakages, water cut-
      offs, affordable services, cross-subsidisation, use of equitable
      share, indigent policy, etc. SALGA has also raised the challenges
      facing the implementation of free basic water. It is therefore
      recommended that the Committee have special hearings on the
      implementation of the free basic water policy.

6.    Consultants

    The Committee raised concerns about the use of consultants and the fact
    that 44,2% of the budget will be spent on professional and special
    services over the medium term. The concern was raised that too much
    money is spent to pay consultants, while not enough is done to develop
    this kind of capacity within the Department and at local government
    level.

    The Department's response was that allocation is mostly for contractors
    and consultants, but 90% is for contractors and design consultants. It
    is not for the Department to do this work itself. The Department needed
    to focus on its work and could not develop its capacity in areas where
    there would not be much need for full-time employment, for example
    building.

    SALGA's response to the use of consultants at local government level
    was that some municipalities have not been able to build up their
    structures. Once that is done, there should be very little use for
    consultants. There also needs to be a way for consultants to leave some
    of their skills behind.

7.    Contamination of Ground Water Sources

    The Committee takes note of the issues raised by the civil society
    organisations about water quality and contamination of water. Members
    raised the issue of ground water as a source of water supply and
    concerns about the contamination of ground water. It is proposed that
    the Committee approach the Department about this issue.

E.    ISSUES RAISED NOT RELATED TO THE BUDGET VOTE

    1.      Future role of Water Boards

       SALGA supports the concept of the regionalisation of water service
       provision that is driven by Water Service Authorities to achieve
       efficient and effective service delivery.  There is a need to
       investigate whether the current Water Board structure reaches the
       above objective, as this may contribute to the future clarity on the
       role of water boards. This issue will be addressed during the
       briefing by the Minister and the Department on the White Paper on
       Water Services.

    2.      White Paper on Basic Household Sanitation


       SALGA raised concerns with regard to the adequacy of consultation
       between municipalities and DWAF in the development of the White
       Paper on Basic Household Sanitation and the National Strategy. It is
       anticipated that these concerns will be addressed and the outcome
       will result in enhanced municipal support consideration to re-visit
       the policy


       Mvula Trust raised the concern that DWAF is not playing its
       regulatory role adequately, especially in the sanitation sector. The
       National Sanitation Task Policy is not being implemented as the CMIP
       money is going into building toilets in rural areas and has no
       health and hygiene component. This radically undermines the national
       policy. It is unlikely, therefore, that the 2010 target will be
       reached. There needs to be an alignment and consistency from funding
       government departments. There needs to be a comprehensive rethink
       around the national sanitation policy. There also needs to be
       integration of a comprehensive sanitation policy into the Water
       Services White Paper process.
    3.      Civil Society Engagement


       Mvula Trust raised the concern of inadequate support and promotion
       of civil society organisations. DWAF is funding a civil society
       engagement process, but not enough money is allocated. Water sector
       NGOs are in serious trouble and face collapse. If DWAF is serious it
       must help to support and promote NGOs.


    They ask:


  For short-term financial support for water sector NGOs under threat;


  That DWAF must instruct Programme Management Units at provincial level to
  assist NGOs to prepare business plans for municipalities;
  That DWAF must engage DPLG, SALGA and municipalities at senior level to
  increase NGO and CBO participation in Masibambane.

 They also claim that the DWAF Head Office has under spent on its
 Masibambane budget.

G.    LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

The following people made oral submissions before the Committee,
representing different organisations. These submissions are available on
request from the Committee Section of Parliament.

1.    Ms Julie Smith, Water Action Campaign
2.    Mr Sandile Ndawonde, Green Network
3.    Mr Eddie Cottle, Rural Development Services Network
4.    Mr George Dor, South African Water Caucus
5.    Mr Abegnego Matu, South African Water Caucus
6.    Ms Tshepo Khumbane, Rural Women's Association
7.    Ms Marne de Lange, Rural Women's Association
8.    Mr Patrick Bond, Municipal Services Project
9.    Ms Kathy Eales, Mvula Trust
10.   Mr Mike Whitcutt, Highveld Biological Association
11.   Mr Buntu Morolong, Mashakane Youth for Future
12.   Mr Mashile Phalane, Batlhabine Development Trust (Tzaneen)
13.   Mr Vukhile Manzana, Gariep and Van der Kloof Dam Affected Communities
14.   Mr Richard Mokulo, Anti-Privatisation Forum
15.   Mr Senza Kula, Ilithe Lomso Children and Youth Organisation
16.   Councillor N M Khoza,South African Local Government Association
17.   Ms B Pretorius, South African Local Government Association
18.   Ms S Makotoko, South African Local Government Association
19.   Mr Motsepi Matlala, National African Farmers Union of South Africa
20.   Mr Wilkenson, National African Farmers Union of South Africa
21.   Mr Hendricks, National African Farmers Union of South Africa
22.   Mr M M Muller, Director-General: Department of Water Affairs and
    Forestry
23.   Mr M J Mabala, Chief Financial Officer: Department of Water Affairs
    and Forestry
24.   Ms M Modipa, Deputy Director-General: Corporate Services, Department
    of Water Affairs and Forestry.

