---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 June 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-06-03
---

TUESDAY, 3 JUNE 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    _____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                    HORRIFIC DEATH OF BABY IN PIT LATRINE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  and mourns the horrific death of a four-month-old baby in Kwa
           Msane in KwaZulu-Natal;


       (b)  that the body of the baby boy was retrieved by police from a pit
           latrine and is suspected to have been in the toilet for 24
           hours;


       (c)  that the baby's mother was arrested and has been charged with
           murder;


       (d)  that it is alleged that the mother did not receive a child grant
           and could not maintain her son, possibly driving her to kill her
           baby; and


       (e)  that there has been great improvement on the spectrum of child
           grants and that we may ask: Can we do more?; and


  (2) calls upon all to reach every corner of our community to help those
       in need.

Agreed to.

                        INTERNATIONAL CHILDREN'S DAY
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the international community marked 1 June as International
           Children's Day, highlighting the need to defend and uphold the
           rights of children, especially the girl child; and


       (b)  through this day we also seek to highlight the plight of
           children in conflict situations - especially child soldiers and
           the millions of children who are trapped in poverty;


  (2) believes that society has a responsibility to create a caring
       environment and build a safe and secure future for all children; and


  (3) calls on the people of South Africa to work for a better future for
       all the children of the world.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Mr Rudi Heine)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I hereby move the
following motion, printed on the Order Paper in the name of the Leader of
the Opposition:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with deep regret and sadness the sudden death of the hon Rudi
       Heine, MP, who passed away on 29 May 2003 at the age of 68;


  (2) acknowledges him as a man of leadership in both politics and
       business, having served as President of SACOB before his entry into
       parliamentary politics in 1999 where he served on the Portfolio
       Committee on Public Enterprises;
  (3) remembers him as a colleague who had friends in all communities
       across the colour and language divide and in all parties, and as a
       man of great warmth and generosity of spirit; and


  (4) expresses its deepest sympathies to his wife, Entronette, his
       daughters and his grandchildren.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, colleagues, Deputy President,
we mourn today the death and celebrate the life of our dear friend and
colleague, Rudi Heine. Rudi served with distinction as a member of this
Parliament from KwaZulu-Natal, representing Zululand, and as the DA
spokesperson on public enterprises.

Rudi Heine het op sy stil, rustige en wyse manier diens gelewer aan sy
omgewing, in die sakewêreld, in die gemeenskapslewe en ook in die politiek.
[In his quiet, calm and wise way Rudi Heine rendered service to his
environment, in the business world, in community life as well as in
politics.]

Rudi enjoyed a public life that was as broad as it was deep. He was born in
the town of Frankfort in the Free State. He went to Heidelberg High School
and matriculated in 1952. After an initial career in banking, he joined
Sanlam in 1970 and rose to become its business development manager. He
retired at the end of 1996, after 26 years of service.

He was not just a businessman, he displayed a leadership in business that
was as consistent as it was meritorious. It is noteworthy that he was not
simply a collector of titles, and a holder of offices. He used his
leadership to build bridges and to break down barriers.

Daarom is dit geen verrassing dat toe hy in 1989 as die President van die
Durbanse Sakekamer verkies is, hy die eerste Afrikaanssprekende persoon was
wat hierdie posisie in die organisasie se 137-jarige bestaan beklee het
nie. In 1995 toe hy aangewys is as die President van die Suid-Afrikaanse
Besigheidskamer, SACOB, was hy dan ook die eerste Afrikaanssprekende
persoon om hierdie posisie te beklee. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[It was therefore no surprise that when he was elected President of the
Durban Chamber of Business in 1989, he was the first Afrikaans-speaking
person to hold this post in the 137-year old organisation. In 1995, when he
was designated President of the SA Chamber of Business, SACOB, he was also
the first Afrikaans-speaking person to hold this post.]

Rudi also used his business leadership to build bridges across the great
chasms that existed in apartheid South Africa. He actively served in, and
enthusiastically supported, the recommendations of the KwaZulu-Natal
Indaba, which appeared like a bright shaft of light during the long dark
night of apartheid violence and the state of emergency which wracked and
engulfed Natal in the 1980s.

If business was his life, then education and the environment were his
passions. He served, variously, on the boards of Unisa, the Mangosuthu
Technikon and the Natal Parks' Board, where he achieved the office of vice
chairman.

Rudi tackled his parliamentary career with all the enthusiasm and energy
that he had brought to bear in his previous work. Although fiercely
partisan in the DP, and later the DA cause, it could truly be said that he
was a man who believed public service was a noble calling. He practised the
dictum of Lincoln that we should at all times have ``charity towards all
and malice towards none''.

His greatest belief, perhaps, was that it was better to have one smile for
the living than a fountain of tears for the dead. Who can forget his
crinkly smile, his twinkling eyes, and his belief that even the fiercest
argument or political dispute was best settled over a drink at Barney's in
the Marks Building at the end of the day's sitting.

Rudi was a paid-up subscriber to the Biblical injunction in Deuteronomy
13:19: ``I have set before thee life and death, the blessing and the curse;
therefore, choose life.'' He was that breed of whom South Africa is in
great need: the optimist. And in the end it is always the optimists who
win, not because they are always right, but because they are positive. Rudi
believed that dedicated, wide-eyed open optimism pays, and that pessimism
can only offer the empty consolation of being right.

I can say, without fear of appeal, that Parliament and all parties need
more Rudi Heines. We need more people who pursue public life with his
infectious enthusiasm, and who believe that a get-up-and-go attitude in
South Africa will always trump a sit-back-and-wait-for-it approach.

When Rudi died suddenly last Thursday, it was because his great spirit was
not matched by a strong heart. And yet in life, and now in death, it is his
big-heartedness for which we will remember him.

Shakespeare wrote in Henry V:


  A good leg will fall; a straight back will stoop; a black beard will turn
  white; a curled pate will grow bald; a fair face will wither; a full eye
  will wax hollow: but a good heart, is the sun and the moon; or, rather,
  the sun, and not the moon; for it shines bright, and never changes, but
  keeps his course truly.

Rudi kept his course true and fair. Rudi leaves his dear wife, Entronette,
four loving daughters and three heartbroken grandchildren. The family has
asked me to say the following:

Sonder hom is ons lewens armer: dié van sy vrou, kinders en kleinkinders,
wie vir Oupie en sy terg en grappies baie gaan mis. Ons is jammer hy is so
vinnig van ons weggeneem, maar ons vind troos daarin dat hy sy lewe voluit
geleef het, en bereik het wat hy hom ten doel gestel het, en daarvoor is
ons die Hemelse Vader dankbaar. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Without him our lives are poorer: those of his wife, children and
grandchildren, who will miss Oupie and his teasing and jokes very much. We
are sad that he was taken from us so quickly, but we also find it a
consolation that he lived his life to the full, and achieved the objectives
he had set himself, and for that we thank our Heavenly Father.]

Wanneer ons in die Parlement dus nou afskeid neem van ons geliefde Rudi
Heine, dink ons terug aan die vreugde van sy samesyn met ons, en wil ons
amper in protes saam met Eugène Marais weeklaag: [Therefore, while we are
now bidding farewell in Parliament to our beloved Rudi Heine, we think back
on the joy of having him with us, and we almost want to lament in protest
with Eugène Marais:]


  'n Druppel gal is in die soetste wyn, 'n traan is op elk' vrolik' snaar,
  in elke lag 'n sug van pyn, in elke roos 'n dowwe blaar.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr J H VAN DER MERWE: Agb Speaker, die IVP ondersteun graag die mosie en
ons het ook met groot skok en pyn kennis geneem van die skielike afsterwe
van ons kollega, Rudi Heine. Graag vereenselwig ons ons met die pragtige
woorde wat mnr Leon uitgespreek het, en ons treur ook saam met Rudi se
dierbares.

Rudi was in een opsig 'n besondere mens. Hy was 'n ouboet. Ons Afrikaners
ken die mooi posisie in 'n gesin - die oudste broer wat vir pa en ma
instaan as hulle nie daar is nie en wat na die ander kinders omsien. By
ouboet kan jy gaan kla, gunste vra, simpatie soek. Ouboet is geduldig,
verstandig en behulpsaam.

Rudi was een van die Parlement se ouboets. Hy was 'n dierbare ouer persoon
na wie jonges kon gaan om raad te vra, te kla of hulp te vra. Sy
persoonlikheid het ver oor politieke grense heen gestrek. Die Parlement is
'n ouboet kwyt; 'n besondere ouboet. Hy laat 'n groot leemte. Ons sal jou
mis, Ouboet Rudi. Jy moet mooi loop. Hamba kahle Baba. Go well, Ouboet.
Tata, Rudi. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Hon Speaker, the IFP would like to support the
motion and we have also noted with shock and pain the sudden death of our
colleague, Rudi Heine. We would like to associate ourselves with the
beautiful words expressed by Mr Leon, and we also mourn with Rudi's loved-
ones.

Rudi was a special person in one respect. He was an older brother. We
Afrikaners know the fine position in a family - the older brother who takes
the place of father and mother when they are not there and who looks after
the other children. One can take one's complaints to an older brother, ask
him for favours, look for sympathy. An older brother is patient, wise and
helpful.

Rudi was one of Parliament's older brothers. He was a kind older person to
whom the young people could go to ask for advice, to complain or to ask for
help. His personality far transcended political boundaries. Parliament has
lost an older brother; a special older brother. He leaves a big gap. We
shall miss you, Ouboet Rudi. You must go well. Hamba kahle Baba. Go well,
Ouboet. Goodbye Rudi.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Mevrou die Speaker, somtyds in 'n mens se lewe dan
kom daar mense oor jou lewenspad en van die oomblik wat jy hulle ontmoet
maak hulle 'n indruk op jou, en is jy bly dat jy die voorreg gehad het om
daardie betrokke persoon te kon ken. [Madam Speaker, sometimes in a
person's life people across one's path in life, and from the moment one
meets them they make an impression and one is glad to have had the
privilege to know the person concerned.]

This was the case with Rudi Heine. From the first moment I personally met
Rudi, we became friends. So today as I am standing here on behalf of the
New NP, it is not only on behalf of my party but also on behalf of myself
that I am saying this: Rudi was a friend. Rudi was a colleague. When I
learnt of Rudi's death on Thursday, I sat there with another friend, Mike
Ellis. We just reminisced for a few moments here in the benches about our
friend who had passed away.

Not only have we lost a friend, but we have lost a colleague whom I had the
opportunity of serving with at one stage in the Portfolio Committee on
Public Enterprises and he was a man who, when he was set on a cause, would
pursue that cause. And he was a difficult customer - I believe the chair of
the committee would agree with us - trying to protect that in which he
believed.

At the end of the day, I just want to say that this Parliament and those of
us who knew him were honoured and privileged to know Rudi Heine better than
just as a colleague. We will miss him and we believe that he has left us
with an example of that which should also be predominant here: When we walk
out that door, we are friends and colleagues in Parliament, and not
opposition members in political parties.

Ek wil vir jou al die eer daarvoor gee. Ek dank u. [Applous.] [I want to
give you all the credit for that. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mnr A BLAAS: Speaker, die ACDP vereenselwig hom heelhartig met hierdie
mosie. Ons bring graag hulde aan Rudi, 'n baie besondere mens en 'n baie
spesiale vriend. Ons wil ook graag ons hartseer uitspreek en deel in die
beproewing van sy gesin en familie.

Om 'n vriendskap met Rudi te kon deel, was 'n baie besondere voorreg. Dit
was onselfsugtig en onvoorwaardelik. Dit is 'n vriendskap wat hy met sy
hele wese gegee het. So het hy ook teenoor sy gesin opgetree. Hy het
leiding gegee en verseker dat hulle beskerm en versorg is. In die
gemeenskap waar hy betrokke was, het hierdie selfde reëls gegeld. Met sy
rustige maar ferm optrede het hy veral in die sakewêreld voor geloop en
onuitwisbare spore getrap. As kollega in die Parlement was hy gewaardeerd
vir sy deelname en sy konstruktiewe bydraes. Rudi het gedeel met almal om
hom. 'n Grappie hier 'n woord van aanmoediging daar, en goeie raad as hy
daarvoor gevra is. Deur sy respek vir ander het hy respek afgedwing.

Ons innige meegevoel gaan aan sy gesin, sy vrou, sy kinders, sy
kleinkinders en ander familielede. Die verlies is groot. Die hartseer is
diep. Ons deel met julle. Mag die Almagtige Here in sy mildelike liefde vir
julle die krag gee om julle deur hierdie beproewing te dra. Ou Rudi, ons
gaan jou mis. Rus in vrede. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)
[Mr A BLAAS: Speaker, the ACDP wholly identifies with this motion. We would
like to pay tribute to Rudi, an exceptional person and a very special
friend. We would also like to express our grief, and share in the
tribulations of his family and relatives.

It was a very special privilege to be able to share a friendship with Rudi.
It was unselfish and unconditional. It was a friendship that he gave with
his whole being. He also related to his family in that way. He guided them
and made sure that they were protected and taken care of. The same rules
applied in the community in which he was involved. With his quiet yet firm
behaviour he was a leader, especially in the business world, and made a
lasting impression. As a colleague in Parliament he was valued for his
participation and constructive contributions. Rudi shared with everybody
around him. A little joke here, a word of encouragement there, and good
advice when he was asked for it. On account of his respect for others he
commanded respect.

Our condolences go to his family, his wife, his children, his grandchildren
and other family members. The loss is great. The sorrow is intense. We
share it with you. May the abundant love of Almighty God grant you the
strength to carry you through this ordeal. Rudi, old chap, we are going to
miss you. Rest in peace. [Applause.]]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and
members, it is sad to say farewell to a member of this House. Every long-
standing member who departs does so with a wealth of experience and
knowledge that can never be fully replaced.

The UDM extends its condolences to the late Mr Heine's family, friends and
colleagues. Your loss is profound and we can only say that our prayers are
with you. Though we may not always have agreed on matters of policy, I can
honestly say that Mr Heine was a dedicated and vocal voice for his
constituency and his party's policies. Therefore he played his part in this
House where all voices must be heard, and he played it very well.

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Mevrou die Speaker, agb Adjunkpresident, dit is goed en
reg dat ons in hierdie Parlement die gebruik het om tot stilstand te kom en
hulde te bring aan ons kollegas as hulle ons ontslaap. Ek wil namens die VF
ons ondersteuning uitspreek vir die mosie van roubeklag vir ons kollega.
Ons kan ons ten volle daarmee assosieer en ons ondersteun dit baie graag.

Ek wil ook namens die VF ons opregte meelewing en simpatie uitspreek
teenoor kollega Rudi Heine se vrou en vier dogters en sy kleinkinders. Ook
aan sy party waarin hy gedien het, ons simpatie en meelewing. U het 'n
groot en 'n sterk kollega verloor. U sal die slag wat u party getref het
wat dit betref, sekerlik aanvoel en ons wil u sterkte toewens daarmee.

Ek sal van kollega Rudi Heine iets spesifieks onthou en ek dink kollegas
sal met my saamstem dat/dit sy vriendelikheid was. Hy het nooit by jou
verby gestap sonder om 'n grappie te maak, stil te staan, bietjie te gesels
of te kuier nie. Dit het van hom uitgestraal en dit is so dat 'n persoon
wat so deur die lewe gaan en vriendelikheid uitstraal, iemand is wat
rustigheid in sy hart het, gemoedsrus het en weet waar hy heen gaan.

Ek wil namens die VF sy gesin baie sterkte toewens. Mag ons Hemelse Vader u
vertroos in die tye wat vir u voorlê. Dit mag vir u moeilike tye wees, maar
wees getroos, u man, u eggenoot en u oupa was 'n besondere mens en die
Parlement staan vandag stil en ons eer sy nagedagtenis. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, it is only right
that we in this Parliament have the tradition of having a moment of
reflection to honour our colleagues who have passed away. On behalf of the
FF, I want to express our support for the motion of condolence for our
colleague. We can associate fully with the motion therefore would like to
support it.

I also want to express the sincere sympathy of the FF towards Rudi Heine's
wife, four daughters and grandchildren. Our sympathy and condolences also
go to the party in which he served. You have lost a great and strong
colleague. You will most definitely feel the loss you have suffered and we
wish you well.

I shall always remember something specific about Rudi Heine, and I think
colleagues will agree with me that it was his friendliness. He would never
walk past you without cracking a joke, lingering a while, talking a bit or
spending some time. It emanated from him and it is so that a person who
goes through life in this way and emanates friendliness, is someone with
tranquillity in his heart, who has peace of mind and knows where he is
going.

On behalf of the FF we wish his family well. May our Heavenly Father
comfort you in the time that lies ahead. It might be hard times for you,
but find comfort in the knowledge that your husband, your spouse and your
grandfather was an exceptional man and Parliament reflects a moment to
salute his memory.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Agb Speaker, agb AdjunkPresident, dit was vir my 'n
voorreg om Rudi Heine te ken. Ek dink Rudi Heine is seker een van die min
mense in die wêreld wat nie vyande gehad het nie. Selfs al het jy van hom
verskil, het jy tog van hom gehou. Dit was sy geaardheid, dit was sy wese.
Daarom is die nagedagtenis wat ons aan hom het, positief en ons sal hom in
'n positiewe gees onthou vir sy omgang met mense en wat hy gedoen het. Ons
sal hom onthou as 'n vriendelike mens met besonderse vermoë wat sy merk op
verskillende plekke gemaak het, ook in die politiek.

As ek aan Rudi dink en hy is weg dan wonder ek, soos hoeveel kere in die
verlede, wie die volgende van ons is wat sal gaan; en of ons, soos Rudi,
reg sal wees om te kan gaan die oomblik wanneer ons geroep is? Hy was vir
ons 'n voorbeeld.

Ons simpatie en meegevoel gaan uit aan sy familie vir hulle groot verlies.
Ons sal hom mis. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, it was a privilege
for me to have known Rudi Heine. I think Rudi Heine was probably one of few
people in the world who did not have any enemies. Even if one disagreed
with him, one still liked him. That was his nature, that was his being.
That is why our memory of him is positive and we will remember him in a
positive spirit for the way in which he related to people and what he did.
We shall remember him as a friendly person with the special ability to make
his mark in different places, as well as in politics.

When I think about Rudi, and he is gone, then I wonder, like so many times
in the past, who of us will be the next to go and whether we, like Rudi,
will be ready to go the moment we are called. He was an example to us all.

We extend our deepest sympathy and condolences to his family on their great
loss. We shall miss him. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, the PAC extends its heartfelt sympathies to
the family of the late hon Rudi Heine, to the DA and to the members of this
Parliament. May we all be comforted. Death is not our friend, for it visits
us when we least expect it and creates a vacuum which is difficult to fill.
Rudi was a great, gentle soul. Many may not recall his words, because they
were never provocative but constructive. His gentle face, however, will be
remembered for a long time to come.

May he serve the ``heavenly Parliament'', where I think at this moment he
has been sworn in, with the same kind of integrity and graciousness.

Rena ba Maafrika re re sepela gabotse. Tsela-šweu! Re re tloga le dithapelo
tša rena o rotoge le tšona; o ba botse gore re na le mathata, re sa duma go
a fenya; ba re romele maatla re kgone go fenya, Afrika-Borwa e be naga ye
botse ya khutšo. Re a leboga. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)
[We, the Africans, say go well. Peaceful journey! We say, go with our
prayers to heaven; tell them we have problems, we wish to overcome them;
let them send us the power to overcome, for South Africa to be a beautiful,
peaceful country. We thank you.]

Ms T E MILLIN: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, I did not know the late
hon member Mr Heine personally, having only recently joined the National
Assembly. However, by all accounts, he was in every respect a true
gentleman and clearly a valued member of the hon House and his party's
caucus. His apparently sudden death last week, shortly after he returned
home from Parliament, serves as a salutary reminder to all of us how frail
our mortality is. We can never know when we may be called away from our
earthly existence.

Although Mr Heine's sudden passing must have been a terrible shock to his
close family and other associates, his manner of passing must surely be the
best way that any of us can hope for, namely to have lived a full and
productive life, then to die in harness, so to speak, with no painful,
lingering illness or injury suffered. I pray that this may be of some
comfort to his family in their grievous loss.

In conclusion, may I, as the leader of the IAM, offer my heartfelt sympathy
to his family, friends, parliamentary and party colleagues. I'm certain he
will be sorely missed by all. Thank you.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, Azapo has learnt
with sadness and shock of the sudden passing away of Mr Heine. To his party
and those who knew him, Azapo is with you in this time of mourning.

On behalf of Azapo, we wish to convey our sympathies to Mr Heine's family
and relatives. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, each time we are
brought to the podium to convey condolences for one of our members, it is
saddening. We have all contributed greatly to the progress we as a nation
have made to date, be it on our side of the fence or on that of the
opposition, and the loss of a member is the loss of a contributor to this
House's success.

On behalf of the MF and as a colleague of the late hon Rudi Heine, I convey
our sincere condolences to his bereaved family and friends. It was always a
pleasure receiving a good comment in passing from the late Heine as I
returned to my seat after each debate. He shall be greatly missed. I
further extend our condolences to the DA on the loss of a valued member.

The late Mr Heine leaves behind a dedicated wife, Entronette, four
daughters and three grandchildren. May God give you all the strength to
endure this painful loss. Your pain is our pain.

The late Heine appeared to have a keen interest in business, community
service and educational matters. His contribution and concern was certainly
an asset and is a loss to South Africa. To the hon Heine, we thank you. May
you rest in peace.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, hon members, it is
with a deep sense of sadness that we have to bid a final goodbye to Mr Rudi
Heine. His country and people will forever remember his contributions in
politics, business and also in education. We will remember that, as
President of Sacob, he served to promote the business interests of this
country. Also, as a member of this House, Mr Rudi Heine contributed to the
nurturing, promotion and development of the culture of democracy and
nonracialism in this country. He deployed his skills through our committees
of Parliament to ensure that our democracy works.

We should be reminded that, as a people of one country, we should work
continually to ensure that the things we say and do and the future we
create is not on the basis of selfishness but a humane and proud democracy
underpinned by the principles of ubuntu and social justice. We would like
to express our heartfelt condolences to his family, his friends and his
party, the DA. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the Deputy Speaker and I associate ourselves
fully with the sentiments you have expressed. Mr Heine will be sorely
missed, as will his contributions to this House.

Debate concluded.

Agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.

The SPEAKER: The condolences of the House will be conveyed to the Heine
family.

                             G8 SUMMIT IN EVIAN

                            (Member's Statement)

Miss M N MAGAZI (ANC): The leaders of the Group of 8 countries, the G8,
started their meeting on Sunday, 1 June, in Evian, France. The focus on
Monday was to look at ways to stimulate global economic growth, Africa and
Nepad; and on Tuesday, the focus will be on the fight against terror, arms
proliferation and regional conflicts.

President Thabo Mbeki announced that the European Union will commit $1
billion a year to the fight against Aids, malaria and tuberculosis. It is
also reported that the US administration has announced a $15 billion plan
to combat Aids in Africa and the Caribbean countries.

The ANC welcomes these developments. The ANC further believes that the
deliberations at this summit will be aimed at contributing to tackling the
global challenge of eradicating poverty and underdevelopment. The ANC
wishes all participants in this summit good luck in their deliberations. I
thank you. [Applause.]

                              CRIME STATISTICS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr D H M GIBSON (DA): Madam Speaker, we have a weak criminal justice
system, but we deserve a strong, competent and effective system. Only then
will we get crime under control. Statistics help to decide whether crime is
increasing, stabilising or declining.

The hon Minister of Safety and Security has decreed that crime statistics
will not be released until August. He appears to think that if he conceals
the statistics we will all believe that crime is under control. I have news
for him. In democratic countries like ours the people have the right to
know.

MPs have a responsibility to hold the Government to account. Parliament
passes or rejects the Budget. It is impossible for MPs to do their work if
they're kept in the dark by the Minister and unless we get the statistics
which we need to assess the Budget and the priorities, spending, staffing
and equipping, I intend using the Promotion of Access to Information Act to
force the Minister to tell this House and the people of South Africa the
truth about crime.

                            DEMOCRACY IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Madam Speaker, since yesterday very disturbing media
and other reports have emanated from Zimbabwe to the effect that the
Zimbabwean government and its security agency are relentlessly cracking
down on mass protests organised by the Movement for Democratic Change.

This suppression takes place against the recent backdrop of attempts by
African leaders, including our own President Mbeki, to open channels of
negotiation between the government and the MDC. What is at stake is the
survival of democracy in Zimbabwe. No true democratic state will ever deny
its citizens the right to peacefully make their feelings known, even if
those feelings are opposition and disaffection with the government of the
day. The freedom to express an alternative point of view to the government
is a true benchmark of democratic governance.

The situation in Zimbabwe is rapidly deteriorating and could lead to
further negative effects for Southern Africa, South Africa and Africa,
beyond those that have already resulted in the past two years or so. It is
particularly tragic that the renewed violence in Zimbabwe is taking place
against the backdrop of the G8 meeting in France, where African leaders are
trying to persuade the developed world to give effect to their earlier
commitment on Nepad and African renewal. We can only hope that the events
in our neighbouring country do not derail these attempts. If they do,
Africa's rebirth would once again be postponed.

                              YOUTH DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr K M MOEKETSE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the focused theme for June is youth
development. The choice of this theme coincides with the historic 16 June
youth uprising that took place in Soweto and quickly spread to other parts
of the country.
In commemorating this day we also honour young people such as Solomon
Mahlangu and countless other young heroes: men and women who laid down
their lives in order for all of us to be free from apartheid colonial rule.
The ANC Government has put in place mechanisms to facilitate the
development of the youth in this first decade of freedom. It has
established the National Youth Commission to monitor and ensure that all
Government departments have youth-friendly development programmes. The
Umsobomvu Fund has been established to fund youth-driven programmes. The
criminal justice system has been revamped to allow the category of youth in
conflict with the law to be rehabilitated and integrated into society.

Whilst the ANC Government has made strides in facilitating youth
development, more still needs to be done. We must, together as a nation,
confront the endemic problem of youth unemployment. We also call on
Government to design and implement a comprehensive national youth service
programme. Most importantly, we call on the youth to utilise the
opportunities created in the first decade of freedom and in the spirit of
vukuzenzele to work for a better life for all. Thank you. [Applause.]

                        EXTRA RECRUITS TO FIGHT CRIME

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr J SCHIPPERS (New NP): Madam Speaker, in certain areas, especially on the
Cape Flats, responsible citizens live in fear that a bullet unleashed by a
gangster could kill or harm their children. Therefore, the New NP welcomes
the announcement made yesterday by the Minister of Safety and Security,
Charles Nqakula, about the deployment of over 6 000 recruits in the Western
Cape to tackle gangsterism and violence.

Apart from the 3 212 recruits who will be deployed in the Western Cape, a
further 2 850 will be trained in the province during the new financial
year. Members of the Pretoria Intervention Unit will also be deployed at
crime hot spots in the province.

The New NP notes the DA's recycled proposal of deploying more police
officers on the streets as part of their criminal justice policy document,
Freedom from Fear, a very ironic title because the document succeeds in
awakening fear. Once again the DA has been so eager to find fault that they
have failed to take into account the Department of Safety and Security's
actions to combat crime and the DA is now calling on the department to do
what it is already in the process of doing. The difference between the DA
and the New NP is that while the DA can only score cheap political points
with pie-in-the-sky statements, the New NP can make things happen. I thank
you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

                       CRISIS IN MPUMALANGA HOSPITALS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, the results of an investigation by the
Mpumalanga provincial legislature highlight the crisis in the province's
hospitals. There have been reports of psychiatric patients released in
general wards where they assault and rape other patients; regular power
failures which, without backup generators, kill patients on life-support
systems; doctors that are unreachable because hospitals no longer have
internal telephone or PA systems; and doctors who are expected to treat up
to 250 patients a day.

The premier has placed the department under curatorship and for this the
Mpumalanga legislature must be commended. It is, however, astounding that
the defiant and incompetent MEC, who tried to evict a rape support group
from Rob Ferreira Hospital for providing antiretroviral drugs to victims of
sexual abuse, continues in her position. Mismanagement and
maladministration are MEC Manana's trademark and reports that the Scorpions
have begun investigations backed by evidence of at least two forensic
audits are therefore encouraging.

In addition to the crisis facing health care under her responsibility,
Manana has been accused of violating tender procedures, financial controls
and Treasury instructions, with contract work costing taxpayers many times
more than it should. It is more than reasonable to expect MEC Manana to
resign under these circumstances and if she chooses not to, the premier has
a responsibility to remove her from office. MEC Manana has violated section
195 of the Constitution which holds administration in every sphere of
government to a high standard of professional ethics and efficient,
economic and effective use of resources. The ACDP calls on the Minister of
Health to intervene and ensure that the MEC is removed from office. Thank
you.
                            WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms G L MAHLANGU-NKABINDE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the United Nations General
Assembly declared 5 June World Environment Day in 1972. World Environment
Day aims to encourage people to become active supporters of sustainable and
equitable living, and to promote awareness and understanding to ensure that
communities play a central role in changing attitudes towards environmental
issues.

The theme for World Environment Day is Water - Two Billion People are Dying
for It! The choice of this theme is in line with the declaration of the
year 2003 as the International Year of Fresh Water. This declaration aims
to encourage Government and other stakeholders to promote awareness of
sustainable use, management and protection of fresh water. This is part of
the implementation process of the resolutions of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development and the Millennium Development Goals, which seek to
halve the number of people living without fresh water by 2015.

As part of this programme, the South African Government has declared 2-7
June National Environment Week. The theme for this programme is: My
Environment, My Life. The ANC supports these programmes. We believe that
environmental preservation is a key component of the broad strategy aimed
at pushing back the frontiers of poverty. I thank you.

                            SAPS ACCUSED OF BIAS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Safety and
Security always maintains that all citizens of this country are treated
equally, as far as justice is concerned, and that if a member of the public
commits an act deemed to be of a criminal nature, the law takes its course,
irrespective of who that person is. But this statement was tested and
proved to be incorrect in Venda, Limpopo, where the police arrested a
prominent soccer boss, Mr David Didiyela, only for him to be released
within minutes of his arrest when he called the provincial MEC for Safety
and Security to intervene on his behalf.

This situation has created a bad image for the police services, as they are
now being accused of favouring the rich and famous. It is important that
this issue is addressed so that the integrity of the policemen and
policewomen, who are committed to their duties, is restored. This, it is
alleged, has also affected the morale of the junior officers, who are now
afraid of being victimised. Thank you.

                       DISINVESTMENT FROM OUR COUNTRY

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms T E MILLIN (IAM): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Minerals and Energy,
the hon Mlambo-Ngcuka, is on recent record as having delivered a strong
message to foreign investors, when she told British business that companies
not prepared to carry the cost of implementing economic empowerment should
not do business in South Africa: ``Some companies may be put off, but that
is the price we have to pay, and that is the sacrifice we are prepared to
make - the lesser of two evils.''

I put it to the hon Minister that it is not our leaders who have to pay the
price or sacrifice for disinvestment from our country due to our punitive
labour laws and unreasonable demands to overseas investors, who are
understandably reticent to do business with the Government - seemingly
hellbent on discouraging would-be investors - and who are instead far more
likely to seek greener pastures and more investor-friendly countries with
which to do business. Far better that we actively encourage investment by
welcoming bona fide investors, relaxing our absurdly restrictive labour
laws, reducing our burgeoning legions of unemployed, thereby restoring the
dignity of so many skilled and unskilled workers. Remember: Half a loaf is
better than none.

Earning a wage, even if it does not match up to the stringent requirements
under present labour legislation, is certainly better than no wage at all.
That, hon Minister, is the meaning of the lesser of two evils. I thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, there are far too many private meetings going on,
and too much whispering.

                        HOSTAGE-TAKING IN MPUMALANGA
                            (Member's Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (ANC): Madam Speaker, we have learnt with shock and dismay of
the hostage-taking of policemen, who were locked in Kabokweni police
station cells by a group of criminals near Nelspruit in the Mpumalanga
province. We unreservedly condemn this unacceptably perverse behaviour by
these criminals, and we urge all people, including the DA, in this country
to unequivocally unite against police attacks, in particular, and against
crime in general.

We wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of
the policeman who was killed, and those who were injured. As the Government
we will continue to enhance measures of safety and security in all police
stations in this country to halt these heartless attacks on our police
members. We also urge the police to tighten and safeguard their designated
environment in police stations at all times.

We acknowledge and congratulate the special task team that was sent to help
resolve this senseless hostage drama for their selfless bravery and
dedication to the cause of fighting crime in this country. Because of their
outstanding service, they not only managed to retrieve the two guns used
during the hostage-taking, but they also managed to contain these criminals
inside the cells. We say: ``A job well done.'' Thank you. [Applause.]

                                  OIL DEAL

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr I O DAVIDSON (DA): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, the DA
requested the President to release all documents and correspondence
relating to the alleged oil deal, reported in the Mail & Guardian on
Friday, 30 May. This was to be done by 14:00 today. These documents include
correspondence between the executive, the Nigerian government and the
Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation. As I speak, there has been no
positive response to this request, and therefore the DA is now invoking the
Promotion of Access to Information Act in order to obtain these documents.

The release of these documents is important, as it would appear that a
lucrative oil deal, intended for all the people of South Africa - secured
with the aid of the President - has benefited only a select few, being a
number of figures linked to the inner sanctum of the ANC, including the
ANC's own fundraising trust. If what is alleged is correct, then this is an
abuse of the President's office and a potential fraud on both the Nigerian
and South African publics. Thank you.

                   UNITING OF LIBERATION STRUGGLE VETERANS

                            (Member's Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Madam Speaker, the effort by the former President,
Dr Mandela, to unite South Africa's veterans in the fight for democracy is
commendable.

The story of the success of the liberation struggle in South Africa will
live on and on, and will be told for many generations to come. It is
important to inscribe and acknowledge the names of those who played a
leading role on the monuments and in the books of history. For the former
President to unite the veterans is heralded as a positive move to fulfil a
worthwhile cause for a worthwhile objective.

This story can only be told by men and women of goodwill, narrated in the
context of its actualities and told with honesty and without bias. If so
told, the story will end on a passionate note of how reconciliation among
political parties and individuals was attained and sealed in the book of
records of our country.

We were flabbergasted to note, in the first instance, the number of
political parties from whom the veterans will be identified. Given that
ugly chapter of the struggle which shows some parties singled out for
discrimination as not worth invitation to the 1983 formation within the
country, one is not surprised by the composition of the veterans' forum.

Our leaders would be naive to forget the price the country paid for
excluding other organisations during that fateful period as those
organisations became the object of vilification and elimination. I don't
think our leaders can afford in this day and age the luxury of repeating
the 1983 mistake. However, in the fullness of time, the truth shall tell
itself. Thank you.

          NEW DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES FOR NATIONAL YOUTH COMMISSION
                            (Member's Statement)

Mr E N MTHETHWA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the National Youth Commission is
embarking on new development programmes for the month of June. The central
focus of these activities will be to highlight youth interests, evaluate
work done, facilitate youth development, and highlight the gains made for
the youth since the advent of democracy.

This programme is underpinned by the theme ``Youth action to seize the
opportunities of democracy''. These activities will include a youth
assembly, which will be held on the Grand Parade, Cape Town, on 12 June.
Young people will march to Parliament to present a youth declaration to the
Minister in the Presidency, Comrade Essop Pahad. President Thabo Mbeki will
address the national rally at Atlantic Park, Nkangala District, Witbank,
Mpumalanga.

The ANC calls on the youth of our country to attend the planned programmes
in large numbers as these programmes champion the youth's interests. The
ANC firmly believes that youth empowerment and development cannot occur
without the direct participation of young people. Youth, you are the
future, produce and learn. I thank you. [Applause.]
       ALLEGATIONS OF FRONT COMPANY TO MISLEAD AND INTIMIDATE ELDERLY

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD (New NP): Madam Speaker, an incident in Stellenbosch
has shown the DA's true colours. The DA is using a front company not
registered with the Department of Trade and Industry to mislead and
intimidate the elderly.

A certain Mr Ivan Rene from the spook company, B W Market Survey CC,
pretends to be a civil servant from the Department of Social Development to
gain access to old age homes, where he pretends to do independent research
on political attitudes. They fail to inform the voters that they are DA
activists. Only when the voters say they will be voting for another party
in the upcoming by-election are they then told that they have to support
the DA because, and I quote: ``How can you vote for the kaffirs?''
[Interjections.] We have sworn affidavits in our possession.

Last week the DA acknowledged their link to this company after being caught
out. According to them, Rene has been fired by B W Market Survey CC. But
the question remains: Is B W Market Survey CC still contracted to the DA?
The DA owes the public an explanation. Who is B W Market Survey CC, that
was apparently also contracted to the DA in Grassy Park? Is this how the DA
spreads the swart gevaar message?

The incident raises serious questions about the squeaky-clean image that
the DA tries to portray. We challenge the hon Tony Leon to have this
incident independently investigated and to get rid of the racists in his
midst. I thank you. [Applause.]

                              CRIME STATISTICS
                           CRIME ON THE CAPE FLATS
                            SAPS ACCUSED OF BIAS
                        HOSTAGE TAKING IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, I am sure that you are
again going to allow me to respond in terms of the amount of questions that
I have.

The SPEAKER: Yes.
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. I want to appeal
to members of the ruling party not to be annoyed at times when people who
pose questions display ignorance. It is our responsibility to educate
people in this House. I don't like it therefore that when the hon Gibson
poses questions, people display irritation with him. He is going to pose
the question of statistics every day.

I have given a response to the matter of statistics. We will give
statistics in August as part and parcel of the report of the national
commissioner. The hon member said that if we do it that way we are denying
our people a report-back.

I want to tell him when it is that we give reports-back to our people. At
the beginning of each year, hon Gibson, the President comes here and
reports back to the nation. We then, as Ministers, follow. My report-back
is next week, hon Gibson. Later on in the year, there will be a report-
back. At times that report-back is given to the nation by the Deputy
President. In terms of Safety and Security, the national commissioner will
table before Parliament a report and that report will also carry
statistics. That is how we report back to our people.
Statistics are not going to help. If we do it on a daily, weekly and
monthly basis, it is not going to help. We explain those statistics in the
annual report that we give to Parliament. We have to assist the hon Gibson
to understand this fact.

I appreciate the observations which have been made by the hon Schippers
about the question of the Cape Flats and the fact that there are people who
use firearms to commit crime. This morning, the Deputy President led a team
that visited Bonteheuwel. There is a programme that we are going to unfold
which is relevant to Bonteheuwel. It relates to the matter of crime. We
have been covering the Cape Flats to ensure, indeed, that people do not
commit crimes there willy-nilly as the case has been in the past. We
appreciate, therefore, the observation that you made.

Regarding the hon Ditshetelo, I think that he also must learn how these
parties deal with reports that they get. Even the DA, Mr Ditshetelo, write
letters to complain when there have been problems. They write those letters
to the Minister so that I can have an understanding of what is happening. I
investigate and respond. That is how, hon members, these things are done.
You can't stand here and say ``the following thing has happened'', because
I won't know how to respond. Please, write a letter and submit a report and
we will deal with the issue that you have raised.

I am happy that the hon George has raised the question of the hostage drama
at Kabokweni. Let me announce here that the police official who was shot
dead is a member of our national task force. Unfortunately, I cannot reveal
at this time what his name is. There are two other police officials who
sustained injuries. One was shot in the foot and the other was shot in the
hand. This drama took place at 22:50 last night and extended over a period
of more than seven hours to just after 6:00 this morning. Indeed, the
ringleaders relevant to this matter are people who are in detention and
some of them have already been sentenced. They are in detention for armed
robbery and murder. Of course, the situation has now been normalised. We
will indicate later on the name of the police official who was killed. I
would like to say that we really appreciate the condolences that you have
extended to the bereaved family. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                        DEMOCRACY IN ZIMBABWE CRISIS
                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, the issue of Zimbabwe has been a
cause of great criticism for the Government over a long period of time. I
would like us to recall somewhat from our own history that at the height of
the Codesa process there were several huge incidents - murders of large
numbers of people especially from black communities, as a result of which,
after Boipatong, it led to us reconsidering abandoning the negotiation
route and suspending talks. But we soon realised that that was not the way
to resolve the issue.

At the present time, we have taken action to move the parties in Zimbabwe
to negotiate a settlement. We are in touch with both the MDC and Zanu-PF.
Right in the course of that process, the MDC abandoned that course and made
exactly the mistake that we ourselves thought we could make, and called for
mass action. The result is that rather than giving the negotiation process
a chance to resolve the issue, you are actually closing it off because you
are making it impossible ... [Interjections.]

You can't resolve it and you will not resolve an issue if you abandon the
talks. You won't. We learnt that from experience. We pursued that and
experienced it at Codesa. The reason that we, after Boipatong, went back to
the talks and the reason we are sitting here today is because we recognised
the fact that if you abandon the talks you will not solve the problem. If,
of course, the MDC is satisfied that they can take on the might of the
state in their country because we are only assisting the process - it's
after all the problem of the Zimbabweans - we can't impose. We can suggest
how to go about it. We will not compel anybody to do as we see fit. [Time
expired.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 6 - Public Works:

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon
members, today I'm going to give an account of some of the things we have
done over the past nine years which, at the beginning, were points of
challenge and for which we have found some solutions. However, we still
have to find solutions for other areas of challenge.
This department started off as a simple handyman. It has managed to
incorporate world standard operations and policies in the management of the
state's huge fixed property portfolio for which it is responsible. The
count includes the thousands of rural infrastructure projects created to
speed up development for the poorest of the poor as well as the growth and
stimulation of broader participation in the property and construction
industries.

A major policy development that affects all of Government that we are
currently dealing with is the Government-wide Immovable Asset Framework.
The key purpose of this framework is to establish a set of minimum norms
and standards in respect of the management of such immovable assets on a
Government-wide basis. This will help deal with many inconsistencies and
inefficiencies in the manner in which Government assets are managed in the
different organs of state. Our plan is to have such a policy document
translated into an Act in due course.

There has been an expression of a need for the total evaluation of the
Government portfolio. Thus an incremental programme to value components and
categories of the state's properties will be formulated in this financial
year. We are also looking at the establishment of a programme to perform a
valuation of the total portfolio and a valuation general entity to service
the whole of Government will be established.

On property holdings and asset management, I can just say that work on the
asset register is ongoing. But, coming to disposal, I wish to inform the
House that Public Works, in the previous financial year, disposed of 835
properties, with an estimated market value of R55,2 million. Of these
properties, 803 were disposed for land reform purposes, 19 were for low-
cost housing, and 13 were for commercial purposes.

Following the announcement by the President in February of the Expanded
Public Works Programme, the department is taking concrete steps to ensure
that the concept of this programme is fully understood and supported within
and outside of Government. Though co-ordinated by the Department of Public
Works, this is a national effort, which will mean the participation of
Government, business, unions and civil society in general. The objectives
of this programme are job creation, poverty alleviation, investment in
social and economic infrastructure and human resource development through
the training of participants. The key focus areas where Public Works is in
a position to optimise contributions are: labour-based methods, emerging
contractor support programmes, procurement policy, monitoring and
evaluation.

Coming to capital works, I remember telling hon members that last year, for
the first time in the history of Public Works, we broke an age-old record
of not fully expending money in this department. We are again on record as
saying that the funds we were given as this department have almost been
100% expended.

In line with Government's priority of security and crime prevention,
projects for the Departments of Correctional Services and Justice and the
SA Police Service have assumed special importance. We spent R759 million on
Correctional Services projects in the past year. A major step in the
development of prisons in South Africa today is the New Generations Prison
Initiative. My department, together with Correctional Services, is involved
in the design of a prototype prison, which should result in the converging
of all prison demands into a functional, cost-effective and efficient
operation. This prototype prison will carry reduced numbers of inmates per
unit and is planned to be rolled out throughout South Africa.

Regarding SAPS projects, we spent about R216,7 million. Work has started on
finding accommodation for 6 000 SAPS recruits, which was completed in six
months. We have also introduced some rapid delivery processes for the
Police Service. In the previous financial year, we completed and handed
over various projects to the SAPS, including community safety centres in
Khutsong, Tshidilamolomo, Centane and Leboeng where the SAPS is the leading
department.

The Justice division accounted for R237,9 million of our expenditure. We
have several major justice projects that are completed or currently under
construction. Some of the interesting ones for us are those at Khayelitsha
and Blue Downs. The project in Khayelitsha requires special mention as it
is the second largest magistrate's court in the country. The building of
such facilities in Khayelitsha and Blue Downs represents the Government's
commitment to not just bringing service, but also justice, closer to the
people in our townships as well as to stimulate urban renewal. We spent
R33,66 million on 42 Ramp projects for the Justice department, and the
largest amount was spent on the Klerksdorp Magistrates' offices and the
Durban High Court.

We have the problem of dolomite in the Waterkloof area in Thaba Tswane, and
we have done a lot of work. The department has actually spent R53,5 million
in the past financial year and has plans for an expenditure of R73,6
million so that we can deal with the problem.

There are other large projects for Defence, which include a new
communication tower under construction at the Waterkloof Airforce Base and
a major repair programme at the Dry Dock in Simonstown. We have done work
to the value of R54,8 million for Arts and Culture and we have also built a
weather observation and scientific research facility costing R117 million
on Marion Island.

The Ramp initiative has also been applied to upgrade fishing harbours in
order to provide vital support to the fishing industry in the Western Cape.
I hope the Western Capers are listening. Currently 15 contractors have been
appointed at eight harbours. This is for a contract valued at R85 million
and has opened up 900 job opportunities. On schedule for the end of 2004,
we are looking at 27 contracts at all 12 fishing harbours, with a contract
value of R161,5 million and 1 700 job opportunities.

Public Works will, on behalf of the Department of Foreign Affairs, complete
the South African Chancery in Berlin in July 2003. The chancery in
Kinshasa, to the value of R72 million, will be completed soon.

Regarding new accommodation, Public Works has set up an Asset Procurement
and Operating Partnership System Unit that specialises in delivering
infrastructure through partnering with the private sector. We call these
projects Apops, and we are going to be undertaking some projects for the
Departments of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Education and Foreign
Affairs. What is interesting is that we are honouring an old agreement to
the effect that we need to renew the area within the Struben Street
Boulevard precinct. We have already gone the route of asking for
qualifications and subsequent proposals.

With regard to client services, we have so improved on our work, through
service-level agreements that we have entered into, that we have reduced
the level of client complaints by 75%. Our maintenance budget of R557
million has been fully utilised, and we want to believe that those
departments that invested in these ventures will actually be satisfied at
the end of it all.

Concerning leaseholds and acquisitions, 80% of the 442 requests for leased
accommodation have been finalised. The procurement of accommodation has
been identified as an area that offers an opportunity for the
implementation of black economic empowerment. We are currently reviewing
targeted procurement to assess and evaluate further commitment to the
promotion of BEE. Tenders to the value of R400 million were awarded to work
in contribution to black economic empowerment.

Regarding construction, we have started a strong thrust to empower women in
the construction industry. Thus we say that we have got women in
construction. To date, 79 construction-related projects to the value of
R188 million have been given to women.

We are going to consider, together with the private sector, a
transformation framework that will culminate in a transformation charter
for Public Works. And we are also saying that there are problems at times
when students cannot be catered for. Thus we are going to be driving, in
the construction industry, a campaign not only to establish a construction
industry development week, but also to try and attract and target young
students.

Another initiative will be the incubator programme. The objective of this
programme is to provide sustainable work opportunities, training and access
to finance to black construction enterprises, which are of a significant
size. Projects between a minimum of R2 million up to a threshold of R25
million will be identified exclusively for these enterprises over a period
of time.

We started with the Community-based Public Works Programme where we had
underexpenditure. I'm proud to say that a lot has been achieved. Today I
want to speak only on what we said were going to be change factors in the
fight against poverty, that is, the community public works centres. These
centres have been established in a number of regions. The first was the one
at Lambasi, which last year managed to have total sales of R3,9 million,
which money we hold on behalf of the communities.

At Ncora we have been selling cabbages from 10 hectares for a period of a
month, with sales that have been paid for of about R40 000. We made sure
that rural women there also produce the seedlings for the nurseries. We've
also engaged the Department of Agriculture, with whom we work very closely,
to support a programme in terms of which women will be experimenting with
the production of herbs. We are talking practical food here and not dreams.

At the Highlands CPC, of the 640 hectares fenced, 100 hectares have been
put under maize. Of the 10 hectares under cabbage, about R20 000 has been
raised from one hectare alone. At Keiskammahoek we have improved on the
infrastructure for irrigation, where 51 cows are currently being milked.

It is interesting that in the Elandskraal CPC, the irrigation
infrastructure involving approximately 290 small farmers has started
working. Though it was initially subsistence-driven, local markets are now
being serviced. Still with Limpopo, we have covered 550 hectares, which
support around 400 small-scale farmer, by rehabilitating irrigation
infrastructure, which is necessary.

In Mpumalanga we have already secured a market with Coca Cola, where we
sell the Cairn lemon that is grown there, with the help of one commercial
farmer. Work is going on successfully at Ndaya as well as at Makhathini
Flats. We want to believe that the provincial Department of Agriculture in
KwaZulu-Natal is also contributing well to what is important.

The Ministry of Land Affairs has always been worried about what happens
when people are given land by way of compensation. Together with them, we
are successfully engaged in the rehabilitation of water, which will
actually move these people from subsistence to commercial farming.

I'm telling you, hon members, that we are not just looking at the present,
we are also checking whether some of the projects we have undertaken in the
past are not white elephants. With that in mind, we have allocated
municipalities R6,5 million to revitalise some of the projects.

At this point in time I want to thank both the IDT and SA Breweries for
their partnership in the Clean and Green Programme. In the gallery we
actually have people from Grabouw who feel that this programme works very
well for them.

Coming to the budget, for the financial year 2003-04, Public Works is
presenting a budget of R4,47 billion. The provision for land and
accommodation accounts for 86% and the National Public Works Programme for
7% of this budget, thus leaving 7% of our total budget for administration
and other auxiliary associated services.

During the current fiscal year, the department will also facilitate the
planned gradual devolution of budgetary allocations to client departments,
starting with the devolution of rates and taxes in respect of provincial
properties to the provinces. This would be followed by other operational
budgets.

I want to say that without the help of the portfolio committee, a committee
that has played an important guiding role, and without the co-operation of
provincial Ministers, heads of departments and staff, we would not be where
we are. We also want to mention yet again how helpful the MECs have been in
making sure that they don't just attend Minmec meetings, but also make
invaluable contributions, which has added to the building of the department
as you would like to see it. They still have a part to play in the Expanded
Public Works Programme.

A special word of thanks also goes to James Maseko, our new Director-
General, for his approach to management and his determination to deal with
some of the auditing issues that continue to bother us. I do believe that
we shall reap the benefits of his endeavours, coupled with that of the
management and staff of Public Works.

I want to say, without any fear of contradiction, that the tide has turned,
even if it is 45 degrees, and will continue to do so. What remains a
challenge is to keep it flowing in the right direction and making sure that
we carry the constituencies, our people, with us. If we leave them out of
any programmes of development, we shall be behaving like the governments of
old, which gave directions, dreamt overnight as to what they wanted for the
people and went on implementing. We choose, as this Government and as
Public Works, to consult successfully and duly with our people and then go
into operation.

I won't hide the fact that we are still dogged by capacity problems in a
big way. Though local government does train staff, there is a lot of
poaching of the very people that they have trained, which at times leads to
a slowing down in some of the projects that we deal with. I thank you, hon
members. [Applause.]

Inkosi M W HLENGWA: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon Minister of
Public Works, hon Deputy Minister of Public Works, hon Chairperson of
Committees, Chair and your Deputy, hon members of the Portfolio Committee
on Public Works, and hon members of the National Assembly, indeed, this is
an appropriate occasion for me to congratulate Mr James Maseko on his
appointment as Director-General of the Department of Public Works.

We, as the portfolio committee, having engaged with him for a short time,
can confidently say we have every confidence in him. Who else could have
been appointed? What we have realised as members is that sometimes it is
not advantageous to change directors-general, unless it is absolutely
necessary. We have seen that he has joined the department for serious
business.

Let me commence by saying that Kofi Annan, UN Secretary-General, during the
African summit on HIV/Aids, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases in
2001 said, and I quote:


  HIV/Aids takes its biggest toll among young adults, the age group that
  normally produces most and has the main responsibility for rearing the
  next generation.

Today we are debating the Public Works Vote, and some people might think
that what is being quoted is irrelevant to the subject matter under
discussion, forgetting that if people are extinguished from the face of
South Africa by the scourge of HIV/Aids, there will be no Public Works and
its Vote. It is therefore imperative for the Department of Public Works and
the Government to begin, and to be consistent with, the process of
disarming HIV/Aids. That will allow and enable the young adults to honour
their responsibility which, of course, is rearing the next generation.

It has now become common to talk about pushing back the frontiers of
poverty, but the harsh reality is that when people are no more, there will
be no pushing back of the frontiers of poverty. To the Department of Public
Works, the Independent Development Trust, the Construction Industry
Development Board and the Portfolio Committee on Public Works, HIV/Aids is
the worst enemy and is a matter put very high on the agenda.

Recent studies show that the construction industry is under siege from
HIV/Aids, and therefore this is a matter that can no longer be ignored. It
is against this background that the Portfolio Committee on Public Works,
together with various stakeholders, held a workshop on HIV/Aids in the
construction industry. This workshop was held on 25-26 November 2002 and we
hope that the report will be debated in this august House before Parliament
prorogues.

The objectives of the workshop were, inter alia, the following: how to
support rural areas in the fight against HIV/Aids; the challenges facing
the construction industry with regard to HIV/Aids; how to ensure Government
programmes have a strategic response to the pandemic, both internally and
externally; and how stakeholders can begin to have dialogue about the ways
to cope with the disease.

We all know that the aim of Public Works is to provide and manage, in
accordance with prescribed standards and directives, the accommodation,
housing, land and infrastructural needs of national departments, as well as
to render associated and supporting services to manage the poverty
alleviation programmes and to promote the transformation of the
construction industry. For the Department of Public Works to honour and
discharge this challenging obligation, an adequate budget allocation is
fundamental. Yes, I do agree that there has been an increase in the budget,
but, taking cognisance of the fact that this department has a huge
constituency waiting for delivery, a 19,6% increase does not even attempt
to dent significantly the expectations of the people of our country,
especially those in the rural communities and the destitute urban squatter
camps.

In the past years, this department did what it could with the lean budgets,
and one believes that is why the President was prompted to announce the
Expanded Public Works Programme during his state of the nation address on
14 February 2003. Notwithstanding the welcome nature of the said
announcement, the challenge remains with the availability of funds to
honour the Expanded Public Works Programme. It is on this basis that one is
obliged to support any stance that might facilitate approaching Treasury
for funds for the expanded programme which, indeed, all of us desperately
need and deserve.

Let me wind up with the matter which I think all of us wish one day to see
resolved amicably for the benefit of us all. The Community-Based Public
Works Programme is understood to have been earmarked for discontinuation in
the Department of Public Works. Given the extent of poverty in the country,
the phasing-out of poverty relief projects by 2004 raises serious concerns,
notwithstanding the fact that there is a need to review these programmes.
Even if this programme is transferred to the local authority, as was once
suggested, there is a concern that such an undertaking should be
facilitated by the department for a certain period with guidelines and
frameworks given to local authorities so as to make sure that they are
capacitated to handle these programmes successfully.

The question then arises: who else is the local authority, which,
regrettably, is viewed as the lowest of the low? Traditional authorities,
even at the height of apartheid, demonstrated their ability, with no
government budgets in place, to build schools, clinics, crèches, community
halls, first aid stations, etc. The devolution of the Community-Based
Public Works Programme to traditional authorities, and justifiably
implemented with the necessary guidance and framework by the Department of
Public Works whilst in a transitional stage, is not a matter to be decided
upon by the department, since it needs a political decision by the
Government.

In the Limpopo Province, one of the living examples is Kgautswane, a
community consisting of 95 000 people, 19 villages ruled by an Inkosi and
22 headmen. The Kgautswane Community Development Centre was founded by
Clara Masinga who works closely with her Inkosi and the traditional
authority. Other traditional authorities can share experiences with
Kgautswane Community Development Centre if they were to be given a chance
to run the Community-Based Public Works Programme.

As the chairperson of the Public Works Portfolio Committee, I wish to take
this opportunity to thank the hon Minister of Public Works, the hon Deputy
Minister of Public Works and officials of the Department of Public Works
for the healthy working relationship we have had for the past year, and
hope we will carry on this financial year in the same spirit. I also wish
to thank the members of the portfolio committee for the team spirit and
making my work as the chairperson of this committee an enjoyable and
memorable one.

Lastly, I wish to thank the secretary of the portfolio committee, Mr Joey
Leburu, who has worked diligently with the committee and with me in
particular, since I have worked as the chairperson without a personal
assistant. The IFP supports this budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, Ministers and members,
most of the time allocated to me will be used to address the issue of
unemployment. Therefore, my theme for this speech is job creation equals
poverty alleviation.

In my address I will refer to very important findings and proposals by the
Centre for Development and Enterprise. I want to give credit for the
research done by this institution, and hope that Government will find time
to evaluate the findings and will implement at least some of its proposals.
The notion that the proposed Expanded Public Works Programme could be the
magic wand that will substantially impact on or solve our unemployment
problems is a pipe dream. The only solution is the long-term involvement of
the private sector in the form of public-private partnerships.

Voorsitter, die nood is miljoene werksgeleenthede. [Chairperson, what is
needed is millions of job opportunities.]

It has been stated over and over by the DA's spokesperson on finance that
South Africa needs economic growth of at least 5% to 6% per year before we
can make meaningful inroads into dealing with the problems of unemployment,
poverty alleviation, crime and even Aids. For higher growth we need more
fixed investment and an environment that encourages entrepreneurship.
Political and social stability will further help to stimulate economic
growth. The high levels of crime, in many instances caused by the high
levels of unemployment, erode social stability, which contributes to the
loss of skills and entrepreneurial energy.

There was a passionate commitment from the President during his state of
the nation address to the Expanded Public Works Programme. The Minister
must inform us how this commitment is reflected in a specific budget
allocation from Treasury.

If there is no specific allocation to the Department of Public Works for
this programme, I will see it as a blessing in disguise, because the latest
report of the Auditor-General on the state of affairs in the Department of
Public Works is a clear indication that the department cannot even properly
handle the management of the finances of the yearly budget entrusted to it.

I have said during previous budget debates that the situation is
unacceptable. The political responsibility lies with the Minister, and the
President must take a decision on how long he will allow himself to refrain
from taking drastic action.

Die situasie van werkloosheid en gepaardgaande misdaad, ``the terrible
twins'', is uiters kritiek. Byna 8 miljoen Suid-Afrikaners was werkloos in
2001. Van hierdie totaal was byna 6 miljoen tussen die ouderdomme 15 en 34.
Dit is byna die hoogste ter wêreld. Dit is 'n noodtoestand wat
noodmaatreëls verg. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The situation of unemployment coupled with crime, the ``terrible twins'',
is extremely critical. Almost 8 million South Africans were unemployed in
2001. Almost 6 million of this number were between the ages of 15 and 34.
This is almost the highest in the world. It is a state of emergency that
calls for emergency measures.]

We propose that the President of South Africa declares the present level of
unemployment a national disaster. Along with the official declaration of a
national disaster, we propose that the following apply as part of the
proposed national disaster initiative: The initiative must be outside the
ambit of any department; the present labour laws must not apply; it must be
outside the jurisdiction of the Minister of Labour; no trade union must
have the right to organise participants or influence this initiative;
participants who wish to benefit from the jobs offered during these
interventions must sign an undertaking to agree to the abovementioned
rules, and there must be political support out the highest level with
massive monetary intervention by Treasury ...

... die privaatsektor se betrokkenheid moet op 'n vrywillige basis geskied;
befondsing moet vir spesifieke projekte geoormerk word; alle projekte moet
arbeidsintensief wees; huidige konstruksie industrieë mag nie ondermyn word
nie en die vennootskap tussen die publieke- en privaatsektor moet openlik,
eerlik en sonder burokratiese rompslomp wees .  . . . the involvement of
the private sector must take place on a voluntary basis; funding must be
earmarked for specific projects; all projects must be labour-intensive;
current construction industries may not be undermined and the partnership
between the public and private sectors must be open, honest and without
bureaucratic red tape.]

Slogans cannot save the day. We need a massive, urgent and practical
intervention.

Die probleem van misdaad, wat in 'n groot mate 'n uitvloeisel van
werkloosheid is, moet terselfdertyd met noodmaatreëls aangepak word. Die
jongste inisiatiewe van die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit kan met
enkele wysigings 'n belangrike bydrae lewer.

Die belangrikste wysiging is om nie polisierekrute in te stuur in wat
letterlik 'n oorlogsone is nie. Dit kan fataal wees. Laat die rekrute
betrokke raak by gewone polisiëring. Kondig noodtoestande aan in
probleemareas soos die Kaapse Vlakte. Gebruik die derduisende voormalige
SAKK-lede en gee hulle tande om strate en woonbuurte aan ons gemeenskappe
terug te gee.

Hierdie voormalige SAKK-lede is behoorlik opgelei in teeninsurgensie en kan
na 'n relatief kort opknappingskursus in probleemareas ontplooi word.
Minister, die lede sit en wag en is slaggereed. Ons kan nie jong, onervare
rekrute in die misdaadwêreld gebruik waar bendes met baie jare ondervinding
in die onderwêreld en met internasionale konneksies optree nie.

Indien hierdie voormalige lede van die SAKK betrokke raak, bring ons 'n
reaksiemag in wat hulle man kan staan; slaan ons 'n slag teen werkloosheid;
slaan ons 'n slag teen misdaad; bevorder ons 'n positiewe gees in ons reeds
getraumatiseerde gemeenskappe; bevorder ons sosiale stabiliteit en word 'n
gunstige klimaat vir beleggings geskep. Hierdie voormalige SAKK-lede bereid
om besoldiging te ontvang wat van toepassing sal wees op die deelnemers
onder die voorgestelde nasionale ramp inisiatiewe wat deur die President
afgekondig behoort te word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The problem of crime, which is to a great extent a result of unemployment,
must at the same time be tackled with emergency measures. The latest
initiatives of the Minister of Safety and Security can, with a few
amendments, make an important contribution.

The most important amendment would be not to send police recruits into an
area that is literally a war zone. This could be fatal. Let the recruits
become involved in ordinary policing. Proclaim states of emergency in
problem areas such as the Cape Flats. Use the thousands of former members
of the SACC and give them the means to return the streets and
neighbourhoods to our communities.

These former members of the SACC are properly trained in counter-insurgence
and can after a relatively short refresher course be deployed in problem
areas. Minister, the members are sitting and waiting and are ready for
action. We cannot use young, inexperienced recruits in the world of crime
in which gangs with many years of experience in the underworld and with
international connections operate.

If these former members of the SACC become involved, we will bring in a
reactionary force that can hold its own; deal unemployment a blow; deal
crime a blow; promote a positive spirit in our already traumatised
communities; promote social stability and create a climate favourable for
investments. These former members of the SACC are prepared to receive
remuneration that would be applicable to the participants under the
proposed national disaster initiatives that should be announced by the
President.]

We hope that the President will take note of these proposals and discuss it
with his Cabinet colleagues. The time for action is now.

Ons sê baie dankie aan die voorsitter van die portefeuljekomitee. Baie
dankie vir die span wat jy lei en baie dankie vir die vermoë en die
geleenthede wat ons het om polities te verskil, maar nog met mekaar saam te
werk. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee. Thank you very much
for the team that you lead and thank you for the ability and opportunities
that we have to differ politically from one another, but nevertheless still
work with one another. I thank you.]

Mr E M SIGWELA: Hon Chair, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, if there are
any, hon members and the management of the department, I am pleased to
stand here. I hope my Inkosi was not offended when I jumped up first to
come to the front here. He knows how I respect him, how we often share our
experiences of rurality.

Our Government has identified investment in new infrastructure and the
rehabilitation of existing social and physical infrastructure as a priority
over the medium term. The realisation of this objective is one of the line
functions of the Department of Public Works, but because the Government is
not equipped to construct on its own, it has always been a fundamental
prerequisite that there should be a programme that links Government with
the private sector in the construction industry. Hence the Construction
Industry Development Programme under the Construction Industry Development
Board about which I am speaking today.

Through this programme, the Government is able to provide leadership and
create stability in the industry in the interest of best practice,
sustainable development and the opening up of our economy, giving an
opportunity for the economic mainstreaming of emerging contractors and the
creation of more permanent jobs, thereby pushing back the frontiers of
poverty.

The steps that Public Works has taken towards the stabilisation of the
construction industry must be acknowledged and admired, starting with the
White Paper subtitled ``Creating an enabling environment for
reconstruction, growth and development in the construction industry'',
which was launched in 1999, through to the passing of eight Acts in 2000,
six of which create a regulatory framework for the built environment
professions. In addition to these Acts, there are two other Acts which
provide a framework for the co-ordination and stabilisation of the
construction industry.
One of these is the Construction Industry Development Board Act, which
provides for the establishment of the Construction Industry Development
Board in order to provide leadership in the establishment, co-ordination
and implementation of an integrated strategy for reconstruction, growth and
development of the industry through, among other measures, the setting up
of uniform best practice standards and guidelines; the development of the
emerging contractor sector; the promotion of skills development and labour
absorption into the industry; procurement and delivery management reform;
setting up of safety, health and environmental standards; the promotion of
uniform application of policy, and, with regard to emerging contractor
development, the promotion of mechanisms aimed at supporting access to
opportunity, information, finance and credit. I will come back to this
matter of emerging contractors later.

The other, the eighth Act, is the Council for the Built Environment Act,
which is another piece of legislation which has made it possible for the
hon Minister of Public Works to create dynamic communication between
Government and the built environment professions. This will also enable the
monitoring of transformation within each of the professions themselves.

Mhlalingaphambili, ngoku makhe ndibuyele kumcimbi weekontraka ezisakhulayo.
Iingxelo zeSebe leMisebenzi kaRhulumente zisixelela ukuba olu xanduva
lweekontraka ezisakhulayo luqwalaselwe ngokubanzi kangangokuba ukususela
kunyaka ka-1999/2000, libe nokuseka iiofisi ezinenkqubo yokunceda ezi
kontraka sithetha ngazo. Ezi ofisi zisekwe kumaziko olawulo lwesebe
eRhawutini yaye xa ndithi eRhawutini ndithetha iJohannesburg,
eBloemfontein, eKimberley, eKapa, eBhayi naseThekwini. Akhona ke
namalungiselo okwenza lo msebenzi eziwenzayo kwezinye iindawo
ezinjengeNelspruit, eMmabatho, eMtata nasePholokwane.

Iingxelo zesebe zithi umsebenzi wezi ofisi kukuba likhonkco phakathi kwalo
lona isebe eli kunye neekontraka ezisakhulayo. Kulapho ezi nkontraka
zingabhalisa khona zaziwe ukuba zikho. Kulapho zifumana khona amacebiso
malunga nendlela iSebe leMisebenzi kaRhulumente elilawula ngayo iikontraki.
Kulapho zicetyiswa khona ngenkxaso yemali kakhulu.

Kambe ke Mhlalingaphambili obekekileyo namalungu ahloniphekileyo, siyazi
ukuba eli lizwe lethu likhulu kakhulu kwaye asithethi ngabantu abahlala
kwezi dolophu zinezi ofisi kuphela. Umntu ohlala eMzimkhulu, okanye phaya
eThabatshitsha phaya kwiintaba zoLundi eMt Fletcher, umzekelo kunzima ukuba
azi ukuba kukho iofisi eseBhayi angabhalisa kuyo ishishini lakhe
elinxulumene nokwakhiwa kwezindlu okanye indlela. Mhlawumbi lo mntu uthutha
impahla, mhlawumbi wenza izitena nezi zinto zibekwa ecaleni kwendlela.
Ingaba iSebe liyise iso na loo meko? Iyabuleleka yona into yokuba abantu
bezidina ngokukokwabo ukuba babhalise ngoba ke kwiingxelo esizifumanayo
ukusuka ku-1999 ukuya kutsho ku-2002 zisoloko zikhonkqoza zisixelela
ngamanani abhalisileyo. Into ekufuneka siyiqonde kukuba ukubhalisa nje
kodwa akuzisi kutya etafileni, kungezisi zimpahla zakunxiba, akuzisi
zingubo zakulala. Into ezisa ezo zinto ngumsebenzi. Kulapho ke uvuthondaba
kuphuhliso lwabakhi abasakhulayo lulele khona.

Xa ndigoduka ngemoto ndisiya ekhaya phakathi kwabaxhasi bam (constituency),
ndiyathanda ukuthi xa ndidlula eBhayi phaya ngaseCoega ndimise. Ndibona
oogandaganda beentlobo ngeentlobo. Ndibona iitraki ezimithamo ngemithamo.
Ndibona kuvela izakhiwo zokuhlala nezokushishina. Ndibona kuvel 'iindlela.
Umbuzo endiba nawo uthi: Ingaba zingaphi iikontraka ezisakhulayo kolu
lwakhiwo luqhubekayo? Andithethi ke ndakufika eCala. Ndiye ndimise ecaleni
phezu kwentaba ngoba ilali yam iphakathi kweentaba. Ndiye ndijonge amaqolo
ebekade ekhona ebebangela ukuba uthi uhamba ngemoto ungayazi into eza
kuvela ngaphaya. Asukile. Aqhushumbiswe ngedamanethi hayi le yesabotage.
Kangangokuba ndidla ngokuthi ebantwini, umntu othi akayiboni into eyenziwa
nguRhulumente we-ANC mbuze ukuba ziyephi na ezi ntaba bezikade zilapha
ngoba wonke lo mhlaba ududulelwa kumathambeka angezantsi kuvele amathafa
amatsha. Ziyephi ezi ntaba? Kambe ke umbuzo wona usekhona. Ingaba xa
sithetha ngeCala - ngokungaphandle koMnumzana uMakwethu, uMnumzana
uSipeliti noNomonde Thukani - zingaphi ezinye iikontraka ezisakhulayo
ezisebenza phaya?

Lo mcimbi ndikhe ndawusa kumalungu ekomiti aphaya ephondweni, ndabathundeza
ukuba bazame ukuya bayilandela le ndaba. Kuhle kum, ndiye ndichulumance
umphefumlo wam wonwabe xa ndiva kuholoza ingwenya, inqanqaza inqunqud'
inyengane. [Kwahlekwa.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, now I would like to go back to the issue of emerging
construction companies. Reports from the Department of Public Works tell us
that the responsibility of emerging construction companies is being
carefully monitored in as much as in the financial year 1999/2000, it was
able to establish offices that would assist such companies. These offices
have been placed in administrative centres of the department in Gauteng and
when I say that I mean Johannesburg, Bloemfontein, Kimberley, Cape Town,
Port Elizabeth and Durban. There are plans to extend their work to other
places such as Nelspruit, Mmabatho, Umtata and Pholokwane.

Reports from the department say that the function of these offices is to
maintain a link between the department and these emerging construction
companies. That is where these companies can register and be in the
department's database. That is where they receive advice about how the
Department of Public Works manages construction. That is where they receive
information about where they could get financial assistance.

Chairperson, however, we know that this country is vast and we are not only
talking about people who live in the areas where the offices have been
placed. A person living at Mzimkhulu, or at Thabatshitsha in Mt Fletcher
for example may not know that there is an office at which he or she can
register his or her housing development or road construction business in
Port Elizabeth. Maybe this person has a removal business or makes bricks. I
would like to know whether the department has noticed that. It is not good
enough that people register their businesses as we hear from reports
compiled between 1999 to 2002 that quite a considerable number have
registered. What we need to understand is that registering only will not
put food on the table. It does not bring clothes to wear nor does it give
blankets. That is where the focus on emerging construction companies should
be.

When I go to my constituency, I like stopping at Coega near Port Elizabeth.
I have noticed a number of different heavy vehicles used in construction. I
see trucks carrying volumes and volumes of load. I see houses and/or flats
and business sites. I see roads. The question I usually ask myself is: `How
many emerging construction companies got contracts and are participating in
this construction work?' One finds a lot of them at Cala. I often stop on
top of the mountain, because my village lies between the mountains and
admire the condition of the roads now because before you would just drive
and not know what lies ahead. There are no boulders or dongas anymore.
Dynamite and not sabotage blew them up. There is so much that I usually say
to people that one should ask a person who says he or she cannot see what
this ANC-led Government is doing where the mountains and hills have gone to
because there are new fields. Where have the mountains gone to now? The
question, however, remains. When we talk about the town of Cala, besides Mr
Makwethu, Mr Sipeliti and Nomonde Thukani, how many other construction
companies are there?

I have taken this matter to members of the committee in the province and
asked them to follow up on it. I feel very happy when I can hear animals
making their sounds. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Mrs T L P NWAMITWA-SHILUBANA: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister
and hon members, I am speaking in support of this Vote and wish to
congratulate the hon Minister and her department on the work they have done
up to now. It may, however, really be necessary to evaluate the further
allocation of funds in areas where serious shortfalls could impact on
delivery and in particular those cases where it will affect local
authorities or hamper the continuation of the Community-Based Public Works
Programme.

The Community-Based Public Works Programme has delivered extremely positive
results to the communities in the deep rural areas. It has assisted the
poorest of the poor in their plight to become economically active, to learn
skills and even obtain industry-approved certificates equipping them to
qualify for further employment in construction-related activities.

It has also provided training to local people to manage assets and
activities performed from directly productive infrastructure created
through this programme. Market stalls with production areas or workshops
and the much larger community production centres from which several
communities benefit are examples of this.

We have been told that only in the course of the 2002-03 financial year,
626 community assets have been created - these are facilities which were
never there before and that have improved the quality of life of the
community. It was also mentioned that close to 18 000 employment
opportunities were created, of which more than 9 000 went to women, almost
8 600 to young people and 429 to people with disabilities. In all respects,
I think this is a remarkable achievement of delivery, taking into account
that co-ordination is taking place throughout all levels of government, as
well as through traditional leadership and other private sector and NGO
entities' activities.

The Community-Based Public Works Programme has supported the Integrated
Sustainable Rural Development Programme since its inception. In fact, the
Community-Based Public Works Programme was already operational in ll of the
13 ISRDP nodal areas before they were announced. The contribution made by
the Community-Based Public Works Programme has resulted in aspects of the
project management system being utilised in the implementation of the ISRDP
and in a district information system that is currently being piloted for
the ISRDP nodes, which is based on the Community-Based Public Works
Programme's monitoring management information system.

This year, Public Works has been identified as a lead department for the
job creation component of the ISRDP implementation plan. The key
responsibilities for the department include ensuring that anchor projects
in the nodes have a job creation dimension and that potential funders of
the job creation initiatives are attracted to the nodes and also ensuring
that sector departments participate in the infrastructure development plan
review process.

In the light of our oversight role in the portfolio committee, however, I
have to emphasise that a measure of concern is experienced when considering
that some implementing capacity may be lost due to the transfer of this
programme to the Department of Provincial and Local Government. It should
be ensured that the implementing agents and delivery structures continue to
be involved and further engaged in building capacity at local level. Public
Works has set a track record of 100% expenditure on this poverty
alleviation and job creation programme of Government that we would not like
to see filtering away.

In this instance, I would like to suggest that not only the departments
involved but also the respective portfolio committees work closely together
to ensure that delivery to the communities in our poverty-stricken areas
indeed continues at its maximum potential, and that justice is indeed done
to these communities.
Nkulukumba Muthsami wa Xitulu, Ndzi pfumeleri ku hoyozela Ndzawulo ya
Mintirho eka ntirho wo tumbuluxa miako ya laha vaaka-tiko va kumaka ku
pfuneka kona ekusuhi na laha va tshamaka kona. Ku kuma ku kumeka ka
swilaveko swa mfumo endhzawini yin'we. Hi twile eka ti-imbhizo leswaku
leswi hi leswi vanhu va lavaka swona. Loko ku ri na miako ya laha vaaka-
tiko va kumaka ku pfuneka, vanhu a va ha lahlekeriwi hi timali na minkarhi
ya vona ku famba mimpfhuka yo leha ku lava ku pfuneka. Xikombiso, laha mina
ndzi humaka kona, vanhu va pfuka na mpundzu hi awara ya mune va khandziya
swibebe ku landza mathekisi, hikuva mathekisi lawa a ya fiki lomu va
tshamaka kona hikuva na mapatu a ma kahle. Va famba hi mathekisi pfhuka wo
leha ku ringana 24/wa tikilomitara ku ya ekusuhi eka xidorobana lexi vange
i Tzaneen, ku ya folela ku kuma mapasi, tisitifikheti ta ku beburiwa na ta
rifu, timali to wundla vana na swin'wana na swin'wana. Va tlhela va vuya va
nga pfunekanga hi ku leha ka tilayini. Kasi loko swilo leswi hinkwaswo
swiri endzhawini yin'we ku fana na kliniki, poso, Miako leyi vaaka-tiko va
pfunekaka eka yona, vanhua va ta oloveriwa.

Namunthla, ndzi pfumeli, ndzi navela ku tshikelela leswaku mfumo wu
seketela hi swa-timali no yisa emahlweni ka Miako leyi vaaka-tiko va
pfuniwaka kona. Leswi swi komba hakunene-nene leswaku mfumo lowu
rhangeriweke hi African National Congress wu yingisela swilaveko swa vanhu.
Ndzhaku ku vuyela singe.

Eku heteleleni, ndzi navela ku vulavula hi xiyenge xin'wana lexi vuriwaka
vuhlayiseki bya tiko na tindhawu ta vuhlayiseki (CSP). Lexi hi xin'wana xa
swikombiso swa mintirho ya Ndzawulo ya Mintirho, ku endla leswaku vanhu va
kuma ku pfuneka eka miako leyi ku endliwaka swilo hinkwaswo kona. Laha
tindzawulo tin'wana ti hlanganaka kumbe ku hlanganisa mavoko ya vona ku
pfuna ku aka tiko, hi ku landza leswi hi nge, i Mafambisele ya Rixaka yo
Sivela Vugevenga na RDP. Tisentara ta muxaka lowu, ti pfuna vanhu hi
swilaveko swa vona swo hambana hambana, ku fana na vuhlayiseki, timhaka ta
ku wundliwa ka vana na swin'wana. Swi tlhela swi hlohlotela mahanyelo
la'manene na vutshila eka va-aka tiko.

Tindzawulo hinkwato leti, ti hlanganiweke eka ndzhawu leyi yi ri yin'we, ti
tlhela ti pfuneka hi ku kuma tindzhawu to tirhela kona ku pfuna vanhu
(accommodation). Tin'wana ta tindzhawu leti, ti kumeka le eNqekhane,
Galeshewe, Bloemfontein, Thabong, Khutsong na le Tshidilamolomo. Ndzi
navela ku mi nyika xikombiso hi sentara liya ya Tshidilamolomo, leyi yi
fanaka na tona hinkwato le'tin'wana le'ti nga boxiwa laha.

Maphorisa hi vona swirhanga-mahlweni eka ku va lava tirhisanaka swin'we eka
Ndzawulo ya Mintirho ya Rixaka. Laha va joyiniwa hi tindzawulo to fana na
Vululami, Rihanyu, Nhlayiseko na Vami-ntirho ya Makhotso, hikokwalaho hi
nge, ndhzawu yo tani yi pfuna hi ku angarhela ku lwa na vugevenga, ta
Rihanyu, Maphorisa na swin'wana. Hi leswi hi swi vulaka ku hluvukisiwa na
ku antswisiwa ka ku fikeleriwa ka mintirho. Mfumo wu ya eka vanhu leswaku
vaaka-tiko va kuma ku pfuneka.

Kwale Tshidilamolomo, ku na patu leri akiwaka na magezi lawa ya phakeriwaka
vanhu. Vanhu va ka hina i khale va xaniseka hi vusweti. Hikwalaho hi nge,
miako ya laha vanhu va pfuniwaka kona yo fana na leyi yi endla leswaku
vanhu va ku, phulani byi hola. Inkomu. (Translation of xiTsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, allow me to congratulate the Department of Public Works on
the good work of developing the structures where communities are able to
get assistance nearer to where they stay. They are able to get Government
assistance in one place. We heard from the Imbizo that this is what people
want. When there are structures where the community is able to get
assistance, people do not waste their money and time walking long distances
seeking assistance. For instance, where I come from people wake up at four
o'clock in the morning to catch bakkies to go and wait for taxis because
taxis do not reach where they live due to bad roads. They travel for about
24 km to the nearest town named Tzaneen, to go and queue for ID books,
birth certificates, death certificates, child grants, and so on. They even
come back without getting any assistance because of the long queues. If all
these things like clinics and post offices were in one place where the
community could get help, things would be easier for them.

Today, allow me to insist that the Government should support, fund and
develop centres where the communities can be assisted and show that the ANC-
led Government listens to the needs of the people. Forward we go.

In conclusion I would like to talk about a section relating to security in
the country and the places of protection (CSP). This is one of the examples
of the Department of Labour ensuring that people are assisted in the
multipurpose centres where various departments join hands or work together
to provide services to build the nation, through the National Crime
Prevention Strategy and the RDP. These types of centres help people in
different ways, such as by providing protection, child grants and so on.
They also develop and create good behaviour among the community.

These department have joined forces to work together and they even provide
accommodation to help people. Some of these centres are found in Nqekhane,
Galeshewe, Bloemfontein, Thabong, Khutsong and Tshidilamolomo. I wish to
quote the example of the centre in Tshidilamolomo, which is the same as
others that were mentioned.

The police are the leaders in working together with the national Department
of Public Works. They are joined by the departments of Justice, Health,
Defence and Correctional Services and that is why we say that a centre like
this will help in general to combat crime, improve health and provide
police services, etc. This is what is called for to promote development and
sustain the progress achieved through this work. The Government goes to the
people so that the people may get help.

At Tshidilamolomo roads are being built and electricity is being supplied
to people. Our people were suffering and were living in poverty for a long
time, and that is why we say these centres should let people enjoy life.]

Mnr J SCHIPPERS: Voorsitter, onderbefondsing van die Departement van
Openbare Werke is seker die hoofkenmerk van hierdie begrotingspos.
Administrasie word met R27 miljoen, voorsiening van akkommodasie en grond
met R470 miljoen en die Nasionale Openbare Werke-program met R98 miljoen
vir 'n totaal van R592 miljoen onderbefonds. Geen wonder dat hierdie
departement gebrandmerk word as die departement wat nie dienste kan lewer
nie.

Voorsitter, die doel van die Departement van Openbare Werke is om
voorsiening te maak vir akkommodasie, behuising en grond en om in
infrastruktuurbehoeftes van die nasionale departemente te voorsien. Hierdie
funksie moet goed vergelyk met die posisie in ontwikkelende lande. 'n
Vergelykende studie sal bepaal waar Suid-Afrika se Departement van Openbare
Werke op hierdie spektrum inpas.

Jaar ná jaar verskyn die sleutel-strategiese beleidsontwikkeling in
operasionele gebiede op die doelwitdokument van die departement, maar
realiseer nie op die korttermyn en ook nie op die mediumtermyn nie. Daar is
geen rendement op die departement se eiendomsportefeulje ten opsigte van
die optimalisering van funksies, ekonomiese en sosiale verpligtinge nie. In
die departement se eie woorde, moet daar nou 'n hersiening van toepaslike
organisatoriese strukture, vermoëns en sisteme kom.

Jaar ná jaar kla die lede van die departement oor die fisiese toestand in
die parlementêre dorpe - Akasia, Laborie en Pelikan Park - en daar is net
nie 'n verbetering nie. Noudat daar 'n nuwe direkteur-generaal in die
departement aangestel is, vertrou ons dat dieselfde klagtes nie volgende
jaar weer gelys sal word nie. Ses-en-tagtig persent van die begroting,
naamlik R3,86 biljoen, is vir die program bewillig en die Nuwe NP glo dat
die fondse beskikbaar is om 'n verskil te maak.

Die tweede doelstelling van die departement is om ondersteuningsdienste in
terme van hul statutêre mandaat te lewer. Onderbefondsing dra daartoe by
dat die departement nie sy verpligtinge ten opsigte van bruikhuur,
dienstegeld en belasting aan kliënt-departemente betyds aan die plaaslike
regerings kan oorbetaal nie. Indien munisipale dienste aan hospitale, skole
en ander openbare fasiliteite waarvoor die departement verantwoordelik is
gesny moet word, sal dit katastrofiese gevolge vir die instellings en die
land se beeld tot gevolg hê. Dit wil dus voorkom asof die R17 miljoen wat
vir hierdie program bewillig is, nie voldoende is om alle departementele
verpligtinge na te kom nie.

Voorsitter, program 3 neem R321 miljoen oftewel 7,2% van die begroting om
die derde doelwit van die departement te verwesenlik, naamlik 'n
armoedeverligtingsprogram wat ook daarop fokus om transformasie te
bewerkstellig. In hierdie edele doelwit probeer die departement
werkskepping en kapasiteitsbou deur 'n gemeenskapsgebaseerde openbare werke-
program te lewer. 'n Sterk faset is die basis vir volhoubare landelike
ontwikkeling. In hierdie opsig moet die departement geloof word vir die
suksesvolle projekte wat in Oos-Kaap, KwaZulu-Natal en Mpumalanga geloods
is. Dit moet verder die grondslag vir ontwikkeling vorm en behoort in al
die ander provinsies versnel te word.

Om meer werkgeleenthede te skep en sneller transformasie aan te help
behoort die departement op 'n vergrote of uitgebreide gemeenskapsgebaseerde
openbarewerkeprogram af te stuur. Maar weens onderbefondsing kom die
program en die departement nie tot sy reg nie, aangesien daar uit 'n bedrag
van R420 miljoen wat in die begrotingproses aangevra is, slegs R322 miljoen
toegeken is.

Hier wil ek aansluit by 'n verslag wat deur die Sentrum vir Ontwikkeling en
Ondernemings op 1 April 2003 uitgebring is. Dié verslag is gebaseer op 'n
ondersoek oor 18 maande deur prof Peter Delius aan die Universiteit van die
Witwatersrand en Simon Dagut wat 30 individuele kundiges gespreek en twee
werkswinkels oor die onderwerp gehou het. Inleidend sê die verslag Suid-
Afrika se grootste uitdaging is om werkloosheid effektief aan te spreek.
Volgens die verslag is daar 7,8 miljoen Suid-Afrikaners wat nie 'n vaste
inkomste het nie, en 5,6 miljoen van hulle is persone tussen 15 en 34 jaar
oud. Ek stem met hulle saam as hulle sê dat werkloosheid 'n vermorsing van
menslike potensiaal en investering in onderwys is.

Die ontevredenheid onder die werkloses neem toe en kan politieke
stabiliteit in die land bedreig. Die oplossing lê daarin dat 'n strategie
van grootskaalse arbeidsintensiewe openbare werke 'n betekenisvolle bydrae
kan lewer die werkloosheid te verminder.
Die verslag beveel aan dat vennootskappe tussen openbare en privaatsektore
gesluit moet word. Om dit te kan doen beveel hulle aan, dat hoëvlak
politieke ondersteuning essensieel is, dat arbeidsintensiewe openbare werke
programme op 'n massiewe skaal bedryf moet word, elke kenmerk van die
program moet so gestruktureerd wees dat die maksimum van die privaatsektor
betrokke moet wees, loonstrukture moet nie hoog wees nie en die program
moet so gedryf word deur die toegewysde fondse wat hulle kry. Verder moet
die kontrak duidelik, bindend en afdwingbaar wees, en die program moet nie
die bestaande konstruksiesektor of die konvensionele infrastruktuur ten
opsigte van besteding knou nie. Op dié wyse kan ook transformasie in die
konstruksiebedryf effektief en doelgerig aangespreek word.

Die Minister en departement moet gelukgewens word met die feit dat die raad
vir die konstruksie-industrie in plek is en reeds baie belangrike werk
doen, die Onafhanklike Ontwikkelingstrust is betrokke by die provinsiale en
nasionale ontwikkelingsprogramme, die werkswinkel oor MIV/Vigs in Durban op
25 en 26 November 2002 was 'n belangrike mylpaal en ek glo dat die
doelwitte wat daar gestel is, behaal sal word met 'n toegewyde Minister en
direkteur-generaal. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J SCHIPPERS: Chairperson, underfunding of the Department of Public
Works is probably the primary characteristic of this Vote. Administration
is underfunded by R27 million, provision of accommodation and land by R470
million and the National Public Works Programme by R98 million, for a total
of R592 million. It is no wonder that this department is branded as the
department which cannot deliver services.

The object of the Department of Public Works is to make provision for
accommodation, housing and land and to meet the infrastructural needs of
the national departments. This function must compare favourably with the
position in developing countries. A comparative study will determine where
South Africa's Department of Public Works fits in on this spectrum.

Year after year the key strategic policy development in operational areas
appears in the department's document on objectives, but it is not realised
in the short term and also not in the medium term. There is no return on
the department's property portfolio with regard to the optimalisation of
functions, economic and social obligations. In the department's own words,
there must now be a review of appropriate organisational structures,
abilities and systems.

Year after year the members of the department complain about the physical
condition of the parliamentary villages - Acacia Park, Laboria Park and
Pelican Park - and there simply is no improvement. Now that a new director-
general has been appointed in the department, we trust that the same
complaints will not be listed again next year. Eight-six per cent of the
budget, namely R3,86 billion, has been voted for the programme and the New
NP believes that the funding is available to make a difference.

The second objective of the department is to render support services in
terms of their statutory mandate. Underfunding contributes to the
department not being able to pay its obligations with regard to leases,
service fees and taxes to client departments to the local authorities
timeously. If municipal services to hospitals, schools and other public
facilities for which the department is responsible, have to be cut, this
will have catastrophic consequences for the institutions and the country's
image.

It would therefore appear that the R17 million voted for this programme is
not sufficient to meet all departmental obligations.

Programme 3 takes R321 million, or 7,2% of the budget, to realise the third
objective of the department, namely a poverty alleviation programme which
also focuses on achieving transformation. In this noble objective the
department is attempting to deliver job creation and capacity-building by
way of a community-based public works programme. A strong facet is the
basis for sustainable rural development. In this regard the department must
be praised for the successful projects launched in the Eastern Cape,
KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga. This should furthermore form the foundation
for development and should be expedited in all the other provinces.

In order to create more job opportunities and facilitate faster
transformation, the department should aim for an enlarged or extended
community-based public works programme. But due to underfunding, the
programme and the department do not come into their own, as, from an amount
of R420 million requested in the budgeting process, only R322 million has
been allocated.

Here I want to link up with a report released by the Centre for Development
and Enterprise on 1 April 2003. This report is based on an investigation
over 18 months by Prof Peter Delius of the University of the Witwatersrand
and Simon Dagut, who spoke to 30 individual experts and held two workshops
on the subject. By way of introduction the report says that South Africa's
greatest challenge is to address unemployment effectively. According to the
report, 7,8 million South Africans do not have a fixed income, and 5,6
million of them are between the ages of 15 and 34 years. I agree with them
when they say that unemployment is a waste of human potential and
investment in education.

The dissatisfaction among the unemployed is increasing and can threaten
political stability in the country. The solution lies in the fact that a
strategy of large-scale labour-intensive public works can make a meaningful
contribution to reduce unemployment.

The report recommends that partnerships must be concluded between the
public and private sectors. In order to be able to do that they recommend
that high-level political support is essential; labour-intensive public
works programmes must be managed on a massive scale; every characteristic
of the programme must be structured in such a way that the private sector
is maximally involved; wage structures must not be high and the programme
must be driven by the allocated funds it receives. Furthermore, the
contract must be clear, binding and enforceable and the programme must not
hamper the existing construction sector or the conventional infrastructure
with regard to spending. In this way transformation in the construction
industry can also be effectively and purposefully addressed.

The Minister and the department must be congratulated on the fact that the
construction industry board is in place and has already done very important
work, the Independent Development Trust is involved in the provincial and
national development programmes, and the workshop on HIV/Aids in Durban on
25 and 26 November 2002 was an important milestone and I believe the
objectives set there will be met with a dedicated Minister and director-
general. I thank you.]
Nkskz A N SIGCAWU: Mhlalingaphambili, Sekela-Mongameli, amalungu ePalamente
kunye noluntu ngokubanzi oluhloniphekileyo, oluze kuzimase ngethuba
lentetho yoMphathiswa, ndizele yimincili engazenzisiyo kukufumana eli thuba
lokuba ndiphose amazwi ngegalelo likaRhulumente kumba wokuphucula
amakomkhulu eekumkani zezwe lakowethu.

Ndimothulela umnqwazi uMphathiswa uNomzamo Stella Sigcau ngokuqalisa iphulo
lokuvuselela amakomkhulu. Ndibamba ngazo zombini kuMongameli wethu uThabo
Mbeki ngokukhuthaza ukubuyiswelwa kwesidima seenkosi kwinkqubo yohlaziyo
lwe-Afrika. Ndithi: Maz' enethole, mzukulwana kaMbeki. Ungadinwa nangomso.
Ukwanda kwaliwa ngumthakathi.

Iinkosi zemvelo zinomlandu kwezopolitiko kwezokuhlala, ezokuhlaziya ubuntu
babantu nakumcelimngeni wokuqhawula amatyathanga enkqubo yocalucalulo,
kwaye oko kunyanzelisa ukuba iinkokheli zemveli zitsale ngamxhel' omnye
neenkokheli ezenyulwe yintando yesininzi. URhulumente uyiqonda
ngokupheleleyo le nyaniso, kungoko kukho le nkqubo yokuhlaziywa
kwamakomkhulu nokubuyisela iinkosi isidima, esasijongelwe phantsi
ngoorhulumente wamadlagusa phantsi kombuso wocalucalulo.

Sokhumbula ukuba iinkokeli zemvelo zizo ezakhokele abantu bazo kwiimfazwe
zokuqala zokukhusela umhlaba kubaphangi base Ntshonalanga. Eyokugqibela
kwezomfazwe zokukhusela inkululeko yabantu abamnyama yimfazwe kaBhambata
ngo1906. Ekusekweni kwe-ANC ngo1912 bezikho iinkosi zemveli.

Ndivumeleni ndithethe ngababantwana bomthonyama. Abathi bazenza idini
lokulwela amalungelo ethu. Iphulo lokuvuselela amakomkhulu apha eMzantsi
Afrika lasungulwa nguMphathiswa weMisebenzi yoLuntu, uNkzs Stella Sigcau,
ngomnyaka we2000 no 2001. Eli galelo leSebe leMisebenzi yoLuntu kwinkqubo
yophuhliso libizwa ngelokuba lilima. Ilima linkqenkqeza phambili
ekugxotheni ikati eziko phaya ezilalini. Ilima liyinxalenye yenkqubo
yophuhliso kaRhulumente ebizwa ngelokuba luphuhliso oludibeneyo
nolungapheliyo. Asixhenxe amakomkhulu ahlaziyiweyo phantsi kwenkqubo
yelima.

Imali esetyenzisiweyo ukwakha amakomkhulu ukususela kunyaka u2000 ukuya
ku2003 ngama-R34,6 yezigidi. Inkqubo yokuhlaziya amakomkhulu iphinde yakha
ii-ofisi zoondlunkulu. Ii-ofisi zondlunkulu zisetyenziswa ekuphuhliseni
inkqubo yoomama kumakomkhulu. Uphuhliso kwii-ofisi zika kumkani uSandile
eMngqesha ludle iR5,2 yezigidi; uphuhliso kwii-ofisi zika Kumkani
uXolilizwe ludle iR9,4 yezigidi; uphuhliso kwii-ofisi zika kumkani
uThandizulu eQawukeni ludle iR5 yezigidi.

Amabini amakomkhulu asele egqityiwe avulwe ngoSeptemba wonyaka u2001
nangoMeyi wonyaka u2003. Amabini avulwe nguSekela Mongameli uMnu Zuma.
Amakomkhulu asecicini lokugqitywa ngala: uphuhliso lwee-ofisi zebhotwe
eQamata ludle R5,4 yezigidi. Uphuhliso kwii-ofisi zebhotwe eNyandeni ludle
R5,3 yezigidi. Kuhlahlo-mali lonyaka u2003 ukuya ku2004 kuza kuchitwa iR5
yezigidi.

Malunga nokuqalisa ukuhlaziya eMpumalanga, kuhlaziywa amakomkhulu kakumkani
Mabena nokumkani Mayisha. Uhlaziyo eLimpopo luxhomekeke kwiziphumo zengxoxo
phakathi kwenkulumbuso yephondo kunye neNdlu yeeNkosi zeMvelo
ngokuphathelele kwinkqubo yamakomkhulu ase Limpopo. Intsebenziswano
yeenkosi zemvelo nooceba kuburhulumente bendawo benza umsebenzi wokuhlaziya
amakomkhulu ube lula. Uxanduva lokukhusela nokuzigcina ezi zakhiwo
zisemgangathweni luxhomekeke kurhulumente wephondo, kwiinkosi, nooceba
nabantu ngokubanzi.

Uhlaziyo lwamakomkhulu lwenza iinkonzo zika Rhulumente zifikelele lula
ezilalini. Ngexesha lohlaziyo abantu baxhamla kumathuba emisebenzi,
ngakumbi oomama kunye nolutsha. Abantu abaxhamle kumathuba emisebenzi
ngamawaka amathathu namakhulu amabini neshumi nethoba,3 219. Ezinye zezi
zakhiwo ziza kusetyenziswa ngabantu kwimicimbi yenkqubela phambili,
ushishino nezokhenketho.

Xa amakhosi enikwa isidima kuye kuthi nabantu babo babonakale ukuba
asingabo abafokazana. Kuyacaca ngokwe kati emhlophe ehlungwini ukuba ikamva
lobomi obungcono kumntu wonke lisezandleni zethu. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs A N SIGCAWU: Chairperson, Deputy President, members of Parliament and
hon members of the community which came to lend support on this occasion of
the Minister's speech, I am filled with genuine joy for the opportunity I
have been given to talk about Government's contribution to the improvement
of the great places of the kings and of our country.

I take my hat off to Minister Nomzamo Stella Sigcau for initiating a
campaign of refurbishing the great places. I am grateful to President Thabo
Mbeki for encouraging the restoration of the dignity of kings in the
programmes of the African Renaissance. I say: I am grateful, grandson of
Mbeki. Bear with us when we come for more. Thank you for your kind help.

The traditional leaders have a background in politics, social matters and
revival of our ubuntu, as well as in terms of the challenge to break the
system of discrimination which compelled traditional leaders to pull
together with the democratically elected leaders. The Government fully
understands this truth. That is why this programme of the refurbishment for
the great places and the restoration of the dignity that the Afrikaner
government looked down upon is in place.

We will remember that the traditional leaders were the ones who led their
people in the early wars to protect the land from the plunderers of the
West. The last such war defending the freedom of the black people was the
Bhambata war of 1906. When the ANC was formed in 1912 traditional leaders
were around.

Allow me to talk about the children of the soil who laid down their lives,
fighting for our rights. The campaign to refurbish the great places here in
South Africa was initiated by the Minister of Public Works, Ms Stella
Sigcau, in 2000 and in 2001. This contribution by the Department of Public
Works to the development programme is called ``Ilima''. The Ilima campaign
is leading the eradication of hunger in the villages. The Ilima campaign is
part of Government's developmental programme called ``Integrated and
Sustainable Development''. Seven great places have been refurbished under
the Ilima campaign.

The amount of money expended on the building of the great places from 2000
until 2003 is R34,6 million. The refurbishment programmes also catered for
the building of head offices. The head offices are utilised in the
development of the programmes of women at the great places. The development
of the offices of King Sandile in Mngqesha cost R5,2 million; the
development of the offices of King Xolilizwe cost R9,4 million; the
development of the offices of Thandizulu in Qawukeni cost R5 million.

The two great places that have been completed had opening ceremonies in
September 2001 and May 2003 respectively. Two of them were opened at a
ceremony by the Deputy President, Mr Zuma. The great places that are
nearing completion are the following: The development of the offices of the
Qamata great place cost R5,4 million. Development at the Nyandeni great
place cost R5,3 million. An amount of R5 million will be spent out of the
2003-04 budget.

With regard to the refurbishment of the great places in Mpumalanga, King
Mabhena and King Mayisha's places are being attended to. Refurbishment in
Limpopo depends on the outcome of the discussions between the premier of
the province and the House of Traditional Leaders, regarding the programmes
of the Limpopo great places. The co-operation of traditional leaders,
councillors in local government, makes the work of refurbishing great
places easy. The responsibility for protecting and keeping these buildings
in good condition lies with the provincial government, the king,
councillors and the public in general.

The refurbishment of palaces creates accessibility to Government on the
part of people who live in rural areas. During refurbishment people get an
opportunity to be employed, particularly women and the youth. The number of
people who have benefited up to now is 3 219. Some of these buildings will
be used by people for development-focused activities, business and tourism.

If the kings are given respect, normally their subjects are also seen as
people who are not just nonentities. It is abundantly clear that a future
involving a better life for all is in our own hands. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you, Chairperson, hon members,
in supporting Minister Sigcau in the areas of prestige accommodation and
other tasks assigned to me, I wish to express my appreciation for her
capable leadership, her dedication towards making an improvement in
people's lives and also her continued strength as an exemplary reformer of
our country.

A total of R43,2 million was spent on prestige accommodation last year and
for the current financial year, R98 million has been budgeted. The weight
of this function is experienced by each member in this House, both for
office and housing accommodation, mainly during parliamentary sessions and
I would like to assure you of our utmost consideration of your comfort,
provided that the restricted budget allows for it. Under the Facilities
Management Contract, we are now implementing the initiative to consolidate
the provisioning of facilities management services on prestige
accommodation.

Since 1 May 2003, WSP Sidibene Facilities Management (Pty) Ltd, which won
this tender for R82,26 million over two years in Cape Town has been in full
operation. This is an international company that has formed a joint venture
with local companies, incorporating set socioeconomic objectives. This
joint venture is made up by WSP Facilities Management SA (Pty) Ltd, ACG
Architects & Development Planners, GVK Siya Zama Building Contractors Cape
(Pty) Ltd, Ubunye Engineering Services (Pty) Ltd, Nibu Construction &
Project Management (Pty) Ltd and Premiere Business Capital (Pty) Ltd.

They are working at prestige office and housing accommodation including the
parliamentary precinct, VIP houses and parliamentary villages. The
objective is to provide the expected day-to-day services as well as attend
to the backlog in maintenance.

This contract includes a performance monitoring system, building
maintenance plans, a prioritised preventative maintenance and life-cycle
replacement control plan, an emergency repair plan and a planned
maintenance programme. At present the priority list on the maintenance
backlog is being compiled. The mammoth task of rectifying the backlog is
anticipated to start within a few weeks.

The scope of work on this Facilities Management Contract includes, among a
long list, the following: Managing and controlling the provision of
services; performance monitoring and evaluation of facilities and service
delivery; establishment of a call centre; establishment of a State Property
Asset Management and Information System; and managing all types of capital
and maintenance work, including statutory, preventative maintenance,
deferred and corrective maintenance. The department does however reserve
the right to undertake certain capital and maintenance work as it sees fit
from time to time.

The scope of the contract includes all maintenance, gardening and cleaning
where it is currently a departmental line function. Excluded from the
contract is cleaning at all Ministerial houses. Deep cleaning at the
Ministerial houses can however be effected upon request by a Minister and
is catered for in that there is a call-down rate tendered for such work.

Also included are requirements in terms of the Presidential Health Plan,
such as the monitoring and testing of air and water quality, biological
testing of the environment, illumination levels, ventilation levels and
thermal conditions at pre-determined intervals.

In terms of the contract and after consultation with the SAPS, WSP's
personnel have been security cleared in the same manner that all employees
of the Department of Public Work are subjected to. This in effect means
that they will not only be checked by the SAPS, but also by the National
Intelligence Agency.

On the question of accessibility to people with disabilities, the
Department of Public Works has also, at the beginning of 2003, commenced
with a project to upgrade existing facilities in Parliament with the aim of
making the complex more accessible to people with disabilities.

The objectives of the project are: The provision of accessible ablution
facilities to people with disabilities on every floor and the fair
distribution of said facilities across genders. This process includes the
simultaneous renovation of all existing facilities. The improvement of
access between and within the buildings with the provision of external
wheelchair routes, ramps, improved lighting in public areas, improved
signage and modification of elevators to enable their operation by people
with disabilities. And lastly, it includes alterations to existing debating
chambers, dining and conference rooms in order to accommodate wheelchair
users.

The project is scheduled to run over a twelve-month period and is expected
to be completed by January 2004. The value of the contract is just over
than R5 million.

I now come to the issue of space planning and its utilisation here in the
parliamentary precinct. One more literally pressing issue that the
Department of Public Works is engaged in is the space planning and
utilisation situation in the parliamentary precinct.

Since 1994 the staff and members of Parliament has increased by more than
30%. However, little attention has been paid to the provision of office
space, parking space, etc. In accordance with Parliament's wish, a holistic
approach to the requirements is being taken. The project will include 120
Plein Street as well as consider all off-site functional units for
accommodation on-site.

The Department of Public Works has appointed a specialist space management
consultant to investigate the use of space within the parliamentary
precinct and the hired accommodation with a view to consolidating all staff
and facilities in order to provide an assessment within 6 months. The task
pertaining to this assignment includes investigating and providing a status
quo report in respect of office accommodation, committee rooms and
boardrooms, auditoriums, chambers and vehicle parking.

This consultant will be required to translate the information and
facilities data into spatial requirements utilising space norms to quantify
the needs and provide options for optimising space with regard to current
and future needs.

Security is of the utmost importance, therefore each member of the
consultant team will be subjected to security clearances and the South
African Heritage Agency approval will be obtained should any alteration or
extensions become necessary to buildings with heritage status.

Coming to parliamentary villages, the crime rate at these villages, mainly
in Acacia Park, is of unacceptable proportions and we are seriously working
on solutions, together with the police. At least 10 arrests have been made
in the preceding 12 months, the outcome of which cases we are still
awaiting. Alarm systems have been installed at all the residences during
2002 but in addition to this, further security measures are being
introduced and considered, including: physical searching of all incoming
and outgoing vehicles at the gates; investigating the introduction of an
electronic access control system although major resistance to this measure
has been expressed by residents' committees in the past; looking into the
installation of burglar bars at all residences, and requesting the SAPS to
increase the number of VIP protection staff to ensure regular foot patrols.

We are conducting an occupancy audit at all three parliamentary villages in
order to compare the result to the information supplied by members and
sessional officials in their original application forms for accommodation.
These additional measures will obviously increase the cost of security
measures in Acacia Park from the existing R1,5 million to an estimated R4
million.

For the remainder, the parliamentary villages will be taken care of under
the Facilities Management Contract I spoke about and I am happy to have
heard from some members here present that they have already experienced an
improvement in service delivery, both through the call centre and in the
overall appearance of the parks.

On the question of fraud awareness, our departmental activities regarding
fraud prevention continue relentlessly, where we have found the major
enticing of officials to collaborate with contractors in fraudulent conduct
for, obviously, personal financial gain being the main occurrence. At
present, 11 disciplinary cases and 11 criminal cases are being dealt with.
The strengthening of our implementation of findings through the human
resource section is a challenge that we are aware of. And the department is
committed to rooting out all sorts of corruption from wherever it is found
in whatever projects we deal with.

I am proud to report that on the Cholera Infrastructure Support Programme
we have achieved a 100% expenditure on the almost R2 million allocated in
2002-03, building 1 395 toilets and protecting numerous springs from
contamination and the spreading of cholera. The socioeconomic achievements
include that 40% of the project budget went to community labour, 400 people
got jobs, of whom 58% were women, 30% youth and 9% people with
disabilities. This far exceeds our minimum targets in procurement.

The HIV/AIDS Infrastructure Support Programme achieved an overall
expenditure of 95% on the just over R5 million allocated in 2002-03. This
programme extended over four provinces. Both Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal
had a 100% expenditure, whereas Limpopo is experiencing some delays and the
Free State had a saving which has subsequently been used to procure trees
for the project site.

Hon Minister Stella Sigcau indeed being the rural development activist that
she is has taken the Community-Based Public Works Programme to successes
that before were not even dreamt of. Minister, in this cause of rural
development, I follow your lead with confidence. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C J MALULEKE-HLANEKI: Chairperson, and hon House, in support of the
Public Works Vote before this House today, I wish to commend the Minister
and her department for turning the tide in the way in which Government is
now dealing and will in future deal with the fixed property portfolio of
Government.

In particular, the consideration given to the enhancement of black economic
empowerment and other socioeconomic factors in all the transactions entered
into by the department that are both construction and property related need
to be acknowledged and taken further through continued procurement,
performance, evaluation and involvement.

One of the Department of Public Works' key mandates is to be the custodian
of the state's fixed property portfolio and to ensure that the state
obtains the best functional, social and financial returns from its property
portfolio. As Government, we should also ensure that as we evolve policy,
everyone keeps abreast of it and co-operates to ensure the maximum returns
from this huge economic asset.

Prior to 1994, a wide range of governmental structures were established,
such as the former independent states and self-governing territories as
well as own affairs institutions. Experiments with these multiple
structures, together with the lack of property management skills and a
proper management regime, all had a significantly negative influence on the
state's immovable properties. The management of properties inevitably went
through a process of re-organisation and the proliferation of inaccurate,
incomplete and absent record systems resulted.

The Department of Public Works therefore embarked on the mammoth task of
capturing these respective properties on one comprehensive electronic asset
register. The register compilation project commenced in May 1996, and was
completed in September 1999. We do understand that work needs to be done
continuously to enrich the information captured per property and grouping
and also in terms of the proper maintenance on the system, which obviously
needs to take place per transaction, be that work executed on a property,
acquisition or disposal.
Some of the key benefits that have been obtained from the compilation of
the assets register exercise include having comprehensive, uniform and
consolidated information in an electronic format. Also, for the first time,
we have the ability to match expenditure against a group of properties,
government departments, geographical areas, financial years and other
reference groupings.

A further ability was created to better assess the level of utilisation of
properties and to assess properties that have no strategic value and could
thus be disposed of. It also provided an opportunity to combat fraud and
corruption through the detection and reduction especially of fictitious
maintenance, abnormal costs for similar types of properties etc, and it
provides base-line information and building blocks for performing a
valuation of the total portfolio of the state, as the Minister has already
said.

Mufambisi wa ntirho, muchaviseki holobye u lhterile a hlamusela hi
mafambiselo mantshwa ya matirhiselo ya nhundzu ya mfumu leyi yi nga
susekiki na milawu ya mafambisele ya nhundzu leyi nga ta herisa ku
tsandzeka loko ha ha hlanganaka na kona. Hi tshembha leswaku makungu yo
lawula nhundzu ya ta tumbuluxa pulani ya mfumu ya nkarhi wo leha ya nhundzu
leyi nga susekiki, leyi nga ta va na swikongomelo yi tlhela yi va na
mbuyelo yo karhi eka mfumu.

Hi laha swi languteleke ha kona swi ta pfuna vatirhisi na vinyi va nhundzu
eka ku teka swiboho na ku kuma nxavo wa nhundzu leyi yi nga susekiki, na ku
pfuna eka ku hlanganyeta migingiriko hinkwayo mayelana ni matirhisele ya
nhundzu. Mayelana na rejistara leyi ya nhundzu, makungu lama ya ta pfuna
eka ku tumbuluxa sisteme leyi hlanganyetiweke ya mafambiselo ya nhundzu
leyi katsaka ku pimela emahlweni, ku hlela na ku endla xiviko xa nhundzu ya
mfumo. Naswona mayelana na ku lombisa, hi vonile mbuyelo wo antswa wa
matirhiselo wa milawu leyi kungari ntsena eka ku hungutiwa ka mali ya mfumu
kambe ni le ka vanhu lava lombisaka.

Ha swi tiva leswaku nawu wa leswaku mutirhisi wa hakela, wu pfumelaniwile
ha wona na National Treasury laha vanhu lava tshamaka eka miako ya mfumu va
faneleke ku hakela. Eka lembe ximali leri, ku fanele ku vulavurisaniwa na
vatirhisi lava mayelana na milawu leyi va nga yi landzelelaka ku fikelela
xikongomelo xa ku ri mutirhisi wa hakela.

Mpimanyeto wa ku engeteriwa ka tihakelo leti wu fanela ku tirha ku sukela
hi siku ro sungula ra Dzivamisoko 2004. Eku heteleleni, a hi amukeleni
magoza lama tekiweke ku herisa nhundzu ya mfumu leyi nga ha pfuniki nchumu.
Muchaviseki holobye u kombisile leswaku nhundzu leyi hi yihi na swona nkoka
wa yona hi wihi. Ku tirhiwile swinene na swona ku vile na vuhlanganyeti byo
tala eka ku fikelela xiboho lexi, leswi kombisaka ku tiyimisela ka mfumu wa
hina ku fikelela swilaveko swa vaaka tiko, hi ku lhterisela timfanelo ta
vona ka nhundzu, ku va akela tiyindlu ta nxavo wa le hansi ni ta tiprojekti
tin'wana leswi nga ta kombisa ku nghenelela ka hina eka migingiriko ya laha
Dzongeni wa Afrika, Afrika Dzonga nile tikweni ni misava hinkwayo. Akhani
mamba. (Translation of xiTsonga paragraphs follows.)

[The hon Minister also gave an explanation about new measures for the
control of immovable state property and laws governing the control of this
property so that we could eradicate the problems that we still encounter.
We believe that these measures will be long-term and will, in the long run,
benefit the state.

These new measures will assist the users and owners of immovable state
property to ensure that they price the property correctly and also to co-
ordinate all activities in relation to the use of this property. With
regard to the registering of this property, it will help in the
establishment of a system for the control of the property, as well as
planning for the future, so as to assess and give a comprehensive report on
the state of this property. Above all, concerning the issue of leasing out
the state property, we are satisfied with the outcome concerning the
financial benefits we received.

We all know that regulations that specify that the user of immovable
property has to pay, have been agreed upon with the National Treasury,
whereby people who are accommodated in such property have to pay. In this
financial year a settlement of some kind has to be reached with these
people on how they will pay for accommodation. The budget for paying for
accommodation should be implemented as from 1 April 2004.

Finally, let us accept the measures taken to dispose of property that is of
no use to the state. The hon Minister has already identified the type of
property we are referring to and what its value is. In reaching this
decision, a lot of effort and co-ordination took place. These efforts show
the commitment of this Government to meeting the needs of its people by
giving them back their rights to own property, by building them low-cost
houses and providing projects that will illustrate our involvement in the
activities taking place here in Southern Africa, South Africa and globally.
Thank you.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, the Vote
before us today represents potentially one of the single biggest
opportunities for Government to address directly the massive unemployment
crisis in this country. It is a crisis that cannot be ignored or debated
out of existence. Half of the adult population of South Africa is jobless,
and the majority are younger than thirty years. This is the dilemma at the
root of all the challenges that face the country. Our success or failure to
address it will determine our success or failure in most other efforts that
we as a society engage in.

The UDM proposes that the economic policy should shift towards investment
in our economy through infrastructural development. It is our ardent belief
that the Government must do more. Yes, we expect business and civil society
to help solve this crisis, but only after the Government has created the
enabling environment. Yes, we expect small businesses to create the jobs
that we so desperately need. Yes, we also expect foreign investors to bring
their money to our shores to invest in South African people and companies.

But we do not expect all of these other stakeholders to tackle the
unemployment crisis while the Government sits on the sidelines as a
spectator. The Government must invest in the economy before it can
reasonably expect anyone else to follow suit.

Dramatically increased Government investment in infrastructure would
address social needs, a constitutional requirement that cannot be ignored.
Infrastructure development creates jobs; it facilitates skills development
and provides opportunities for small business development. The long-term
impact of improved infrastructure is to lower input costs, which helps
existing businesses to expand and new businesses to enter the market. In
both cases, jobs are created.

The Department of Public Works deserves credit for the success of some
Community-Based Public Works Programmes. These programmes offer a glimpse
of the possibilities that the UDM speaks of in terms of infrastructure
development. Looking at the Vote, it is therefore sad to note that the
Community-Based Public Works Programme constitutes a mere R288,3 million or
6% of the total Vote before us.

The UDM supports the Vote, but we call on the Minister to seek ways of
expanding the tangible output of job creation in activities of the
department. I thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mmusakgotla yo tlotlegang ... [Hon Chairperson ... ]

... the Department of Public Works is the custodian of all Government
assets, be it land or buildings. In these trying times of joblessness,
Public Works has to come up with ways and means to alleviate poverty.
Labour-intensive projects have to be mounted in all parts of the country.
We have, however, noted that the department has been able to engage the
other sister departments to set this to rest.

The erection of multipurpose community centres is a welcome venture. The
wish is that they could be put up in really deserving places, and not just
to make a political statement, as in the case of the one in Winterveld,
where the targeted Government services are within walking distance of
nearby Mabopane and Soshanguve, this in spite of rural areas detached from
the metropolis having difficulty in accessing Government services. It is
hoped that the R10 million set aside for the multipurpose community centres
in the 61 district councils will be used wisely and not will not duplicate
facilities where similar ones are in place already.

The vukuzenzele spirit imbued by the Emerging Contractor Development
Programme gives young entrepreneurs hope. The unfortunate situation is that
they experience difficulty in accessing funds. We call on other finance
houses to take a leaf from the book of Standard Bank and Khula by making
access to finance reasonable for the emerging contractors. Even then, we
hope the allocations of the contracts by the department and its satellites
will be done fairly and responsibly.

We are aware that it is difficult to dispose of property, but call on
Public Works to ensure that buildings that stand unused are taken care of.
Institutions such as Thaba Nchu College of Education and some of the former
Public Works sites in the previous government dispensation come to mind.

It is unfortunate that even the Book of books states that those who have
will receive more and those who don't have will receive less. Gauteng and
the Western Cape province will receive 36% and 19% respectively of this
financial year's budget allocation, while poor provinces - Limpopo,
Mpumalanga and the North West - will receive 2%, 3% and 7% respectively. I
thank you.

Mr N E MAGUBANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, Public Works as a
Government function possesses inherent economic opportunities for the
public. Government uses Public Works projects and programmes to procure
services and goods from the public for its benefit, thereby creating
economic and business opportunities for the private sector and the public
at large.

Naturally, procurement is the single largest economic muscle available to
the Department of Public Works to acquire necessary goods and services,
while realising the social and economic expectations of Government, such as
poverty alleviation, job creation, infrastructure development, black
economic empowerment and public-private partnerships, among others.

Procurement within the Department of Public Works may involve activities
such as: supply of goods, services, work or any combination thereof,
disposal of movable property, hiring or letting of anything, and the
acquisition or granting of any rights. Prior to 1994, the policies and
procedures of the State Tender Board which regulated the procurement of
supplies and services tended to favour larger and better established
entrepreneurs. This state of affairs did not create an environment that
allowed easy access for smaller enterprises into the mainstream of
procurement activities funded by the public sector.

In response, the Department of Public Works began to put into motion the
process to reform the procurement regime as early as 1994. Within this
context, an interim strategy called the Ten Point Plan was developed and
published in conjunction with the State Tender Board in November 1995.

In its introduction, the document entitled Public Sector Procurement Reform
in South Africa and subtitled ``A Ten Point Plan'' acknowledges:
  While the general review of procurement policy will produce directives
  and procedures to accommodate RDP objectives, there is an urgent need for
  interim procurement strategies that can be implemented immediately within
  the ambit of existing legislation to impact positively on the
  participation of small, medium and microenterprises, with emphasis on the
  disadvantaged and marginalised sectors and with focus on employment
  creation.

As we celebrate nearly 10 years of democracy and freedom, we are proud to
reflect on the glorious journey this Government has travelled in turning
the tide of apartheid, alleviating poverty and establishing the conditions
for the existence of a better life for all. Earlier efforts such as the one
undertaken by men and women of Public Works laid a solid foundation for the
development of sophisticated procurement policies such as the Preferential
Procurement Policy Framework Act which, in partnership with the Public
Finance Management Act, gives effect to the achievement of good governance
in procurement, as well as the achievement of socioeconomic objectives
through procurement.

The Ten Point Plan and the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act
provided the framework within which the Department of Public Works has
developed procurement policy and procedure to guide the department in the
procurement of construction-related services. For the second year running,
because of its improved efficiency levels, the national Department of
Public Works has expended 100% of its capital works budget totalling R1,6
billion. Considering that targeted procurement policies are integrated to
Public Works transactions, it comes as no surprise that, of the R1,6
billion allocated in the 2002-03 financial year, about R400 million, which
is 25%, went to affirmable business enterprises as part of the department's
drive to promote and cultivate black economic empowerment.

Affirmable business enterprises are defined as businesses registered with
the SA Revenue Services, and who are adhering to labour standards and are
owned, managed and controlled by previously disadvantaged persons. On the
other hand, targeted procurement is an instrument of policy developed to
create opportunities for participation by targeted groups. It enables
Government, and in some instances the private sector, to utilise their
procurement needs, firstly, to stimulate the growth and development of
small and medium enterprises and local resources and, secondly, to empower
specific population groups or sectors of society, increase the volume of
work available to the poor and encourage the use of labour-intensive
practices to technologies.

Targeted procurement within the Department of Public Works has been
successfully used to direct capital flows into underdeveloped or
disadvantaged rural communities on conventional construction projects. The
department has also used targeted procurement to develop black construction
capacity at prime contract level in its strategic projects initiatives and
to ensure that black economic empowerment takes place in its Asset
Procurement and Operating Partnership system. The resources specification
on contracts for the designing, building, financing and operation of
prisons ensures that black economic empowerment takes place for the period
of the concession versus 25 years.

Further initiatives by Public Works for accelerated opportunities to ABEs
within construction are: Regional offices advertise locally required
services in the local communities; notices are put at public places such as
magistrate's offices, police stations, taxi ranks and railway stations. In
the area where such services are required, the advantage is that local
emerging contactors without access to Internet facilities or the Government
Tender Bulletin remain informed of opportunities within the local
community.

The department approved that authority be delegated to invite, close and
award tenders at regional offices valued up to a maximum of R5 million.
This accelerates the awarding of tenders to local emerging contractors
without the intervention of head office. Also, the establishment of
standing tender committees at each regional office with equal authority to
that of the head office standing tender committee has been approved, which
also contributes to the acceleration of tender awards.

The State Tender Board's approval was obtained to waive the requirement for
performance guarantees for construction projects up to R2 million, which
eliminates potential financial stumbling blocks for emerging contractors.
This action was taken as a result of the reluctance of financial
institutions to provide performance guarantees to historically
disadvantaged contractors.
In conclusion, I wish to remind the House that BEE is a Government policy.
It is enshrined in all business transactions of the department in its daily
interactions with the public. We take this opportunity to congratulate the
department on its commitment to do its work efficiently and effectively
while realising the socioeconomic goals of the Government.

Sithola ukuthi abantu abaningi abamnyama, abafisayo nabathandayo ukusebenza
izinto ezibonakala ziyimbali nokukhanya emphakathini, kubalulekile ukuthi
bazinikele basebenzisane nabantu balo mnyango ukuze kubonakale umehluko
okhona kubantu phakathi kwesikhathi samanje nesikhathi esidlule. Kodwa-ke
okuhlupha kakhulu uHulumeni ukubona ukuthi abantu, endaweni yokuthi
bazinikele ekusebenzeni ukuze baqondise isimo sokuthi baphile impilo
engcono njengoba uHulumeni ayeshilo, sibathola besebenzisa ezinye izinto
ezingaqondile nezingakwazi ukusiza uHulumeni ukuze nabo basizakale.
[Kwaphela isikhathi.] (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[We feel that it is very important for many black people who have the
desire and dedication to engage in developmental and exemplary activities,
to collaborate with officials of this department so that the public can see
the difference between the past and the present. However, what troubles the
Government most is to see that, instead of dedicating themselves to work
which will help them achieve the better life that the Government wants for
them, people resort to wayward means which cannot assist it to help them.]

The ANC supports the Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J P I BLANCHE: Mr Chairperson, the Department of Public Works has for
many years been treated as the stepchild of Government.

Firstly, Presidents from the old and new South Africa seem to view this
Ministerial portfolio as the one through which newly appointed Ministers
must graduate before they are promoted to other departments, which are
regarded as more important. That is why the department has the highest
turnover of Ministers and directors-general. This has a detrimental effect
on the managers of Public Works and causes instability for the ranks lower
down.

Secondly, because the department's main function is to deliver a service to
other state departments, the other Ministers and directors-general seem to
care less about their maintenance budget, a service which they expect
Public Works must render to them, whether they budget for it or not.

When the occupant department doesn't budget adequately for the maintenance
or upkeep of buildings and properties which it occupies, the people's
properties and buildings fall into disuse and decay, often beyond repair.
When this happens the officials perform poorly, the work environment looks
bad and the taxpayers, our people, remain poor, because maintenance costs
run out of control when a larger percentage of revenue collected has to be
spent on the upkeep and renovation of neglected buildings and properties.
All this leads to the image that Public Works is a junior department and as
long as the Minister accepts that attitude from her colleagues, it will
remain a department in trouble.

Let me illustrate why I say this by referring to a question which I
recently put on the Order Paper. I asked:


  Whether she or her department has taken any steps to address the plea of
  petitioners complaining about the state of neglect of the state property
  known as Excelsior Court in Durban; if not, why not; if so, what steps
  and what amount has been budgeted to address the problem; when will her
  department start with work to clear the property and renovate the
  buildings and how long will the project take to complete?

The Minister replied:


  Yes, in 1995 a service was created to repair and renovate the facility.
  The project was ready for tender in 1997 at a cost of R7,7 million but
  the service was stopped. The national Department of Public Works is
  awaiting the SAPS to submit the priority of the service and to grant
  approval to proceed and, if approval is granted by SAPS, the project will
  be completed within 15 months.

Eight years later and the petitioners are still waiting.

The second part of the question was, and again I quote:


  Whether her department has received any representations regarding the
  state of this building; on what dates, from whom and what was her
  department's response to each specified representation?

To which she replied:


  Yes. One letter of complaint dated 26 July 2002 from the Ethekwini
  Municipality.

That is the Durban municipality. The health department came to her office.


  The letter was forwarded to SAPS. The Durban regional office requested
  SAPS Provincial Logistics to prioritise the service but no response has
  been received to date.

Eight years later and nothing to report and, in the meantime, the cost has
risen. I asked:


  On what date was maintenance carried out on this building; what specified
  work was done and what was the cost to her department of such work in
  each case?

The reply was:


  Apart from reactive maintenance, refurbishment on the property has not
  taken place as SAPS did not prioritise this service.


  Routine maintenance is the responsibility of SAPS and was limited to
  repairs below R5 000.

Chairman, from the reply, it is obvious that the Minister is neglecting her
duty to oversee the maintenance of the nation's fixed assets. She seems to
think that when other state departments are delaying the upkeep of
buildings, which they occupy, it clears her from co-responsibility for her
department's maintenance function. It does not.

This is not an isolated case. One can go to every town and city and you
will see neglected state buildings. To name a few, there is the military
base in George which was in the papers just recently; the portfolio
committee visited Limpopo; a road leading to the airport; elsewhere around
the country, and you find even in Cape Town that the Government villages
are in a state of neglect. And let me quote the final one: A prison in
Boksburg called the Cinderella prison has been vacant for 16 years and has
now been vandalised.

Let's see if we can find a solution. The Minister must develop a policy and
submit it to Cabinet, binding the President and the Ministers to agree that
Public Works must timeously carry out the required maintenance and bill the
receiving departments when maintenance is due. She must bill them. When she
thinks it's due, they must carry on with the work, whether that Director-
General wants to do it or not.

The nation's fixed assets under her control and care are in a bad state,
because she does not stand up to the President and her colleagues in
Cabinet. Added to this, the rent is not collected from many officials
living in Acacia Park. Rent is not collected even from the Public Works
officials living in Acacia Park. And now they tell us R4 million will be
spent on security.

There are six huts around Acacia Park, but you never see a policeman in
them. They have probably been erected at a cost of about R20 000 - R30 000.
On top of all this, we have to date not been given the reason why a state
house was sold to Mrs Mbeki at an extremely low price. And then when there
was a public outcry, her department reacted. [Interjections.]

I do not have time to expand on the problems of the metro councils who are
in trouble because government departments occupying buildings and
properties under this department's control do not pay the local government
accounts. What kind of an example is Government setting in this instance?
What is the policy of the ANC in this regard?

Chairperson, the DA is contemplatimg not supporting this Vote because the
Minister is neglecting the maintenance of the nation's fixed assets by not
laying down hard and fast rules for the other Ministers. I think it is time
that she graduated to another portfolio.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, one of the objectives set out by the
Public Works department is ``to become a pioneer of Community-Based Public
Works Programmes''. In this context, Azapo understands the department to be
saying that these community-based activities will be geared at job creation
and poverty alleviation. If our understanding is correct, we therefore
believe that in targeting the rural poor, the department shall contribute
significantly to the development and empowerment of rural citizens of our
country.

Indeed these intentions are noble, but until such time as a co-ordinated
strategy is developed together with the provincial and local spheres of
government, these intentions will remain unfulfilled. Azapo has noticed
with disappointment though that some local government entities have not
even begun to implement these much-needed job creation activities. A
mechanism should be found to facilitate job creation activities in this
sphere of government.

For example, there has not been vigorous rural road construction in the
remote rural areas of our country. In order for the rural poor to engage in
microbusinesses and other income-generating activities, they need roads in
order for their products to be accessible to potential buyers as well as
reaching appropriate markets.

The youth in particular, in both rural and poor urban areas, should be
integrated into these programmes. Azapo believes that when a country has
large youth unemployment, it risks the possibility of the youth being
recruited to engage in criminal or other kinds of deviant activities, such
as gangsterism and violence. Or, as is the case in some other African
countries, the youth are recruited to become soldiers to destabilise these
countries.

Unless we in South Africa engage our youth in meaningful employment, who
knows, we might live to see our youth being used by reactionary forces and
individuals to destabilise our country. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, this department has served as a great
contributor to the reconstruction and development of South Africa.

The programmes embarked upon by the department have delivered much success,
which the MF applauds. The National Public Works Programme, NPWP, has
mothered two beneficial programmes, namely the Community-Based Public Works
Programme, CBPWP, and the Construction Industry Development Programme,
CIDP. Both programmes have a number of success stories, which have
certainly led to a tremendous domestic turnaround. We are proud to note
that the CBPWP was judged by the International Labour Organisation to be
the leading public works programme in over 30 developing countries.

Poverty is eating away at our citizenry, and beating it is certainly not
easy. This programme has been instituted to achieve poverty relief and
infrastructure investment. The programme has assisted Government in
strengthening ties with the community and earned the title Letsema. Its
contribution to alleviating unemployment has shown numbers with a pleasing
recognition of women, youth and the disabled.

BEE has also received a large contribution from the programme showing the
department's commitment to bridging the gap. The MF is quite impressed by
Operation Plough Down and the advancement it has made especially in the
KwaZulu-Natal region. The multipurpose centres have also proved quite
beneficial, allowing Government to monitor community needs and loopholes in
rural areas.

The development projects on unemployment, skills development and labour
relations are promising. It is hoped that the budget for this financial
period shall be utilised to produce the promising results it has had thus
far.
Let us unite in bridging the gap and alleviating poverty. The MF supports
the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M M CHIKANE: Chairperson, the hon Minister and Deputy Minister of Public
Works have outlined the major achievements and activities of the important
portfolio for which we applaud and support them in the Vote.

During the course of the year, we have regularly interacted with the
management through the parliamentary committee and we have been informed
about the challenges and achievements. Of course, at times, Mr Blanché was
not there. That is why he spoke in the manner that he did.

We have travelled a long way since 1994. We moved from a white male
dominated empire to a department that represents a tapestry of all the
people of South Africa. We changed the face of nepotism to that of a young
and vibrant community with women taking central positions which were
reserved for whites only. Our symbols represent united nationhood at work
and are enshrined in our policy.

We grappled with the task and expanded on the main line function to include
the Community-Based Public Works Programme, which has gone a long way in
addressing poverty alleviation and the transfer of skills in the deprived
and formerly disadvantaged communities in the cities and towns alike, as
well as in the informal settlements and rural areas. The people have water
and electricity. Access roads have been created where none existed.

Bongi and Jan can be heard talking in the classroom, trying to share common
ideas on the problem facing them, a state which in the past was regarded as
an anomaly. Mama Shenge and Annetjie van Wyk can today share a common topic
on an episode of Madam and Eve, which was uncommon in the days of our
dictators. Even Van der Merwe, not our van der Merwe but the other one,
feels uncomfortable with the term `baas'. Mrs now applies equally to all
those who celebrated have matrimony.

South Africa is at work. Apartheid is behind us, but there are challenges
that we still face. Poverty and unemployment are still dogging all we have
done and must be removed henceforth.

It is my task and yours not to threaten the poor with 150 000 police, but
to deal with poverty through a decisive strategy. The planned job summit
must have the support of all right-thinking South Africans. Let us not
fight those who have brought about the system that is envied by most people
the world over. Let us expand the programme to include all those we have
not reached today. Let us isolate the lunatics who continue to advocate for
separate and unequal development between Sandton and Diepkloof.

Bongi, whom I talked about, has been accepted as a pupil at the nearest
school. She does not have to walk the long road in the platteland whilst
her counterpart who is also her playmate enjoys a free ride on the bus.

Jan who was a student at the University of Pretoria and studied engineering
is now a proud South African. He has no plans to leave his fatherland. He
does not respond to the false drumbeat played by some among us of unrythmic
music about the brain drain. He does not want a homeland. He wants a
country and to serve his people.

Difficult and windy as the road to nation-building has been, we are happy
that progress has been made. Apartheid and discrimination are on their way
out. In comes a nonracial, nonsexist democratic dispensation enshrined in
our Freedom Charter. Slowly, the doctrines of Verwoerd and Malan are fading
away. In comes equality and self-respect of each other's culture and
values.

Lack of ownership is declining as Mrs Ditodi gets a house that she can call
her own at the age of 73. In Tibane in the Ga-Matlala area, people have
running water and some have electricity or both. The Community-Based Public
Works Programme has created assets where none existed - clinics, schools,
and multipurpose centres.

There is an access road in Madietane. The multipurpose centres have been
completed in Maluti and Thaba Nchu. Nine years ago, some of these areas
were dumping grounds for surplus people from the Johannesburg and Welkom
mining giants. Today the roots are strengthening and the bond is made.

Amongst other challenges that we need to reflect on today is the full
compliance with requirements of the Auditor-General in accordance with the
financial management system - FMS, for you guys, hey! [Laughter.] - the
property management information system and work control system utilised by
the department. The Auditor-General's report for the financial year 2001-02
identified gaps of unmatched transactions, but the department was able to
address this through an action plan.

The Department of Public Works set up a task team of both finance and
operations personnel to tackle the weakness identified by the Auditor-
General and has informed us on some of the milestones in response.

Firstly, systems relating to reconciliation problems have been addressed
and the Auditor-General is reviewing the work done to evaluate the proper
solution of the problem identified. System reconciliation is now done on a
month-to-month basis. The corrective measure is a direct response to the
reconciliation of unmatched transactions between operation and management
systems in the department.

Secondly, operating expenditure incurred due to the ownership, validity and
accuracy of state-owned property questioned by the Auditor-General was
analysed and provided to the Auditor-General who is currently evaluating
it. Thirdly, to ensure the availability of supporting documents, the
department has developed a filing-in convention that makes it easier to
locate and retrieve the documents for audit purposes.

Fourthly, the Department of Public Works is consistently following up all
debtors' balances and recovering debt from the client departments to
minimise losses by ensuring recovery of payments. We have been assured that
proper accounting treatment in accordance with the Public Finance
Management Act is strictly complied with.

The hon Minister also referred to the Repair and Maintenance Programme
which we call Ramp, which is a brainchild of the Department of Public Works
to address the acute deterioration of buildings and general backlog in
maintenance of state-owned property. A lot of my colleagues before me spoke
about this. Reports received indicate that the programme is indeed bearing
fruit and that the client satisfaction level has been increased where Ramp
has been introduced.

The hon Minister also referred to the reduction of complaints from the
client departments in her presentation today. I would therefore support a
motion for the increment of the budget for the Repair and Maintenance
Programme. I would in fact recommend that other spheres of government learn
from the National Public Works Programme how they can address deterioration
in their own properties.

We also welcome here the Director-General, Mr Maseko, who has shown the
determination to try to deal with some of these difficult problems.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you, Chair and hon members. I have
given myself some kind of a score. There were 17 speakers and 15 of them
supported the budget and said we are doing a good job. And what is strange
about the two who did not support what we are doing and the changes we are
making is that they are the very people who came from parties which were
part of Parliament ages ago, who were part and parcel of that history of
public works in which the budget was never fully expended, especially that
of public works. Now that we have broken the record, two years down the
line, they are trying to punch small holes in what we are trying to
achieve. I am a teacher by profession. Let me educate them a bit.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

In the Government that we are running today, we work as a collective and in
some cases we work in clusters, and in that situation, there is a lot of
consultation that takes place. There is also a lot of prioritisation of
work. The impression that is being created by the two Cinderellas is that
my department should not consult. What we have done to achieve the
expenditure that we now boast of was that we agreed with Treasury and
decided to let the budget for capital works devolve to the various
departments so that themselves say: ``This is what we require to be done at
a particular time.'' It is not a question of being bullied.

Abantu abaqhela ukubhulisha abafazi babo ezindlwini baza kuthetha ngokuba
kuyabhulishwa. [People who are used to bullying their wives will talk about
being bullied.]

It's a question of saying ... yintoni na elungele ukwenziwa? Asukume ke
umntu andixelele ngento eyabahlula bona kuqala ... [... what is it that
should be done? And now a person thinks he can just rise and tell me about
something that they themselves did ...] 16 years ago.

Ayithathe ngebhakethe aze kuyijula apha kuthi. Ndinomnqa. Okwesibini kwesi
sikolo sam ... [Somebody thinks he can just fill a bucket and throw its
contents in our faces. I am puzzled. Secondly, with my education ...]

... I just don't understand why ... [Interjection.] No, I was in Transkei
and I am not ashamed of that, so if you keep on talking about it, you are
missing the boat, my friends, because for me, it was quite a learning
curve.

What some of these people forget, these two did not say they are not
supporting the budget. They are sort of, you know, ... uyalazi iqanda
elibandayo elingazazi nokuba lithini. [... like a cold egg.]

One of them was actually out of information. Our Government has long spoken
and implemented the policy of public-private partnerships. We don't have to
get it from some recent report. It's long been effected. Even where - as I
was talking for instance of some of the successes in the community
production centres - if they were listening carefully, they would have
heard it was not just community people, but a combination of community
people working in partnership with people who had success in what it is
that they were doing.

Some people, too, don't attend portfolio committee meetings where
departments report on some of the problems they have, or the challenges on
some of the plans that they have to deal with, and then come to this House,
as any truant will come, and want to take us some 10 years back. I'm sorry
that in this year 2003 we still have people who debate in that fashion.

I have taken notes of some of the points that were raised by the hon
members for, whoever is walking the talk cannot always be 100% accurate and
the very reason that you are in Parliament is for you to make comments that
are going to build us up further in our work. It should be criticism of a
constructive nature, not of a destructive nature.

I'm happy that the IDT pioneered the workshop which everyone seems to be
appreciating. You will remember even of old, whether it was the army or
people in construction, there were always camp followers. So, in
constructions once ... intente igxunyekwe [... the tent has been erected]
... the next thing you will find are some nappies or some clothing because
of the camp followers. It becomes very important, therefore, that within
the construction industry, we play a major role in dealing with issues of
HIV/Aids and I really commend the portfolio committee because it was their
initiative together with IDT although, as the Deputy Minister said, we have
had our own initiative departmentally.

The issue of dealing with land is a subject to which Government gives a lot
of attention, and as Public Works, we have set out to introduce programmes
which, when people are given land, are balanced by projects like the one I
quoted in Schmitsdrift where a community which was literally twiddling its
thumbs has now, through an irrigation scheme and water supply, been able to
move into the commercial field. I have also addressed a situation where
through trade and industry, through Khula, we have managed to get finance
for some of our people. There is some light at the end of the tunnel.

I want to end by saying we are not yet there but the fact that I
acknowledge that the tide is turning is an important factor, and we shall
only be able to fulfil what we have to do if you as parliamentarians, in
your portfolio committees, play your role and are not absentee parties.

I thank all who supported the Bill, who came up with ideas that we might
use. We are going to scrutinise those ideas and when we make a report back
at the level of portfolio committees, you must know that we listened.

I just want, Chair, to give an explanation. What we are building for
traditional leaders are not palaces. What we are building are chambers for
them to operate together with community halls. If you take Sandile, because
of the history of resistance, that family ended up being shunted from place
to place and Sebe at one time even gave them a small farm. What is going to
happen to the dignity of amaXhosa? All that we are trying to do is to say
ikomkhulu must be respectable and that we have the right infrastructure in
place.

Ndiyabacela abantu baseLimpopo ... [I humbly ask the people of Limpopo ...
] to help us solve the problem. The money is there. We would like to go and
build those two chambers as soon as we possibly can. Ndiyabulela. [I thank
you.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

       HEARINGS ON DEVELOPMENT FUNDING FOR STATE INSTITUTIONS AND NGOs
    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, the hearings that we
held with the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry proved one of the
most interesting that I have attended. We had a wide range of presenters -
I was going to say protesters - [Laughter.] - including Government
development agencies, public entities and NGOs and I would like to thank
all those people who came to present and spent so much time in producing
good papers and evidence.

We must understand the background for these hearings. Firstly, poverty
alleviation and overcoming underdevelopment are central themes in
Government policy and I believe enjoy widespread national support. It is
also understood that to achieve these objectives requires a major common
purpose right across the whole country and a clear understanding of the
instruments that are available to achieve those objectives. For instance,
we obviously need a proactive development state, but understand at the same
time that state measures alone cannot suffice.

We need a wide range of partnerships right across the country. We need to
ensure that people's participation actually happens; that the vision of
people-centred and people-driven development is central to our work. We
need to ensure that there is buy-in by civil society in all its forms and
strong participation by the private sector. If we do that, this will ensure
that all our resources are brought to bear: Financial resources, material,
human skills and social capital. Nothing should be left out.

The hearings were brought about, because many MPs have encountered
complaints that funding is scarce ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Order!

Prof B TUROK: Thank you. I lost three seconds there. Please add them on.
[Interjections.] And there is grumbling here as usual, or is it grunting?

However, MPs have encountered complaints that funding is scarce, that civil
society organisations are starved for development work and that some
agencies are underperforming. And so the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
Industry called these public hearings on behalf of a number of portfolio
committees, the economic cluster and others. The purpose of the hearings,
it should be understood, was not actually to look at funding shortfalls as
such or to examine particular agencies, but to see what systemic problems
there may be, whether funds are achieving their objectives and whether they
are reaching the intended targets.

So the agenda was a broad one. We are not accountants; we are not the
Auditor-General. We were parliamentarians looking at systemic issues to see
what was going on. And so we invited a sample of agencies - Government,
independent public entities and NGOs - to get a sense of the problems in
the area. We found at the hearings that the sums involved are really very
substantial, larger than we thought. The smallest fund that came to give
evidence has R12 million a year, the largest R10,2 billion - a very
substantial amount, indeed.

We also discovered that the funds for development have a range of origins.
There is direct funding from Government to agencies such as the National
Development Agency, the Umsobomvu Fund and the Independent Development
Trust. There are allocations from general funds, which go to the Isibaya
Fund. There are foreign donor funds and also private sector funds.

Examples of these are as follows: The IDT gets R800 million a year from the
Government in support of Government development programmes. The RDP Fund
has received R4,2 billion, of which R923 million is unspent at the moment,
for good reasons. Funding is received from foreign donors, which is part of
overseas development assistance and funding also goes directly to
beneficiaries, not through Government channels.

We were told that there is no clear sense of what kind of funding flows to
NGOs which do not go through the RDP Fund and we are not sure that they
accord with national priorities. Also, ODA funding flows off-budget and
this can be a problem, because the Accountant-General has to monitor them
and yet it is off-budget.

Now I come to the recommendations, because that is where the important
element of the whole exercise lies and also certain proposals for
Parliament and the portfolio committees to consider. There is a call for a
more focused national overarching vision and the NDA, to our surprise, told
us that their work is not guided by Government vision and direction. And
since the NDA is one of the major funding institutions in South Africa, we
thought that should be looked at.

There was also an appeal for greater co-ordination across the whole
developmental sector, including Government and the private sector-funded
agencies. The whole gamut of agencies perhaps need greater co-ordination.

The suggestion was also made, which we thought was eminently sensible, that
there should be a forum to discuss funding and spending, again across all
agencies, not just the NGOs, but also government agencies, public entities,
and so on. And there was a suggestion that perhaps there are too many
agencies operating in the development area, so there is duplication,
overlap and so on.

One thing is clear - the pool of funds is large, very large indeed, and we
as Parliament have to ensure that the funds are allocated properly and are
spent for the intended purpose. State institutions and state-sponsored
institutions could also help in setting up proper methodologies for
disbursement. We need an infrastructure which is unchallengeable, which has
integrity, and which ensures that disbursement takes place properly.

We have also been told that Government payments are sometimes too slow and
we would appeal to government departments to ensure that the funds which
are allocated are disbursed speedily. We were also asked to ensure that
government departments make greater use of NGO capabilities where
appropriate. For example, Nicro has a staff of 100 and 1 000 volunteers,
and they have enormous capacity in the security area and Government could
use them more effectively and co-ordinate better with them.

The Community Chest in the Western Cape alone has 9 000 volunteers. This is
a huge volunteer force which Government can use more effectively by co-
ordinating better with them. We need to enhance also, at the grass-roots
level, the capacity of community organisations to use money. The need is
great, but the community organisations don't always have the capacity to
absorb funds and use them properly. This can be assisted by interventions
from Government.

We were also told - and we know this for a fact - that there are NGOs with
a very good track record and they should be given priority. They should be
treasured. We should ensure that their capacity is enhanced and proper
partnerships should be established between Government and such NGOs.

Now I turn to the role of Parliament. Clearly Parliament is not taking
seriously enough the role of these agencies and development funding in
general. We need a comprehensive oversight machinery which is located in
the portfolio committees to ensure that development funding performs
properly, that the agencies perform properly and that weaknesses are
eliminated. Parliament could play an enormous role, and our committee
believes that this is not being taken seriously enough.

We also need to ensure that foreign donor agreements are tabled in
Parliament. These are formal agreements called ``technical assistance
agreements''. They should be tabled in Parliament so that we have an
overview of the totality of overseas development assistance to South
Africa. We don't actually know what is coming here, because the reports we
get are from the Treasury, and the Treasury reports don't deal with all the
detail and all the agreements which Parliament should be advised of.

We need to ensure that there are improvements to the regulations of
development fund expenditure. There are some regulations in place. The
Department of Social Development clearly has them. But we need to look at
them properly and systematically so that the regulation of expenditures by
agencies of all kinds, Government, public entities and NGOs is properly
conducted and that Parliament has a sense - we are not looking at detail
here, but systems - of what is going on.

Finally, we were told that there are inconsistencies in the legislation
with respect to NGO activities, for instance, in the case of the Non-Profit
Organisations Act, the Income Tax Act, the trust deeds Act and the
Lotteries Act. Because they were put in place at different times, they are
not co-ordinated and they are not systematic in dealing with the whole
question of NGO activities, funding and expenditures.

And so, Chair, what I would urge, and what our committee would urge, is
that we actually launch a massive joint effort across the private sector,
with the NGOs, community organisations and government departments in a
partnership to reach the development goals that we all support. It is our
hope that this report may indicate some useful proposals on the way
forward. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Deputy Chair, the lasting impression I took away with me from
these hearings on development funding for state institutions and NGOs was
the comment from the Head of the National Institute for Crime Prevention
and the Reintegration of Offenders, otherwise known as Nicro.

When asked, at the conclusion of her presentation, to comment on the
current status of funding of state institutions and NGOs, she said that she
wished to make what some might see as a somewhat radical statement, but
that it was necessary to make it. Huge bureaucracies had been created,
perhaps with the best of intentions, to hand out funding, but in so doing,
they were not meeting the needs of those who needed help the most. She
echoed the cries of many when she asked if there wasn't a better, more
efficient way of doing things.

That telling observation was a recurring theme from many of the NGOs who
came to brief the portfolio committee - a recurring theme that, on behalf
of the DA, I should like to take up this afternoon. In part, it is to pay
tribute to the extraordinary work that NGOs do in ever more difficult
circumstances, but also to ensure that their suggestions and, in fact,
their pleas from the very coalface of hope, of need and too often of
grinding despair, are translated into a co-ordinated plan of action by
Government to ensure that development funding for state institutions - but
most especially for the NGOs who do so much with so very little - does
receive more support, recognition, more understanding and, ultimately, more
money.

And any talk of money must include the National Lottery, more popularly
known as the Lotto. I remain deeply concerned about Lotto funds not
reaching those most in need, particularly charities. Despite assurances to
the contrary, from both the Minister and Uthingo management who administer
the Lotto, the facts speak for themselves.

Only today, statistics included in Landscape: The changing face of South
Africa, an ongoing research project of the Unilever Institute of Strategic
Marketing, reflect that more than 70% of South Africans play the Lotto, and
that a staggering R80 million is spent on Lotto tickets every week. And
yet, statistics provided by the DTI show that in the past year only 16% of
funds available for distribution actually reached the applicants. From
information given in response to my questions, since the inception of the
Lotto, a paltry 7% of funds available appears to have been paid across to
beneficiaries.

Welfare organisations are floundering and people are starving while
bureaucrats in sharp suits and paid top-drawer salaries are building lavish
empires to distribute other people's money, proudly showing us by way of hi-
tech presentations and glossy brochures how they have workshopped and
strategised and visioned and planned. Yet, many are unable to produce even
an income statement to show how the money has been spent and what they have
delivered.

I have raised this before, but I believe the example of the Pinetown Child
Welfare Society is instructive. Despite an exemplary history, this society
has lost its grant this year, because it erroneously omitted two annexures
from its application. Last year they received R500 000. Despite every
effort by them to correct their error, this year they will receive nothing
because the men in sharp suits say that they didn't follow the proper
procedure. How does one tell the communities of Claremont, KwaNdebeka and
Marion Ridge that the Pinetown Child Welfare Society cannot help them this
year because they didn't follow proper procedure?

We also need a rethink on the current distribution policy, which ignores
the Community Chest organisation, saying they do not qualify because they
are distribution channels, when they should be targeted as institutions
with the infrastructure, expertise and ability to get the money to where
it's needed most. It is deeply ironic that, while Khula and Ntsika have had
little to show for the tens of millions pumped into them, the Community
Chest is struggling to attract any money and welfare organisations are also
cap in hand, yet R80 million is being spent every week on the Lotto!

It is also unacceptable that Government still has not resolved the issue of
Lotto money allocated to RDP projects and programmes. At least R153 million
is lying idle while so many worthy projects and development programmes go
unnoticed or underfunded. Last October, the DA appealed to the Minister of
Finance either to create a new fund so that this money could be distributed
to worthy causes, as allowed by the Lotteries Act of 1997, or to bring
legislation before Parliament to untangle the red tape tying up this money.
Seven months later, nothing has happened. It is a serious indictment of the
Government that this bureaucratic bungle has occurred at all. It is even
worse that it has been allowed to drag on for so long.

The RDP Ministry was discontinued in 1996 and the Minister of Finance
announced then that the RDP Fund would be integrated with international
development finance to form a one-stop facility for grant financing. If
there was a problem with this fund receiving money from the Lotto, it
should have been identified by Treasury when the Lotteries Act was
processed in 1997 or, at the very least, before the Lotto was launched
three years ago.

The DA then called on the Minister of Finance to announce during his Budget
Speech that he would create a new fund for the distribution of the Lotto's
RDP allocation. Considering that nearly R1 billion of RDP funds from
foreign donors went unspent in the 2001-02 financial year, a separate fund
administered by competent and dedicated people would be preferable to money
being shifted from one unspent budget to another. Our request seems to have
fallen on deaf ears.
In conclusion, we can only agree with the head of Nicro. In creating
mechanisms to ensure development funding for state institutions and NGOs we
have, perhaps unintentionally, created bureaucracies that are inefficient
in many ways, allowing many needy organisations to slip through the cracks.
We urgently require a meeting of the heads of all funding agencies, a
funding summit if you like, to allow those people who are at the coalface
of decision-making about who receives and who doesn't, a chance to create a
better and more efficient way of getting funding to those people and
organisations who need it most. In that way, the women and men in sharp
suits with fancy plans will still survive, but so too will our welfare
organisations, our Community Chest and our NGOs. I thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I now recognise the hon
T Shabalala who will be making his maiden speech in the Assembly.
[Applause.]

Mr T SHABALALA: Thank you, Deputy Chair and hon members, for the warm
welcome you have given me.

Today's debate on development funding for state institutes and NGOs
presents me with my first opportunity to address this House since my
arrival from the KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature. It is a great honour
to be an IFP member of our national Parliament. I want to express my
gratitude to IFP President, Dr M G Buthelezi, MP, for giving me this
opportunity.

Even after 10 years of political freedom, millions of people in our country
still suffer the tragic effects of deep-seated poverty on a daily basis.
There can be no doubt whatsoever that massive poverty alleviation must be a
national priority, and that we, as members of Parliament and Government,
have a special duty to see to it that our national responses to poverty
make a difference to the people who are suffering the most.

The correct application of development funding is one of the tools at our
disposal to alleviate poverty and help people to help themselves. The IFP
therefore welcomes the public hearings held by the Portfolio Committee on
Trade and Industry during March 2003 where such funding from state
institutions and the nongovernmental sector came under the spotlight.

It gave us as parliamentarians the opportunity to hear first-hand accounts
of the problems that are being faced in the development sector as they
relate to funding issues. The hearings thus also gave us insight into the
reasons for the apparent failings and shortcomings in the field of
development funding and, therefore, poverty alleviation.

The public hearings brought to the fore three major issues. Firstly, the
IFP was grateful to learn that there is actually a large amount of money
available for development projects and programmes. Secondly, however, we
were dismayed to learn that co-ordination between development funding
agencies and development programmes suffered from a serious lack of co-
ordination, duplication and sometimes serious fragmentation. Thirdly, we
also learnt of large deficiencies in the human resource capacity within
development funding bodies and developmental agencies.

It became clear from the hearings that both state institutions and NGOs
active in the field of development are in a position to take proactive
steps to address shortcomings and problems, but that they may need outside
assistance to rectify the situation. Parliament can potentially assist and
the IFP therefore underwrites the portfolio committee's recommendation that
public entities ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Carry on, hon member. I am
just trying to get the House to be more receptive to what you are saying.

Mr T SHABALALA: Thank you, Deputy Chair. Does that mean I will get another
two minutes?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes. [Laughter.]

Mr T SHABALALA: Public entities involved in development funding should
report to Parliament in a more systematic and co-ordinated manner so that
oversight and monitoring is improved. We also agreed to the recommendation
that the development and development funding activities of NGOs should be
reported in some manner to Parliament, but without placing too much
additional strain on organisations that may already be suffering from
capacity and other constraints.

The portfolio committee also recommended that there was a need for a
national overarching vision to guide development funding. The IFP totally
agrees with this, but we want to add that the development funding sector
also needs a champion or champions to drive and implement the overarching
vision. These champions could be an institution or person or persons fully
dedicated to development and poverty alleviation.

I want to return briefly to the issue of capacity constraints. State
institutions in the development field have indicated that they face
capacity constraints in project and financial management and project
implementation. This deficiency can be addressed by assessing the skills of
the nongovernmental sector where they exist or joint skills development
initiatives.

Due to time constraints, I have only mentioned a few of the portfolio
committee's recommendations to come out of its public hearings, but I want
to place on record that the IFP supports all of the recommendations.
Poverty alleviation and the development of our people, particularly the
rural poor, must be a national priority. All South Africans, whether they
are in state institutions or the nongovernmental sector, must urgently take
the necessary steps to address the problems.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr T SHABALALA: Thank you, Deputy Chair. I was about to finish. I needed
one second. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: The first type of order that I
pronounced, I learnt courtesy of hon Koos van der Merwe.

Dr R T RHODA: Thank you, Chairperson. We must bear in mind that many
countries which have been democracies of one sort or another for more than
100 years themselves continue to grapple with problems of a similar nature
to ours up to this day.

Seven years down the road from our first democratic elections is not a long
time in the greater scheme of things. In most things, we are doing
incredibly well. In others, we are doing things less effectively, but that
is not to say that we are doing badly. No. It's simply that there is room
for improvement.

Dissatisfaction about the way development funds are allocated and used
across the country is a typical example. Government has identified the
problem. As has been mentioned, various committees in Parliament are aware
that there is considerable dissatisfaction about the way development funds
are allocated and used across the country.

There are serious allegations about underspending and duplication of
effort. This committee was asked to work with other committees in the
economics cluster to convene public hearings on these matters with the
intention of examining systemic and policy issues so as to ascertain
whether development funds were achieving their objectives and purposes.

The report is based on evidence presented by these institutions. We cannot
escape the fact that we found that large amounts of money intended for
poverty relief, socially responsible investment and black economic
empowerment remain idle or unallocated in a number of these funds which
were dedicated funds set up by Government for these purposes. Reasons
forwarded in most cases were weak and skimpy. Bureaucracies, delays in
processing funding applications and procedural inefficiencies rather than a
lack of funds were offered as the cause for the bottleneck.

Special funds is not specifically a competency of the Trade and Industry
Department alone because we are dealing, I feel, with matters that concern
the socioeconomic section of practically all the portfolios that we have
today. It is for this reason that I would like to propose, at this point,
the establishment of a special committee on development funding and black
economic empowerment.

As I said, the report is based on evidence presented by several
institutions. Yes, indeed, large amounts of money intended for poverty
relief, socially responsible investment and black economic empowerment
remain idle or unallocated in a number of these dedicated funds. The main
reasons forwarded were understandable to me, given our past history and the
distortions it caused. It is the end of one process, and the beginning of
another.

We are indeed today still faced with severe capacity problems and skills
shortages. The report lists a number of very helpful recommendations. But,
most importantly, I feel there is a need for a national overarching vision
to guide the development funding, in spite of what the National Development
Agency had to say. Where there are inconsistencies in legislation,
Parliament must rectify that. Finally, reporting to Parliament by public
enterprises engaged in development funding should be more systematic and co-
ordinated.

In conclusion, our great leader, Nelson Mandela, once said, and I quote:


  Democracy will have little content and indeed will be short-lived if we
  cannot address our socioeconomic problems within an expanding and growing
  economy.

Let us roll up our sleeves like true patriots and try to solve this
problem. Thank you.

Mrs F MAHOMED: Chair, Minister, Deputy Minister, comrades and friends, in
the name of God Most Gracious Most Merciful. I wish to congratulate Mr
Shabalala on his maiden speech. Many debates on the developmental discourse
aim to scrutinise the tools used to achieve active real growth which
translates into skills development, capacity-building and job creation.
Sustained economic growth and sustainable development can be realised by
setting up effective systems and organising and co-ordinating spending of
accumulated resources.

Chair, it is true that apartheid created severe disparities and inequities
between black and white and it also widened the gap between the rich and
the poor. Economic deprivation continues to disempower the poorest of the
poor. Indeed many developmental funds aim to alleviate the scourge of
poverty and helplessness such as the RDP Fund, the National Development
Agency, Nicro, Non-Profit Partnership, National Empowerment Fund and many
others. This development funding must be used effectively and proactively.
Equitable disbursement of allocated funding will give opportunities to
allow disadvantaged communities to engage in socioeconomic activities and
this will help minimise past imbalances.

Advancement of women in the economic and business domain is becoming more
and more a subject of concern. Deliberate and concerted efforts should and
must be made to ensure that more women become players in the megabucks
industry and the blue chip companies so that they become major players in
policy formulation and trillion-dollar projects to advance our cause for
realising our developmental agenda. I am sad to say that only two agencies
were able to give me statistics on women recipients of developmental funds.
They are Kagiso Trust and the Community Chest. I congratulate them.

The challenge remains for other development agencies to present us with
statistics on the disbursement of funds to women and women NGOs. It is also
a woman's dream to realise her own potential and her full potential in
industrial development and to be a major player in the global village.
South Africans can indeed achieve optimal efficiency if we are successful
in employing our total available human and material and developmental
resources in such a way that the maximum feasible quantity of need-
satisfying goods and services are produced. This value-added production
will result in a reasonable degree of economic stability and sustainable
growth.

Perhaps in looking for an effective system of utilising developmental
funding and utilising other allocated resources in every economic system,
three fundamental questions come to mind: What, how and for whom? How much
of which alternative goods and services shall be needed to be produced? Who
will produce them and what resources and in what technical manner will this
be done?

Our present challenge is to use developmental funding effectively to
transform, conceptualise and realise our developmental agenda so that we
meet our new and urgent challenges by reaching our desired socioeconomic
goals. We all know these goals - our goals of sustainable development, our
goals of exploiting our human capital to acquire a desired skill so that
our people are able to compete in the domestic and global markets and, most
important of all, our goal to alleviate poverty.

It is important to create an enabling system of disbursement of
developmental funding which must consist of indispensable elements which I
will mention now. In my mind's view, I call it a filter mechanism in which
all claims must be passed to maintain a balance between resources and the
claims on them so that optimum efficiency and equity is realised. It must
provide a mechanism to motivate individuals to put their best performance
in their own interest and in the interest of society. In other words,
mentoring and the hand-holding process are necessary for any project to be
successful. So the new entrepreneur or the new entrant is not lonely in the
hard corporate world, because fear of failure and fear of the unknown are
sometimes devastating.

An effective way needs to be found so that socioeconomic restructuring
enables prompt transfer of funding without complex application forms and
heavy bureaucracy. Development funds should be more systemic and co-
ordinated. All the speakers have said that. NGOs should and must be
accountable and guided by clear objectiveness. They should become more
organised with a view to realising sustainability effectively; social
upliftment should contribute possibility to sustainable development and
poverty alleviation, and legislation should be consistent with respect to
NGO activities.

Also, an overarching vision to guide development funding is fundamental.
Therefore examined improvement to the regulation of development funding
spending is imperative. We all know that spending of RDP funds has to be
conducted according to the technical agreements between South Africa and
the donor organisations. It is important that these agreements be
encouraged to understand to help us realise our national objectives for our
developmental agenda.
During the hearings, the National Development Agency identified the
following challenges and also said that application backlogs had to be
processed: Their desire in improving their organisational structures and
mainstreaming HIV/Aids into their activities. Also they had mentioned the
decentralisation of the NDA and building network, streamlining projects and
ensuring proper oversight.

All agencies agreed that co-ordination is fundamental for effective
functioning of resources available. Non-Profit Partnership reiterated
during the hearings that development institutions face numerous challenges
including lack of capacity, inadequate funding, focus on investment rather
than development, slow disbursement of funds and also administrative
problems. Again, it is important for the harmonisation of development
institutions within a unified framework. The introduction of a tracking
system linked to an accessible database, and the setting of realistic and
measurable targets by increasing funds to vulnerable communities is the way
to go.

I just want to mention a little bit on the National Empowerment Fund. Let
us just remind ourselves in this case that there are three main components
to the NEF structure, namely private equity, venture capital and investment
services. The Venture Capital Programme was established in 2002 and
provides start-up and expansion capital. Some of the challenges highlighted
by the presentation included poor delivery, quick staff turnover and
capacity problems.

In conclusion, the hearings revealed that a great deal of development
activity is taking place in South Africa, but there is a need to synergise
and effectively co-ordinate activities around the said funding so that the
responsible agencies proactively disburse the earmarked moneys to the
targeted constituencies. Poverty eradication, skills development and job
creation should be some of our guidelines to spur on developmental funding.
It is important that development should have an overall vision of co-
ordination within Government, between Government and public entities,
between public entities and NGOs. Oversight and accountability of special
funds remain a challenge. Therefore, systems should be put in place to
track and monitor its effective spending of such resources which will
enhance and realise our developmental agenda.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Deputy Chair, the MF shares in the dissatisfaction of how
development funds are allocated and utilised across the country. It is
especially concerned about the serious allegations of underspending and
duplication of efforts. The MF is therefore pleased that the committee has
taken on the task of analysing systemic and policy issues in examining the
success of development funds. The MF is further pleased that this task
involved major stakeholders concerned with this dilemma.

Having viewed the report, the MF is perturbed by the circumstances. There
is a clear show of funds available for development work from Government and
foreign donors. We constantly stress how we are striving towards poverty
alleviation and social development, and the recognition of the need to
alleviate poverty and create jobs. So where is the loophole?

It appears that the flow of funds is often disrupted and hinders our
delivery negatively. Contributing to this is a lack of common vision and co-
ordination. This disappoints the MF as much as it disappoints the
citizenry. It is failures like these that give the media leeway to paint
negative pictures of our system. There are a number of factors that need to
be reviewed. With policies in place, it is disheartening that such glitches
still occur. The MF calls on the necessary bodies to embark on a clean-up
and to correct this negative fate of funds.

We have people starving and unemployed. There are resources to overcome
this. Let's put our weight behind ensuring delivery. We have a promising
and viable system and if all stakeholders could commit to delivery, we
would be in a better position than we are now. Thank you.

Dr R H DAVIES: Chairperson, the hearings which have resulted in the
production of the report, which we are discussing this afternoon, are the
product of an exercise that has taken us out of the usual silos within
which we normally operate in this Parliament. Many of the agencies which we
interacted with do not report to the Department of Trade and Industry, and
are not agencies with which we would normally engage in our regular routine
oversight. What we have been involved in here is an exercise which is based
on an investigation of a thematic nature, which reaches across a number of
different portfolios.

I want to begin by acknowledging the support of my colleagues in other
portfolio committees who encouraged our committee to pursue this
investigation. I particularly want to acknowledge the support of Mr
Nhlanhla Nene, the co-chair of the joint budget committee, who also
participated in the hearings.

When Government announces - usually in the Budget - that it intends to
establish a fund for poverty relief or developmental purposes, I think many
of us imagine that the very next day you can begin to apply for some of
these funds to be made available. In fact, that is the beginning of a
process which is often rather tortuous. First of all, very often the
Government has to raise the money concerned, and that happens during the
course of a Budget year. Then there is the question of the mandate for the
disbursement of these funds. That is often followed by the setting up of an
institution, the recruiting of staff, the setting up of procedures, and so
on.

This is a process which, I must say, many of us feel has taken an
inordinately long time. The result of this is that we now have a number of
different spending agencies, all with somewhat different mandates, somewhat
different criteria, and so on. All of this, I think, has to be seen against
the background of capacity constraints, capacity constraints both to
dispense and to absorb funds.
In this respect I want to take issue with the image that Mr Lowe presented
of Government bureaucrats in smart suits with fancy presentations, versus
hard-working grass-roots NGOs. I think this is somewhat of an
oversimplification. The truth is that the funding agencies actually have a
variable record. At best, I think, they are headed by rather hard-working,
dedicated and knowledgeable people.

But, more importantly, I think we need to acknowledge that the NGOs also
have a variable record. Whilst, at best, some of them have hard-working and
dedicated people, they also suffer from capacity constraints. They also
have administrative costs and, as the report highlights, it was
acknowledged that there is the issue of a lack of cohesion within the NGO
sector, which was the basis on which the predecessor of the National
Development Agency was set up in the first place. So, I think, the truth is
that we need to deal with capacity constraints both to dispense and to
absorb funds. That is our reality.

As Prof Turok highlighted at the beginning of the debate, one of our key
recommendations is that there is a need for a guiding national vision for
all of this activity. I think that the reality at the moment is that the
lack of this is leading to processes in which each individual agency is
working to define a mandate, to define criteria, to find a niche in this
rather crowded market. We feel that there does need to be a national
guiding vision, which we would also hope the NGOs would buy into.

We also feel that there are probably too many of these organisations. We
suggest that if Government in future wants to make money available for
these purposes, it should seriously consider capitalising, recapitalising
or providing resources to one of the existing agencies, and not setting up
a new fund. At the same time, I think we need to be clear that what we are
recommending is a process of co-ordination rather than necessarily
institutional merger, although that might be a product of the process of co-
ordination.

It is important to note that in our hearings, the National Development
Agency embraced and gave some very useful pointers on the way that this
might proceed. I would suggest that this body is perhaps well placed to
play a leading role in this process.

As I said at the beginning of my speech, these hearings are an exercise in
parliamentary oversight, which is a little different to the kinds of
exercises that we have been involved in. I do need to say that this
initiative emerged within the ANC study group, that it got support from
other chairs within the ANC, that we had the support of the Chief Whip, and
that there was no attempt by Ministers or members of the executive, in any
way, to stop us from carrying this out. I think this indicates that the ANC
wants an actively engaged Parliament that is involved in oversight,
oversight which is identifying policy and administrative and procedural
matters that need to be dealt with in order to realise our common objective
or rolling back the frontiers of poverty and delivering more effectively to
our people.

I want to suggest that this report is only a first stab at such an
exercise. I think that a lot of the recommendations are suggesting that
there needs to be reporting to Parliament on some of these issues. We might
have to consider how Parliament receives those reports. I'm not sure that
individual portfolio committees are necessarily going to be the way that
this needs to be done. I think the joint budget committee could play a
central role, and that clusters will certainly have to be considered for
some of this. But I do think that Parliament's role in this can be an
active one, as some of the reactions to our report already have shown. I
therefore have pleasure in commending this report to this Parliament. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I think the final concluding
points that were made by the hon Davies have indeed to be carefully
considered in order that we know exactly how Parliament will deal with
these reports. I would like to place this on record so that the matter is
dealt with expeditiously.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Deputy Chair, may I first start by
expressing my condolences to the family of my friend Rudi Heine. I was
unable to be there today. Rudi and I go back a long way when I was a
unionist organising his factory in Pinetown and it is sad that one of the
good people of our country is gone.

Deputy Chairperson, you have, in a way, summarised what I was going to say.
May I first congratulate the committees on having such a hearing. I think
this is, as the hon Ben Turok and Rob Davies have both indicated, a
somewhat new form of hearing, and of oversight, and I think it has the
potential to break new ground, because we need to begin thinking ahead on
how these various endeavours to bring about development can be better co-
ordinated and more effective.

I would urge you to consider a little more deeply on how we go forward on
this matter. It may be that you wish to have more hearings. It may be, as
the hon Rob Davies said at the end, that you want to think through how the
reporting should take place. I would urge you to think of a few things. I
think there is a difference between Government's endeavours in which, we
will all concede, I think, there is a little bit of duplication at present;
maybe too many funds. Some thought needs to be given to how we as
Government co-ordinate these activities because there are certainly
considerable resources now available for activities.

I think in the NGO domain, for me, what is fundamental is an NGO as an NGO.
It is a nongovernmental organisation. It is something that needs to grow
and develop, not absolutely dependent on Government because, if it is, I
don't think it is fulfilling its fundamental objective. I think we have to
accept that there has been a tremendous change in the environment in which
the NGOs have to work.

There is a great difference. There is a great difference between the time
when NGOs were part of some broad struggle and the time where they must now
play a role in making our society better outside of that very stark set of
circumstances that many an NGO existed in. I speak as someone coming from
probably one of the most powerful NGOs that was formed in this society.

How do we do this? It would be wrong, I think, to attempt to make sure that
we as Parliament had oversight of every NGO. It can't be right. Obviously,
it also needs to be necessary for NGOs to have access to public resources
in one way or another, be it from the Lottery, NDA or whatever. So I think
the wisdom of the multiparty processes in Parliament and your own processes
are necessary here. Let us think this through because what we are trying to
create is a society and an environment where developmental endeavours are
secure, innovative and effective, and how that is done is not absolutely
simple. No one has the answer. We may well be breaking new ground here.

So I would urge you to continue on this work and see how we work this
through. I think Government is very receptive to it. It would be a sad day
for our new democracy if we responded to every form of pressure by creating
a new fund or new money. We need a system. We need a framework. We need to
protect what one hopes and believes - and I think this is the case - is the
vitality that comes from NGOs - a sense of exploration and the meeting of
urgent and usually specific needs. We need to ensure that there is support
for NGOs from public funds.

I would counsel against new committees dealing with development and BEE. I
think we have enough structures. I think if we could say anything from the
executive's side, we would urge you to  continue the work, reflect, engage
and see whether we can develop - and I think we can - a framework that
gives guidance and direction on how Government should interact with NGOs
and give the NGOs some support for their work, but also allows those people
that they work with to hold them to account. I think that is something that
I would like to stress from my own experience in the past. What is most
important is that the people that the NGOs purport to benefit must be able
to hold them to account. It is not that we as Parliament should hold them
to account for something else.

I think there is great work to be done. We have many challenges to
overcome. The great achievement that we should all be thankful for is that
we have achieved a situation where we can create the resources for these
things to take place. It is not every society in this world or every
society on this continent that has managed to achieve that. We may have
many criticisms, as we all do, of something like the Lottery, but the
amounts of money that are actually going out are unprecedented in this
society.

So these are achievements that we all have been able to achieve and I would
like to congratulate you on the work you have done. I think it is path-
breaking. We begin to look ahead, and I would really urge you, on behalf of
the executive and other Ministers that are involved, to take this process
further. We will begin to reflect on it in the executive, but could you
take it further. This is something that should not be a political debating
point. This is something where genuine bipartisan multiparty work can be
done to give us a better delivery system for the NGOs and for development
as a whole. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The Chair recommends that this
matter be referred to the hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party to see how
the request and recommendations, both of the Minister and of the hon
Davies, can be processed.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move that the House note the
Report.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 18:24.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             MONDAY, 2 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills:


    (i)     Exchange Control Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill -
         Act No 12 of 2003 (assented to and signed by President on 30 May
         2003).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    On 30 May 2003 the Speaker received a legislative proposal on
          the public auditing function from Dr Z P Jordan, MP, Chairperson
          of the Audit Commission on behalf of the Audit Commission.


          Copies of the proposal can be obtained from the Office of the
          Clerk of the Papers.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:
1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Government Notice No R 663 published in Government Gazette No 24867
     dated 16 May 2003: Code of Conduct for Debt Collectors made in terms of
     section 14(b) of the Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).

2.    The Acting Minister of Transport:


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2003-2004.

                            TUESDAY, 3 JUNE 2003

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister for Safety and Security:


         (i)     Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 28 - 2003] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              24767 of 25 April 2003.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and
         Security of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 4 June 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     Strategic Plan of the Public Service Commission for 2003-2006.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     COMMUNIQUÉ OF THE STEERING COMMITTEE ON THE PROTOCOL TO THE TREATY
     ESTABLISHING THE AFRICAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY (AEC) RELATING TO THE PAN
     AFRICAN PARLIAMENT - ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA - 28 APRIL 2003:


     1.     At the initiative of the Commission of the African Union, the
         Steering Committee (Botswana, Cameroon, Gabon, Libya, Mali,
         Rwanda, SADR, South Africa, Tanzania and Togo) on the Protocol to
         the Treaty establishing the AEC relating to the Pan African
         Parliament, met at the AU Headquarters, in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
         on 28 April 2003.


     2.     This Committee was established in conformity with the decision
         of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government which met in
         Durban, South Africa in July 2002, upon the proposal of the
         Consultative Meeting of the African Parliaments which was held in
         June 2002, in Cape Town, South Africa.


     3.     The Meeting unanimously elected Dr. Frene Ginwala, Speaker of
         the South African Parliament, as Chairperson of the Steering
         Committee.


     4.     The Committee agreed to work closely with National and Regional
         Parliaments and other deliberative organs in Member States, in
         particular, to coordinate its actions and initiatives with the
         African Parliamentary Union and other parliamentary bodies towards
         the acceleration of the process of ratification and
         operationalization of the Protocol to the Treaty establishing the
         AEC relating to the Pan African Parliament.


     5.     The Committee was briefed by Amb. Said Djinnit, Interim
         Commissioner for Peace, Security and Political Affairs of the
         Commission, on behalf of the Interim Chairperson of the
         Commission, on the priorities and activities of the Union during
         the interim period, in particular, the progress made in
         establishing the key organs of the Union, and the political and
         socio-economic situation on the Continent.


     6.     Following an exhaustive exchange of views on the ways and means
         of accelerating the ratification and operationalization of the
         Protocol to the Treaty establishing the AEC relating to the Pan
         African Parliament, the Committee agreed as follows:


         *  Appealed to all Member States that had not signed and/or
              ratified the Protocol to do so as soon as possible;


         *  The need for the Commission to request Member States to provide
              information on their constitutional processes and procedures
              for the ratification of treaties and the current stage of
              ratification of the Protocol relating to the Pan African
              Parliament;


         *  The Permanent Representatives to the AU should be requested to
              inform the Commission on a regular basis, on the progress made
              in the ratification of the Protocol;
         *  The members of the Steering Committee should work closely with
              existing regional Parliamentary structures, in particular, the
              Parliamentary Fora of SADC, CEMAC, UEMOA, ECOWAS, EAP, UMA and
              IGAD.


         *  The Commission should send the text of all AU Treaties to
              National Parliaments for information and appropriate action.


     7.     The Committee exchanged views on the vision of the Pan African
         parliament.


     8.     The Committee requested the Commission to bring to the attention
         of the 3rd Extra Ordinary Session of the Executive Council
         scheduled for Sun City, South Africa in May 2003, the outcome of
         this meeting and to urge all Member States to expedite the signing
         and/or ratification of the Protocol.


     9.     The Committee agreed to hold its second meeting before the
         Maputo Summit to assess the progress made and to prepare its
         report to be submitted to the Summit in July 2003.
     10.    At the end of its deliberations, the Steering Committee
         expressed its appreciation to the Commission for the initiative
         taken in convening the meeting. The Committee commended the
         Interim Chairperson of the Commission and all his collaborators
         for the actions undertaken during the interim period.


     Addis Ababa, Ethiopia


     28 April 2003


     Referred to the Working Group on the African Union.

2.    The Speaker:


     (1)    Seventh Report of the Working Group on the African Union, dated
         3 June 2003:


         1. Introduction


              Following its Sixth Report, adopted by the House on 11 April
              2003, the Working Group would like to report as follows:
         2. The Pan African Parliament Steering Committee


              The Working Group reported in its Sixth Report that it would
              follow up with the African Union on the establishment of a
              representative steering committee of Parliamentarians to
              support and co-ordinate the steps necessary to achieve the
              ratification of the Protocol. The African Union Interim
              Commission has since established the Steering Committee which
              is made up of two member states from each of the five African
              regions. Members of the Steering Committee have been selected
              on the basis of precedence in the ratification of the PAP
              Protocol. In the case of those regions where no member states
              have as yet ratified, members have been selected on the basis
              of precedence in the signing of the Protocol. The Southern
              Africa region is represented by Botswana and South Africa.
              The first meeting of the Steering Committee was held in Addis
              Abbaba, Ethiopia on 28 April 2003. At the meeting, the
              Speaker, Dr F N Ginwala, was elected as the Chairperson of
              the Steering Committee. At the end of the meeting, the
              Committee issued a communiquÿ which, among others, appealed
              to all member states that had not signed and/or ratified the
              Protocol to do so as soon as possible.


         3. Meeting of African Parliaments


             The Working Group also reported and recommended previously that
              a meeting be convened for countries that have ratified the
              Protocol to begin to develop a common vision and
              understanding. The Working Group has since agreed that this
              meeting of African Parliaments should involve not only the
              countries that have ratified, but all the African countries.
              The Working Group has established a Task Team comprising ten
              members to deliberate and make recommendations on the
              programme content and resource people for the Meeting.


         4. Recommendations


             The National Assembly should consider -


              (1) Convening a Meeting of African Parliaments on 30 June and
                  1 July 2003 to exchange views on the Pan African
                  Parliament with a view to building a common vision.


              (2) Inviting the following participants to the Meeting:


                  a.   1 Speaker and 2 members from each Parliament, with 1
                       out of the 3 delegates being a woman;


                  b.   The Speakers of each of the regional Parliaments;


                  c.   Members of the Pan African Parliament Steering
                       Committee; and


                  d.   South African members of Parliament.


         Report to be considered.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on Study Tour to Japan,
     dated 24 January 2003:


     The Portfolio Commmittee on Defence, having undertaken a study tour to
     Japan from 14 to 20 April 2002, reports as follows:


     A.     Introduction


         1. Background


              Japan and South Africa (SA) have similar positions with regard
              to many security-related issues; i.e. the need for nuclear non-
              proliferation, the banning of anti-personnel landmines, peace
              support operations and the promotion of democracy and human
              rights. Like SA, it is a military and economic regional power,
              which places certain responsibilities on it.


              Even though Japan lacks natural resources, is 75% mountainous
              and is far from foreign markets, it has the second largest
              global economy. It furthermore has a per capita income of
              almost US$40 000 and a population of 126 million.


              Japan's defence spending is comparable to that of China, even
              though its uniformed personnel is a tenth of that of China's.
              The Japanese Constitution, however, prohibits engagements in
              foreign military conflicts. Although the Japanese Self-Defence
              Force (JSDF) may partake in peace support operations, the JSDF
              may only act in self-defence of its own personnel.


              The objectives of the study tour were to share views on
              parliamentary oversight, peace support operations, post-Cold
              War defence management, civil/military relations, arms control
              and the defence industry.


         2. Courtesy calls


              Courtesy calls were undertaken to the following dignitaries:


              *   Mr ME Mminele, South Africa's acting ambassador


              *   Mr Nakatani, Minister of Defence Agency (i.e. Department
                  of Defence)


              *   Mr K Tamaki, Chairperson of the Committee on Security
                  (House of Representatives)


              *   Mr K Tameki, Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign
                  Affairs and Defence (House of Councillors)


              *   Mr S Sugiura, Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs.


         3. Delegation


              The delegation consisted of Ms T R Modise, MP (ANC), Mr J N
              Mashimbye, MP (ANC), Mr V B Ndlovu, MP (IFP), Mr H C Schmidt,
              MP (DP), and Mr G Campher, Committee Secretary.


     B.     Defence Policy of Japan


         Japan's post-World War II defence policy was based on:


         1. An exclusive self-defence posture.


         2. Adherence to the Japan-US security arrangement.


         3. The establishment of foundations for national security through
              efforts for peace and co-operation.


         This is encapsulated in the Constitution, as follows:


              ``Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on
              justice and order,


              the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right
              of the nation and the threat or use as a means of settling
              international disputes ...


              The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognised"


         [Japanese Constitution - Article 9].


         An example of this self-defence posture is the fact that the in-
         flight fuel apparatus of the American F-15J fighter aircraft,
         which is manufactured under licence in Japan, was removed so that
         the aircraft could not be used beyond Japanese airspace.


         The US-Japan Security Treaty came into force in 1951. It
         stipulated that the USA will defend Japanese and regional
         interests and will maintain military bases with 100 000 personnel
         in Japan. This treaty forms the basis of Japan's Self-Defence
         Force (SDF) Act and its security policies. It also forms the basis
         of military co-operation between the two countries; i.e. joint
         military exercises, provisioning of goods and services, research
         and development, and technology transfers. This effectively means
         that the US is the formal guarantor of Japanese security.


         In April 2002, the Japanese government submitted three pieces of
         legislation to the Diet (Japanese Parliament), in an effort to
         review security legislation. The first bill will define the basic
         framework for the government to make decisions with regard to a
         foreign armed-attack. It will enable the Prime Minister (PM) to
         establish a task team, should Japan come under military attack.
         The Cabinet will adopt fundamental policies, which must be
         approved by the Diet, to deal with the situation. The public will
         be obliged to obey these measures, as failure will result in fines
         or imprisonment.


         The second bill will amend the SDF Act to enable the SDF to engage
         in necessary operations in the event of a military attack. It will
         authorise the SDF to initiate preparations for an attack, even
         before the PM, as commander-in-chief, has issued such an order.
         During the attack, the SDF might be authorised to apply force to
         fend off an attack and even to launch a counter-attack.


         The third bill will grant the Security Council, an advisory body
         to the PM, greater power to deal with emergencies.


         The Diet


         The Diet consists of the House of Representatives and the House of
         Councillors, and came into existence in 1890 by virtue of the
         Meiji Constitution, which was based on monarchism. In this
         imperial Diet, the emperor, on the recommendation of senior
         statesmen, appointed the PM. The PM and his Cabinet was thus
         accountable to the emperor and not to the Diet or populace.


         The new Constitution, i.e. the one after World War Two (WWII),
         proclaimed that sovereign power resided with the people and not
         the emperor, who became the symbol of the state. The PM and a
         majority of Ministers of State are currently designated from among
         Diet members. The Cabinet is collectively responsible to the Diet,
         and if the House of Representatives pass a vote of no-confidence,
         the Cabinet resigns en bloc or the House dissolves itself in order
         that an appeal could be made to the populace.


         Members of the Diet are elected by universal suffrage. The 480
         members of the House of Representatives are elected for a four-
         year term, while half of the 252 members of the House of
         Councillors are elected every third year for a six-year term.
         Members of the Diet are elected by proportional representation and
         single-seat or prefectural constituencies.


         The Houses have Standing, Research and Special Committees. No
         business may be transacted unless at least one half of a
         committee's members are present. The only observers at meetings
         are the media and those that have the chairperson's permission.


     C.     Mr Takemi (Committee Chairperson: House of Councillors)
         Mr Takemi is the former State Secretary for Africa Affairs. He
         stated that the Constitution renounced war due to the fact that
         the populace, which did not prevent the military from plunging
         Japan into WWII, was repentant. The result was pacifism and strong
         civil-military control over the military. However, some sectors of
         the population, especially the youth, were against Article 9,
         because it made security arrangements inflexible. For example,
         Japan has the right to collective defence, like any country, as
         per the UN Charter, but Article 9 prohibits the use thereof. The
         result is that:


         1. The JSDF may not defend another country during peace-keeping
              missions, even though that would defend JSDF units.


         2. It could not provide military units to ``Operation Enduring
              Freedom'' in Afghanistan.


         3. It cannot do anything about suspicious ships in its territorial
              waters.


         Mr Takemi stated that he supported the New Partnership for
         Africa's Development (NEPAD) and wanted Japan to become more
         involved with African affairs. He also welcomed SA's role in
         pushing for UN reforms, SA's relentless struggle to overcome
         apartheid and SA's efforts to strengthen democracy. A Science and
         Technology Agreement was also recently signed between SA and Japan
         to enhance co-operation in this field.


     D.     Mr Tamaki (Committee Chairperson: House of Representatives)


         Mr Tamaki stated that the military did not account to the populace
         before WWII. However, its influence vanished after the war with
         the effect that pacifism, which was entrenched in the
         Constitution, became a dominant feature of Japanese society. He
         warned, however, that the Diet's power seemed to be waning,
         because approval for deployment of the JSDF for peace-keeping
         operations and the ``War on Terror'' was only sought after the
         deployments.


         Japan was working tirelessly through international co-operation
         missions to improve security in the region, so that incidents such
         as the alleged kidnapping of Japanese nationals by North Korean
         agents could be addressed.


     E.     JSDF and Society


         The JSDF consists of the Ground Self-Defence Force (GSDF), Air
         Self-Defence Force (ASDF) and Maritime Self-Defence Force (MSDF),
         i.e. Army, Air Force and Navy. JSDF activities are supported by
         local governments and various groups. This support boosts the
         morale of JSDF personnel and promotes a feeling that they are
         working with the public to ensure Japan's security. The above-
         mentioned activities include recruitment operations and supporting
         retired JSDF members in their search for employment. The Reserve
         Force system has a broad understanding and acceptance within the
         private sector, which might be due to the fact that the Defence
         Agency (the DoD) provides subsidies to companies and organisations
         that employ reserves and retired soldiers.
     F.     GSDF Information Centre


         This centre aims to inform the public on matters of defence, i.e.
         defence spending, defence operations, structure, size and force
         design of the JSDF and other defence forces, as well as on
         regional and international balance of power. The ASDF and MSDF
         have their own information centres. The centre has a theatre, with
         a three-dimensional screen, which show videos of the GSDF in
         action. There are also military video games and free photo
         opportunities in GSDF uniforms. The history of the GSDF, which was
         established after WWII, is also illustrated, whilst weapon systems
         (main battle tanks, armoured vehicles and attack helicopters),
         uniforms, parachutes and small arms are also on display.


         The centre is open to both the JSDF and the public, and entrance
         is free. It plays a major role in educating the public on the role
         of, and the need for, a defence force, not only among the older
         generation, who did not want a defence force after WWII, but also
         among the younger generation, who serves as a feeder system for
         the JSDF.
     G.     Mr Nakatani (Minister of Defence)


         The Minister expressed his pleasure at the fact that the Portfolio
         Committee on Defence was the first SA parliamentary committee to
         visit Japan. He stated that Japan strongly believed in non-nuclear
         and non-offensive defence policies, as it was the only country
         that experienced the devastating effect of nuclear weapons. This
         resulted in a demilitarised society, where civilians do not own
         fire-arms. He added that SA had played a positive role in ensuring
         peace in the world and paid tribute to SA for having delivered
         four Nobel Peace prize recipients.


     H.     Mr Hayashi (Cabinet Peacekeeping Office)


         Article 9 provided the framework for International Co-operations,
         which has three aspects:


         *  UN peace-keeping operations (PKO)


         *  International humanitarian relief


         *  International election-monitoring activities.


         The SDF was involved in seven international co-operation missions
         since 1992. These included Angola, Cambodia, Mozambique, El
         Salvador, Zaire-Kenya, Israel-Syria-Lebanon and Bosnia-
         Herzegovina. It had recently sent 700 SDF personnel to East Timor
         to monitor the ``elections for independence''.


         Furthermore, the Cabinet approves, whilst the Diet ratifies, all
         peace-keeping operations.


         Even though Japan contributed 20% to the UN PKO budget, the UN
         wanted it to be more involved in peace-keeping by providing ground
         forces. The SDF has certain constitutional constraints, and is
         therefore only used for medical, logistical, engineering
         assistance and rear support for other peace-keepers. It does not
         do patrolling, disarming or separation of belligerent parties.
         This may change due to the results of the ``11 September 2001''
         attacks in the US.


         Due to the restrictions contained in Article 9, the JSDF applies
         the following five principles whilst participating in a UN Peace-
         keeping Force (PKF):


         *  Agreement on a cease-fire should have been reached between the
              belligerents
         *  Consent from the host countries and the belligerents for the
              peace-keeping operation and Japan's inclusion in the PKF
         *  The operations should maintain impartiality
         *  The Japanese government may withdraw the SDF if any of the
              above cease to be satisfied
         *  The use of weapons should be limited to the minimum necessary
              to protect the lives of own personnel.


     I.     Mr N Odano (Director-General: Sub-Saharan African Affairs)




         Mr Odano emphasised the fact that Japan has an independent foreign
         policy as a sovereign country, in spite of the US-Japan security
         arrangement. For example, Japan has good relations with Iran,
         which it believes is an important player in the Middle East. Japan
         approached Iran to join the ``War on Terror'' campaign. Japan's
         strategy to apartheid was also different to that of the US. For
         example, whilst the US had an embassy in SA, Japan only maintained
         a consular office. Japan furthermore applied the sport boycott
         strictly, whilst the US did not.


         He stated that the US-Japan security arrangement was useful,
         because it helped to stabilise the region. The strait between
         China and Taiwan was unstable because of missile launches by
         China, whilst the Korean Peninsula was unstable because of the
         remnants of the Cold War between North Korea and South Korea.


     J.     Mr Seriyama (Deputy Director: Defence Policy)


         The US-Japan treaty was militarily one-sided, because Japan would
         not be able to defence US interests, owing to Article 9. As such,
         Japan only provided logistical support to the US in the Indian
         Ocean during the ``War on Terror'' campaign.
         The Tokyo International Conference on Africa's Development (Ticad)
         was established by Japan in 1993 as a vehicle to promote
         development in Africa. It was based on ownership and partnership
         and not only aid. SA's then Deputy President, Thabo Mbeki,
         attended and delivered a paper at Ticad 2 in 1998. Ticad 3 will be
         held during October 2003.


         The primary theme of Ticad 2 was ``Poverty reduction and
         integration into the global economy''. It focused on:


         *  Social development, i.e. the promotion of education, health,
              access to water and the eradication or control of certain
              diseases


         *  Economic development, i.e. debt management, debt relief and the
              establishment of investment and technological promotion
              centres


         *  Basic foundations for development, i.e. destruction of anti-
              personnel mines, establishment of good governance forums and
              Asia-Africa forums.
     K.     Defence-related Industry


         Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is Japan's biggest defence company. It
         manufactures, designs, researches, develops, produces and tests
         armoured vehicles and main battle tanks.


         Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Company Ltd is involved in
         the military and commercial engine market. It builds, overhauls
         and repairs engines for fighter aircrafts, passenger aircrafts,
         patrol aeroplanes, flying boats, helicopters, space shuttles and
         ships.


         Most defence companies are diversified, because of the small
         defence industry. The decrease of defence budgets globally
         resulted in the downscaling of the local defence industry. The
         Japanese defence budget is, nevertheless, relatively high, due to
         the fact that:


         *  Japan cannot export its military products, because of Article 9


         *  Locally- produced defence equipment are more expensive, because
              of a lack of competition. The result is that the industry is
              not efficient, as it cannot recoup some of the massive capital
              inputs from exports.


     L.     Recommendations


         The delegation recommends as follows:


         1. That the Department of Foreign Affairs be requested to
              investigate the issue of allowances for the diplomatic corps,
              because the standard of living is quite high in certain
              countries.


         2. That the SA government promote the reserve system in the
              broader community through partnerships and incentives,
              particularly in the private sector.


         3. That the Department of Defence establish information centres to
              broaden public understanding and appreciation of the SANDF.
         4. That the SANDF and the JSDF share knowledge and expertise.


         5. That economic, political, cultural and defence ties be
              strengthened with Japan.


     M.     Appreciation


         The delegation would like to thank our Acting Ambassador and the
         Japanese Ambassador, as well as their respective staff, for the
         assistance and friendship which assured the success of the visit.


     Report to be considered.



