---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 June 2003'
layout: debate
year: 2003
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2003/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2003-06-10
---

TUESDAY, 10 JUNE 2003
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 9:32.

The Chairperson of Committees  took  the  Chair  and  requested  members  to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 2 - Parliament:

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, I would like  to  make  my  starting  point
this morning the older generation who nurtured and led us  to  democracy.  I
am thinking of people like Oliver Tambo, who of course  himself  never  even
sat in the gallery. I am also  thinking  of  people  like  the  late  Walter
Sisulu and Comrade Woolfie Kordesh, who at least had the honour  to  sit  in
the gallery and look at us from there, but who, although they  never  became
members of Parliament, I want us to remember, were more honourable than  any
who have ever graced these benches. [Applause.]

I am thinking of those who came to Parliament briefly, and I remember the
old lady Dorothy Nyembe, who had been imprisoned. By the time she came
here, she could just shuffle around for some time, and then she retired.
She has since passed on. I think of the late Thomas Ngobi, the late Archie
Gumede and others who have since passed on, but who at least became members
of Parliament after the democratic dispensation came into being.

I also think of some others like Brian Bunting, MaSisulu, MaShope, MaTambo,
MaKuzwayo and others, who did manage to serve in the first democratically
elected Parliament, and have since retired and sadly today are struggling
with inadequate medical aid, no tickets to travel, and yet other ex-members
of Parliament have quite a number of tickets to travel every year.
[Applause.] They have very little pension, unlike other ex-members of
Parliament who were fortunate enough to come and serve here under a
different dispensation, while the ones that I am talking about served the
country for many years before they came to sit briefly on these benches.
But today, they hardly survive on the little pension that they get.

I believe that we as parliamentarians need to think about the state of
affairs that affects them, and we need to at least honour them with a
decent old age for what they have given to this country. [Applause.]

We need to pay tribute to the older generation of all types and backgrounds
for having survived the times that they lived through, wherever they were,
whatever they were doing, but in particular those that sit with us here
today. I don't see Bab'uFazzie, but he is a member of this Parliament.
[Interjections.] Or Bab'uMiddleton ngala uIFP, or Bab'uSchalkwyk and my
friend Colin Eglin, I don't know where he is ... [Interjections] ... for
having been exemplary when they were exemplary, because we also know that
some have done bad things, but we must not remember those things. We must
not pay tribute to those things. We must remember and pay tribute and learn
lessons from the good things that they have done.

I remember the hon Colin Eglin during the constitution-making times,
because of the positive attitude he had as we did that work, which was not
easy at all for a person who came from the kind of background that he came
from.

I believe they need to be congratulated for surviving those times and for
still being part of us.

This year is the year before elections. All of us here are members of
political parties and naturally are getting, if we have not done so
already, into election campaign mode. I believe that there are certain
things which, because this is the last year before the next elections, we
as members of this Parliament have a responsibility to tighten, or take
certain decisions and certain positions on in order to enable the next
Parliament to start from a better basis than what we found when we came
here.

I do, of course, know we have to bear in mind that we can't in every
respect tie the hands of the next Parliament by taking very binding
decisions that perhaps the next Parliament might prefer to look at in a
different way. But I would like to touch on a few things that I believe
this collective, which was elected and has been here for the past four
years, needs to try and finalise during its last year.

Firstly, around the question of the legislative programme, I believe we
need to look at that, bearing in mind the limited time we have left before
the next election. On the side of the members of the executive, clearly
there is a responsibility for those members to prioritise what in fact
needs to be and can be passed before the next election so that we don't
find ourselves faced with a long list of legislation, some of which really
could wait for the next parliament. So, there is the question of
prioritisation that in particular members of the executive have to be
conscious of.

But from our side, as Parliament, we must make sure that we finalise and
pass the Powers and Privileges Act, because that's a very important piece
of legislation that has been on our slate for quite some time. [Applause.]
It has very serious implications for Parliament, not only this Parliament,
but future parliaments, and how we believe Parliament should function, and
what should inform its functioning.

The second issue is the question of the process that we started when we had
discussions, both in the NCOP and in the National Assembly, on the vision
and mission of Parliament. I believe those are exercises we must try and
bring to a close. On the side of the National Assembly, at the end of the
last session that we had, we formed a task team, headed by the hon Chohan-
Khota. Its members have since met and it has made certain proposals that we
must look at. We should see to it that we finalise those processes and then
merge the two processes of the two Houses so that we can come out with one
vision and mission for the whole Parliament.

The third issue which I believe is important is the language policy. The
Joint Rules Committee has tasked the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP and
myself to head a task team that has been looking at this matter. We have
had a number of meetings, and have had a number of drafts, and we hope that
the next Joint Rules Committee can look at a document that perhaps would
take us closer to adopting a language policy for this institution.

The last issue I want to mention around this particular point about those
things that I believe we need to do before the elections is the question of
the old debate of integrated committees of Parliament. Those of you who
were members of the first democratically elected Parliament will remember
that there were times when we had documents of all colours. I think there
was once an orange one, which produced a series of arguments and options
and scenarios whereby we were saying: How can we try and pool committees
that belong to the same cluster together so that we actually have
structures that enable us to look at policy in an integrated fashion?

I believe that before the elections we, this collective, must perhaps just
revisit that debate, and see if we can come up with proposals that could
lay a better basis for the structuring of the next Parliament,
postelections.

I now want to move on to the question of how this Parliament must consider
preparing itself for the Pan-African Parliament. As you are aware, we
formed this working group which has been looking at all matters relating to
the African Union. But in particular, there is the issue of the Pan-African
Parliament which we in South Africa have offered to host, and, in fact,
that position has since been adopted by SADC. It is now officially a SADC
position.

So, if all goes well, perhaps the next summit might agree that indeed South
Africa must host the Pan-African Parliament, but the issue is: How does
this Parliament prepare itself for being part of a Pan-African Parliament?
There is also the issue of our, at some point, electing a delegation of
people who would then represent us in the Pan-African Parliament. But apart
from that, I think that we should consider that, even in our own
restructuring, we have to consider the question of where and how we are
going to deal with issues relating to the Pan-African Parliament, but also
all the other organs of the African Union.

Are we going to continue with the approach of saying that it is not
feasible for the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs to deal with all
the issues relating to the policy of the Government of South Africa with
relation to foreign affairs, as well as deal with the issues of the AU? Are
we going to then form a structure that is going to look at issues of the
AU, or are we going to have a different approach? These are questions that
I am just posing to remind us that these things are facing us, and we can't
shun our responsibility by just shelving them and hoping that some miracle
is going to happen with a new Parliament that did not start the kind of
work that we have already started doing. So, we have to look at the issue
of the restructuring of Parliament, taking that particular question into
account.

 The second issue around this point is the question of the programme of
Parliament itself accommodating the programme of the Pan-African
Parliament. Perhaps Mondays would need to be given to the delegates of
South Africa to the Pan-African Parliament. We will have to consider
reports that will have to come back from that Pan-African Parliament, and
how we will process them. I believe that these are all issues that we need
to exercise our minds on.

These questions, which relate to the Pan-African Parliament and the AU, are
linked to the earlier issue which I raised, and that is our needing to
consider how we propose to have integrated structures for the new
Parliament, or that we would like to propose for the consideration of the
new Parliament.

I believe that these are some of the matters that we must not avoid and
which we must not leave hanging in the air. So, thank you very much for
your attention and the time that I have been given to be able to share
these thoughts, questions and anxieties on matters which I believe are the
responsibility of all of us. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A C NEL: Chairperson, colleagues, 91 years ago, on 8 January 1912, the
people of South Africa came together to form a parliament of the people,
known as the African National Congress. Forty-three years later this
parliament of the people played a leading role in organising the Congress
of the People, another parliament of the people, that adopted the Freedom
Charter on 26 June 1955.

Gathered at this Congress of the People were representatives of the people
from all corners of the country, urban and rural; men and women; rich and
poor; workers and peasants; students; artists, and religious leaders. They
came together to discuss the demands of the people that had been collected
in the most democratic process known to our country up to then. These
representatives asserted on behalf of the people that:


  We, the people of South Africa, declare for all our country and the world
  to know:


     that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white, and
     that no government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the
     will of all the people;


     that our people have been robbed of their birthright to land, liberty
     and peace by a form of government founded on injustice and inequality;


     that our country will never be prosperous or free until all our people
     live in brotherhood, enjoying equal rights and opportunities;


     that only a democratic state, based on the will of all the people, can
     secure to all their birthright without distinction of colour, race, sex
     or belief;


     And therefore, we, the people of South Africa, black and white together
     equals, countrymen and brothers, adopt this Freedom Charter;


     And we pledge ourselves to strive together, sparing neither strength
     nor courage, until the democratic changes here set out have been won.

It was this vision and these principles that guided the people of South
Africa, led by the African National Congress, as they struggled for the
establishment of a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous nation.

Now, as we near our first decade of freedom, it is appropriate that we
reflect on the role that Parliament has played, and still needs to play, in
the achievement of the objectives outlined in the Freedom Charter.
In 1994 the most immediate tasks confronting us were the translation of the
principles and demands of the Freedom Charter and other policy documents
into Government policy; replacing the apartheid legal framework with a
democratic one, and, at the same time, the transformation of the Public
Service that was supposed to implement these new policies and laws.

During the period 1994-1999 Parliament passed a phenomenal amount of
legislation. Year on year, the number of Acts passed increased from 55 in
1994, to 89 in 1995, 108 in 1996 and 1997 each, culminating with 136 in
1998. During this same period, 56 White Papers were produced setting out
the policy framework of the democratic Government. Then, in the period from
1999 to date, having laid a legislative and policy foundation, we
increasingly focused on accelerating delivery. Parliament passed between 60
and 75 Bills per year.

Since 1994 Parliament has passed 780 pieces of legislation. Virtually none
of the demands raised in the Freedom Charter has been left unattended to.
In many cases much remains to be done, but in respect of each and every
demand, a solid foundation has been laid. When we talk of the demand that
``the people shall govern'', we think of our new Constitution, we think of
the Financial and Fiscal Commission Act, the Local Government: Municipal
Structures Act, etc.

The demand that ``all national groups shall have equal rights'' is
addressed in, amongst others, the Pan-South African Language Board Act. The
Extension of Security of Tenure Act and the Restitution of Land Rights Act,
amongst others, seek to address the demand that ``the land shall be shared
among those who work it''. The Human Rights Commission Act, the Public
Protector Act, and the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act
all seek to give expression to the demand that ``all shall enjoy equal
human rights'', and ``all shall be equal before the law''.

This policy and legislative framework was established in the same spirit of
openness, transparency and participation that characterised the Congress of
the People. Our Parliament has succeeded in bringing together
representatives of the people, the rich diversity of our nation. These
representatives have engaged each other in robust and, at times,
acrimonious debate. However, a spirit of collegiality has always prevailed
in the end.

Slowly but surely a national consensus has been forged around national
priorities, despite the fact that we might disagree on how those priorities
should be addressed. Parliament, as a forum for national debate, has played
an important role in this regard. Unfortunately, some still remain sadly
confused, whether deliberately or otherwise.

Speaking in a debate on the role of Parliament in alleviating poverty in
October 2002, the hon Bernice Sono, then a DP MP, said:


  ... the alleviation of poverty is the task of the Government and the
  executive, not of Parliament. Parliament's job is to hold the executive
  to account. We as legislators have to see to it that the Government takes
  steps to alleviate poverty. When ...

I stress ``when'', not ``if'' -


  ... the Government fails, as it has done, it is Parliament's task to tell
  Government and also to tell the people, that the Government has failed.

What Parliament, representing millions of people struggling to overcome  the
legacy of centuries of colonial oppression, can turn  around  and  tell  the
very people that have entrusted it to represent them, that it  has  no  role
to play in the alleviation and eradication of poverty other  than  to  be  a
trumpet of failure?

We must transcend this narrow, antiquated and, quite frankly, reactionary
conception of the roles of legislatures and executives, and the
relationship between them. Classical liberal interpretations of
parliamentary oversight, with an emphasis on the separation of powers, and
checks and balances, are not necessarily the most useful ones to describe
adequately our particular reality, and to guide our practice. We need to
overcome a political world view that limits the role of Parliament, and
more specifically, opposition parties in Parliament to exposing corruption
and maladministration - vitally important as this task is in ensuring good
governance.

Oversight can, and must, be approached from the perspective of promoting co-
operation between the executive and legislature, with a view to
contributing to accelerated service delivery. During the course of our
first decade of freedom, the oversight role of Parliament has become
increasingly focused, relevant, thorough and sophisticated. Many of us
recall a time, in the not too distant past, when portfolio committees
attempted to grapple with departmental Budget Votes, armed only with our
political wits, a few pages extracted from the national Budget, a
departmental annual report, and a day or two of briefings.

Today, Treasury regulations require departments to table strategic plans
before budget debates, and annual reports five months after the end of a
financial year. More and more portfolio committees prepare for budget
debates by holding extensive budget hearings, where every facet of the
department's areas of operation are thoroughly examined. Many portfolio
committees precede their budget hearings with extensive oversight visits to
gain first-hand knowledge of the issues.

Increasingly, different committees are linked up in the same cluster to
conduct oversight work in a co-ordinated manner that corresponds to the
integrated manner in which departments are trying to function. In this
regard, recent visits to various provinces by the Portfolio Committees on
Justice and Constitutional Development and Correctional Services, to look
into the obstacles retarding progress towards an integrated criminal
justice system, must be commended. Another good example is the visit
undertaken by the social transformation and home affairs portfolio
committees to the Eastern Cape to look at the issue of identity documents
and access to social services.

All this oversight work is undertaken, not to discover and advertise the
failure of anyone to anyone else, but to ensure that the policies that have
been agreed and translated into legislation actually make an impact with
regard to improving the lives of people.

As elected representatives, our task must at all times be that of
intervening to help remove whatever obstacle may have led to a failure to
improve the lives of the people, and strengthening the links between the
people and the Government they have elected. Regrettably, much of this work
goes unreported although, fortunately, not always unnoticed. Often, those
who are most extrovert when the bright limelight of controversy is shining
become intensely shy when long, hard hours of patient, unglamorous,
systematic oversight work needs to be done.

Recently, the Joint Rules Committee adopted an extremely thorough and well-
researched report by the Ad Hoc Committee on Oversight and Accountability.
We hope this will contribute to enhancing the general level of
understanding of issues of oversight and accountability.

In addition to the oversight work of parliamentary committees, public
representatives engage in oversight work in the course of their
constituency work when they honour the obligation to maintain regular
contact with the people. Unfortunately, despite these positive
developments, we have seen the integrity, credibility and legitimacy of
Parliament being subjected to a sustained attack from certain quarters.

Parliament can take some cold comfort from the knowledge that it is not the
sole target of these attacks. Parliament finds itself in the company of
judges of the High Court investigating corruption in party-political
funding, Auditors-General and other incumbents of constitutional
structures, who do not share certain characteristics of the predecessors
their detractors defended so valiantly.

In May 2001 the hon Tony Leon accused the ANC ``of trying to turn the South
African Parliament into a toy poodle - operating in an ethics-free zone''.
Later, in the same piece, he refers to ``the continued vandalism of our
democratic institution by the ANC majority''. During Parliament's Budget
debate in June 2002, the hon Douglas Gibson chose to title his speech ``
The marginalisation of Parliament'', in which he echoed many of his
leader's sentiments.

These forces have attempted to paint a picture of Parliament as a weak and
ineffectual body. These attacks are led by the very same forces who, for
decades, proudly defended their participation in a Parliament elected by
less than 15% of South Africa's people. Why do they do this? They know very
well that a strong and credible Parliament can only serve to reinforce the
transformation process they have consistently sought to block.

In his paper, Good governance needs an effective Parliament, Firoz
Cachalia, Speaker of the Gauteng legislature, says:


  Since one of the functions of Parliament/Legislatures is to create and
  sustain a government, actions which undermine Parliament/Legislatures,
  undermine the authority of the government in the long term, making it
  more difficult to mobilise support for its decisions.

We believe that Parliament has played a significant role in creating a
better life for all. However, this is not to suggest that there are not a
host of challenges facing Parliament. Parliament, like so many institutions
in our society, has proved remarkably stubborn and resistant to change.
Much attention will need to be given to increasing the extent to which
Parliament is accessible, not only in law, but in fact. Despite the fact
that Parliament is incomparably more open, transparent and accessible than
before 1994, we still have a long way to go in ensuring greater access by
those who are not organised and resourced.

 Structuring and resourcing the work of Parliament in ways that will enable
it to carry out its tasks in our second decade of freedom deserve the
attention of all parties. We also need to find ways to co-operate with,
support and assist the councillors in local government, and be familiar
with the activities and decisions of the councils that fall within our
constituencies. Equally, we need constantly to promote a closer working
relationship between the National Assembly and the NCOP. The challenge of
addressing not only our national challenges, but operating in the context
of a continental Pan-African Parliament is another challenge.

We would want to conclude by extending our appreciation to the Presiding
Officers, Chair and Deputy Chair of Committees, the members of the Chief
Whips' Forum, the Secretary to Parliament, and all members of the
parliamentary service: cleaners; service officers; security personnel;
catering staff; managers; Hansard staff; Table staff; legal advisers;
researchers; the media; parliamentary officers, and other members of the
Public Service; support staff of various political parties - in short, all
of those who contribute on a daily basis to enable Parliament to serve the
people of South Africa.

The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, the hon Andries Nel is certainly an interesting
chap. He has given us an interesting history of this Parliament and of the
ANC since 1994. You will know that what he said about the Democratic
Alliance is not reality and certainly what he said about the ANC and all
that it has achieved over the past years is not reality. [Interjections.]
He will know that, in actual fact, the DA has played a very strong and
positive role in the parliamentary process of this country since 1994, and
we as the DA are very pleased and very proud of what we have achieved.
[Interjections.]

The hon Deputy Speaker talked about the fact that we are in a year before
elections and politicking is very much part and parcel of what we are
doing. Certainly that is exactly the trap into which the hon Andries Nel
fell this morning.

The hon Deputy Speaker talked of a need for this Parliament to tighten up
and finalise a number of issues that we are working on before that general
election next year. I want to say, hon Deputy Speaker, that we agree with
you fully and the points I raise today are raised for that very purpose.

Madam Deputy Speaker is again quite right when she says that matters like
the language policy need to be resolved now and certainly before next year.
The DA has very real concerns about the overall management of Parliament,
at both political and administrative level, which needs to be improved
upon. This does not mean that we do not respect the work and role that many
people play. We acknowledge that we are extremely fortunate to have so many
extremely efficient and dedicated officials and Presiding Officers who do
their utmost to make a difference.

Unfortunately, not all staff and all officials fall into this category. We
have to be concerned about the shortage of skilled staff in certain
sections. In short, in many areas of parliamentary life, there is a serious
lack of capacity which severely hampers the running of Parliament. A
shortage of sufficient skills starts from the Office of the Secretary to
Parliament through to the committee section, from Hansard through to the
control and proper functioning of the service officers. And we need to get
this right and we need to get it right now.

Far too often, for example, decisions are taken at the Rules Committee and
yet from one meeting to the next these decisions are not carried out. It
also applies to decisions taken which affect the finance section, which
again do not manifest themselves in action because the proper directives
have not been sent through. These are problems which need to be resolved.
Perhaps one of the most frustrating areas of parliamentary life, as far as
MPs are concerned, is the committee section itself. The Chair of
Committees, who is sitting right behind me at the present time, the hon
Doidge, is committed, willing and enthusiastic about his job. But quite
frankly, unless he is given adequate trained staff, the committee section
will lurch from one problem to another. Of course, portfolio chairs need to
co-operate with the Chair of Committees and one knows that they do not
always do so - but members from all parties are tired of late notices of
meetings or incorrect information being given, etc. And far too often,
meetings are cancelled at the last minute or chairs arrive late, which is
particularly embarrassing when people have often travelled a long way to
give evidence before committees.

Hansard is another section where lots of goodwill exists but there is not
enough capacity. It is inconceivable that this important department of
Parliament has been allowed to fall as far behind in its reporting as it
has. We are told that members can expect their unedited versions of
speeches within a few days of delivery but, quite frankly, this is not the
case. Soft-bound copies of Hansard are months and months behind, while it
is of huge concern that 1999 bound copies of Hansard have not been
delivered, while we are still waiting for bound copies of 2000 and 2001 and
2002.

The security within Parliament itself is a cause for major concern.
Millions of rands have been spent over the past five years but we all know
that the security systems that have been installed are nowhere near
adequate to fulfil their purpose, which is to protect individuals and
property, offering a secure environment in which the important work of
Parliament can be done.

The DA offices in the Marks Building are broken into regularly. Petty theft
in Parliament is rife and the theft of confidential information occurs far
too frequently. This very past weekend, members of the DA again had their
offices broken into, post was opened and documents stolen off computers.
The SAPS say there is nothing that they can do. But quite frankly, this is
a deplorable situation which has to be corrected.

There are many other things too to talk about as far as administrative
problems are concerned: the collapse of the sound and voting system in this
House - despite warnings for years from experts employed in Parliament; the
ongoing problems with the Department of Public Works over maintenance
matters; the transport of MPs from and to parliamentary villages; theft in
these villages, and so on.

The political management of Parliament also requires attention. One can
talk at length of overbureaucratic rules for the management of question
time, rules which have allowed question time to become boring with
sweetheart questions asked by ANC members giving Ministers the opportunity
to give long, prepared answers to ANC follow-up questions. [Interjections.]
Ministers become evasive and at times abusive of opposition parties and all
too often the nonavailability of the executive is a cause for major
concern.
Quite frankly, Mr Chairman, let me concentrate on the DA's deep concern
over the way Parliament is dealing with the new development over the arms
deal or the JIT report into the Strategic Defence procurement. The DA has
strongly recommended that a joint ad hoc committee be established to
investigate this matter. We believe a move such as this is absolutely
essential because of the various allegations which continue around this
matter to the detriment of Parliament and the good name and reputation of
the Government. It is quite clear that the ANC does not want an ad hoc
committee appointed for this purpose and is trying very hard to kick the
matter into touch by doing nothing. It appears they want the matter
referred back to Scopa. That is fine and good if Scopa's terms of reference
are nothing more than whether it was misled or not. The editing scandal
itself has to be investigated by another body. It is this type of political
mismanagement by the ANC that is causing Parliament embarrassment and
leading to frustration among those MPs who want Parliament to function as a
proper organ of society in the best interests of all the people. The way
Parliament is handling this particular matter is most unsatisfactory.

In conclusion I also want to thank the officials in the NA, the secretary,
the undersecretaries, the people working in the questions office, and the
legislation and proceedings office for a job well done. To all of you,
including to others, including support staff and workers in the cleaning
section, thank you very much to all of you who are really trying to make a
difference in Parliament. [Applause.]

Mr D M GUMEDE: Chairperson, hon members, comrades, hon Ministers, ladies
and gentlemen, the influence of this Parliament far exceeds that of
comparable parliaments, in relation to both parliaments on the continent
and abroad. Our Parliament and Government have achieved a unique and
enviable status, not only in Africa but in the global world at large - it
is only those who are blind to reality that do not accept this - thanks to
the vision and leadership of the ANC.

There are very few parliaments on the globe that have hosted the Presidents
of the USA and of Cuba at the same podium. President Bill Clinton stood at
this very podium and so did President Fidel Castro. How many parliaments
can boast that?

Over and above these achievements, this Parliament has to do oversight to
ensure that the national political agenda of development is indeed on track
and pushing back the frontiers of poverty in a democratic, open society so
as to improve the quality of life for all and to promote national,
continental and global security, peace and development.

Those who were in Kliptown in 1955 drafting the Freedom Charter would be
proud of us as they see what they visualised in 1955 unfold, be they in
their graves, on their sickbeds or in retirement. However, the challenge
is: How do we sustain this? We have lifted the standards, now the question
is that of sustaining them. Are we in a position to sustain our standards
with the given resources?

What strategy informs our actions, both in the short and long term? Do we
cater adequately for members, committees, and resources to be sustainable?
A lot of damage was done by the previous government before 1994 that left
this country in debt. We are suffering the consequences of that debt.
Committee chairpersons at a hearing cogently and persuasively put forward
their concerns around a number of inadequacies in budget allocation. It was
the view of the chairpersons that there were constraints that were
significantly and adversely affecting the ability of committees, but
fortunately there are actions that have been taken. There are steps that
are being taken to address all these problems.

The area of research, secretarial and administrative support is of great
importance for improvement in these areas of oversight. We should enhance
the role of Parliament in the national political programme. Parliament has
improved in its ability to enable participation and representation of the
disadvantaged interest groups or people living in remote areas. A number of
constituency offices are involved in outreach programmes. There are imbizos
and there is interaction with different interest groups and sectors,
irrespective of whether they are rich or poor.

However, this is not enough. More has to be done. Having said this, there
is also a responsibility for those that require resources to motivate their
position via clear and understandable strategic objectives. Clear
priorities and business plans are needed. It would really assist if we
could have parties like the DA assisting in this process, rather than
criticising everything and in that way trying to demoralise every South
African. [Interjections.]

Matters that are critical have to be separated from those that would be
``nice to have''. Short-term activities have to reinforce long-term plans.
This is one area that seemed to be problematic in a number of instances. I
am happy to report that plans and the implementation thereof are afoot to
try and address this problem.

It has also emerged that another area that needs further attention is that
of policy guidelines, like appropriate accommodation for committee
activities; use of travel facilities, use of business class, economy class
and so forth; international and regional membership of associations;
insurance and car hire, and funding of ad hoc committees, etc. As we
proceed we have identified the problems, and the problems are being
addressed and policies around issues like donor funding are being
developed.

In order to undertake these activities, Parliament has often had to have
hearings, consider departmental reports, visit some departments, and talk
to people that are entrusted with managing Government departments. The
national political agenda demands that we partake fully in the African
Union and Nepad, and in the formation of the African Parliament. We have to
define our role so as to have a good idea of activities that we shall
participate in yearly, so as to allow reasonable forecasting for purposes
of budgeting. We have to list activities that we shall participate in and
their frequency and provide budget estimates.

 The problem of sound equipment has been mentioned by the DA but
destructively so. We had to save so as to address our macroeconomic
problems as a whole and, in the process of addressing the macroeconomic
problems, we endured these deficiencies. We have the best macroeconomic
system in the developing world. It is because of those sacrifices that we
had to make that we have the side effects with regard to things such as the
malfunctioning of our sound system, which is receiving attention.

To this end, R2 million has been allocated and hopefully this will soon be
a problem of the past. Computer equipment for committee chairs and support
staff to the tune of R1 million are a welcome addition as well. There is
about R10 million allocated to staff, which is a concern of Mr Ellis, and
that concern is being addressed.

However, clearly, more organised input from members of Parliament is
necessary to improve the efficiency of Parliament. The legislature must be
confident that it is sufficiently involved in directing its own
institutional development and that resources at its disposal are adequate
to meet the high expectations of people who voted for us. To empower budget
holders, including committee chairpersons and committee support staff, a
recommendation was made by the budget subcommittee to the finance
management office to arrange training in the planning and budget process as
well as in the budget software.

The chairperson of the budget subcomittee, Comrade Billy Nair, has assured
me that this will not be unreasonably rejected. Definitely, we shall push
back the frontiers of poverty together, forever. [Applause.] Thank you very
much, Chairperson.

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, it does rather seem as if we are heading for
an election, and the political speeches are going pretty well here today.
Today we are debating a Vote that is crucial to each and every political
party, to each and every individual member and in fact to South Africa as a
whole because how we perform here at Parliament affects the country as a
whole.

Parliament's budget for 2003-04 shows a substantial increase of some 42%
from the last year's allocation, but this, of course, takes into account
the inflation and various other things, but there is, included in this, a
provision for the much-needed refurbishment of the National Assembly
Chamber and, of course, this would take into account the sound system as
well.

The overall increase is welcomed if it enhances Parliament's ability to
achieve its aims which, we are told, are to provide the support services
required to fulfil its constitutional functions, and to assist political
parties to secure administrative support and service constituents to
provide members of Parliament with the necessary facilities. These are
lofty ideals for any parliament anywhere in the world and even more so for
our Parliament that has really only existed in its current form since 1994.
Although many aspects of our Parliament have improved over this time,
especially since Mr Charlton introduced several new measures to ensure the
smooth functioning of the process, there are still numerous problems and
difficulties that impact negatively on the ability of members to execute
their constitutional functions and I will refer only to the most important
of these.

There is no doubt in my mind that the facilities provided to members are
still grossly inadequate and I will deal with some of these inadequacies in
detail. Let me start by pointing out that, yet again, the involvement of
political parties in the budgetary process leaves much to be desired. There
have been many improvements but the budget process is still haphazard. Not
enough time is made available to political parties to make their inputs to
management and to the Presiding Officers well in advance of crucial
decisions being taken.

The remuneration packages of members must be improved dramatically as a
matter of urgency. Of course, such a statement will draw the inevitable
accusations of being on a gravy train, but the reality is that there are
numerous members who have to rely on other sources of income to execute
their duties, which is extremely difficult given that Parliament sits most
of the year. In addition, the time served as a member leads to that member
being divorced from the business world and a return to earlier professions
is often made impossible by the situation. Furthermore, the inadequacy of
our packages has meant that Parliament continues to haemorrhage some of its
best members to the private sector, leading to a less effective Parliament.
How can we hope to execute our constitutional mandate if some of our best
and brightest leave on a sustained basis?

That being the case, members who retire or leave Parliament have to fall
back on their pension payouts. These can only be described as pitiful as
members who have served for 10 years are left with ridiculous, low monthly
pensions of some R4 000. That is certainly not a living wage. It is
therefore absolutely crucial that members' pension benefits be increased
dramatically and very urgently. The current pension system serves as a
deterrent to prospective parliamentarians and we cannot hope to attract top-
quality people to this institution under these circumstances.

Members have for a long time asked that serious consideration be given to
providing them with a housing subsidy. It is frequently forgotten that
members have to run two homes - one in their constituency and one here in
Cape Town. Consideration also needs to be given to car subsidies, as
politicians generally require motor vehicles both here in Cape Town and in
their constituencies. Members' travel benefits are totally inadequate. Many
of us live far away from Cape Town, and even if we do live close by, our
allocated constituencies are far away. Members do not receive anywhere near
enough travel tickets and we have been fighting this issue for several
years to little or no avail. Despite all the motivation provided by the
Joint Subcommittee on Support for Members and from the Chief Whips' Forum,
Parliament ignores the plight of the member. And once again Treasury has
apparently declined the motivation for additional travel facility
allocation. This causes major stress in the lives of individuals,
especially those who are committed to carrying out their duties at all
levels responsibly.

These inadequacies should be improved immediately. In addition,
administrative complexities with regard to the receipt and issuing of
travel tickets further complicate and encumber our ability to travel in
pursuit of our duties to our constituents and our political parties. Even
though the budgetary allocation in respect of members' support has been
increased substantially this year, there are still problems in respect of
secretarial support for members. Other parliaments around the world have on
average one secretary per member. That is certainly not the case in our
Parliament where the secretarial support has to deal with multiple members.
This is not an optimal situation as it not only places pressure on the
existing staff, but also makes life extremely difficult for members.

Although Parliament's programme has improved somewhat and political parties
are more involved with the scheduling process, much time is still being
wasted as we would certainly spread our workload better and more
effectively. There are times when we are scratching around for work for
sittings, and there are times like this week when we are sitting on five
occasions. This is not optimal and detracts from our ability to service our
constituents.

There are also, of course, problems with facilities for members and I think
more specifically for our members with disabilities. I have fought for
years now for access from the Good Hope building down to here to be sorted
out, for example, because of things like cobblestones. There is Dr Woods,
who has a problem. He is crippled and he finds it extremely difficult to
get here on a daily basis. Ten years down the line, nothing has happened.

The past year in Parliament has been one of many challenges. Foremost of
these has been the floor-crossing debacle leading to the majority party
increasing its number of seats to constitute a two-thirds majority, which
one would hope it treats with respect and circumcision. [Laughter.] Sorry,
circumspection. There has also been the unseemly sight of ``crosstitutes'',
as they have been referred to, forming single-member political parties to
preserve their salaries and positions. Surely this makes a mockery of
representative democracy and detracts from the status of this Parliament.
All in all, the floor-crossing spectacle could not have enhanced public
support, but it has enhanced the public's perception that politics is a
joke and that politicians are jokers.

During the past year, much of Parliament's time and energy has been focused
on the establishment of the African Union and its Pan-African Parliament.
While we have no substantial objection, one has to ask: Is this achievable
in view of the fact that the erstwhile OAU could not successfully handle
just four institutions while the African Union is tasked with handling some
17 institutions? We can only hope that our efforts do not come to naught
and the Pan-African Parliament remains a good idea that exists only on
paper.

Members of Parliament have to find a way to more effectively engage in
issues of importance. Let us look at issues such as HIV/Aids and poverty
alleviation. These are the things that we as Parliament should be dealing
with. Next year, there will be national and provincial elections and yes,
we are getting to that time in our country. Parliament will be constituted
fairly early, I believe, in the next year. I want to express the IFP's
sincerest hope that the next Parliament will provide more and better
support services and facilities to members of Parliament and political
parties. Without a large increase in these facilities we will struggle to
meet our constituents' expectations and our constitutional duties. We have
come a long way since 1994, but there are many shortcomings and we have a
long way to go to reach optimum performance in this Parliament.

I would like, too, to thank those members - and I think they are the Chief
Whips' Forum and the Presiding Officers - who are involved in the day-to-
day activities, ensuring Parliament is running smoothly. I include there
the Secretary to Parliament and all the secretarial staff, support staff
and all the officials who make it possible for us to function.
Notwithstanding our concerns, the IFP does support Parliament's 2003-04
budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N M TSHEOLE: Chairperson, Ministers present, Deputy Speaker, comrades
and colleagues, I am trying to speak slowly so that I do not find myself
making a Freudian slip as the hon Seaton did. [Laughter.]

I stand here to support the Budget Vote. I do not want to miss the
opportunity of saying that. I want to start with it, just in case. I stand
here to support the Budget Vote because, as the hon Seaton has said, we
have come a long way, but the road ahead is still very long. In my
language, we say that we know that when you have a long way to go, you have
to have a mofago [lunch box].

You have to have provisions. There is no way in which we cannot support
this Budget Vote because of the issues that still need to be addressed by
this Parliament and we need this budget to address them.

I would like to start by making some acknowledgements. Having come the long
way that the hon Seaton referred to, we started on low ground. I am going
to speak here about language, interpretation, translation and all those
issues related to the language policy of Parliament.

We have come a long way. When we came here, we found that there was only
interpretation into English from Afrikaans and vice versa. We had to start
where there was no foundation at all. Starting where there was no
foundation at all does not just mean the provision of facilities in
Parliament; it means drawing people from the market.

South Africa does not have a history of language practitioners. South
Africa has never had a history of interpreters. We know that even in our
courts in the country interpretation was just a by-the-way thing. The
people's language rights were never respected except for two languages. So,
the efforts that have been made, the long way that we have come, the little
progress that we have made cannot be ignored, and we cannot afford not to
acknowledge that. [Interjections.] Yes, I am going to speak about the
shortcomings that we still have.

An acknowledgement of achievements does not exclude the acknowledgement of
shortcomings. Hon Ellis, we need to note that. Yes, there are things that
need to be addressed, but we cannot ignore the efforts that have been made.
We cannot afford to forget that we started with nothing, and before I move
on to other issues, I would like to acknowledge the efforts which have been
made by our interpreters.

 With regard to all the efforts and all the things related to it, we know
that interpretation requires a lot of training; training with regard to a
number of issues that we deal with in Parliament. People whom we recruit
for interpretation come from universities which have never made provision
for services that they have to offer, that is, training them in
interpretation on political and economic issues.

The type of training that our interpreters went through is the type of
training which was just meant for people to be able to work in the garden.
As the 1956 education policy said, ``We educate people so that they can
wear suits and ties, but they will never be able to do anything for
themselves.'' We are trying to recover from that legacy. So, we know we
have problems, but that does not mean we do not have to do anything and I
would like to start on that footing.

The hon Gumede referred to the R2 million that has been budgeted for. I
would like to make a comment. I do not know if that R2 million is going to
be able to cover everything because, with regard to the language services
in Parliament, we have a number of issues. In the first instance, this
building itself has no room at all, with no provision for interpretation.
The provision of interpretation at this Parliament requires the provision
of space. It requires the breaking up of certain offices.

One always wonders whether the procurement for the construction of this
building was ever investigated. I am going to refer to something that has
no relationship to languages. When you come to this building where the NA
is, you find that there is no provision for a kitchenette where glasses can
be rinsed. Glasses that we use at this Parliament have to be rinsed in
toilets.

I do not know who approved the procurement for the construction of this
building where a five-storey building, which goes into the basement, can be
without any provision for such facilities. I do not know whether the
previous Parliament had glasses and people were drinking water from the
toilets, but this is what we are experiencing here.

Now we come to the issue of languages. That was not on their minds either.
If they could not think about the water which they were drinking, how could
they have made provision for interpretation? One other thing we know is
that they were closed. They never invited foreign speakers into this
Parliament, which means that only two languages were always spoken at this
Parliament. There was no way in which another member of a parliament from
outside could come here and have interpretation done from French and other
languages. That is why we have this. Those are the challenges that we are
faced with at this Parliament.

The reason I am commenting on the budget is that I do not know if the R2
million will be able to provide booths for interpretation because that is
the first thing that we have to do. Once we have provided the physical
space for interpretation, we will have to employ people.

I hope that our tertiary institutions are listening because we have  always,
even in the language portfolio committee  ...  Institutions  complain  about
the new policy which has been promoted. We appreciate the  participation  of
other  parties,  but  it  was  spearheaded  by  the   ANC   to   acknowledge
multilingualism.
Universities have not made an effort. Instead of making  an  effort  towards
the production of language practitioners, they have closed  departments  and
claim that it is because  of  the  language  policy.  It  is  because  those
professors out there are not making an effort to ensure that they can  shift
away from the old method or paradigm of producing people who are trained  in
languages to come and supply the market.

We know that OBE does not mean anything to them. We know that universities'
language departments are closing because they do not want to make a
paradigm shift to train people for interpretation, translation and editing
in our own languages, the 11 official languages. [Applause.]

We find universities closing. I hope that universities will be listening to
this comment. We acknowledge and appreciate those universities like
Stellenbosch and the Free State who have already started, but in the
majority of the universities whom we thought would be empowered by
multilingualism, the departments have closed. We should look at that.

The other thing that I would like to speak about is the quality of the
sound system. The interpretation leaves a lot to be desired. We know we
have come a long way, but we need to pull up our socks. The Deputy Speaker
has indicated that before the end of this term of Parliament we shall have
adopted a language policy. That is greatly appreciated. We hope that the
interpretation facility that we have is going to afford us the opportunity
to speak in the language of our choice.

At present I am not able to express myself in my own language because I
know that I did not give the interpreters notice to be available for
interpreting. The second thing is that with the load that we have, I have
not been able to write two speeches to give it to them so that they can
interpret my message the way I would like it to reach the people.

The issue of interpretation must be taken seriously. It is not only about
me speaking, my language right is not only about me being able to express
myself in my language, but those who I am speaking to must be able to hear
me as well. [Applause.]

I have always looked around when in this House. When you speak, you look at
your colleagues, and see that they do not put their earphones on their
ears. In the beginning, I used to criticise that but now I understand. It
is because of the quality of interpretation that we get here. You find that
the message does not go through to the people and, at the same time, we
find that as much as we encourage ourselves to speak our own languages, we
know that we have never been encouraged to feel proud in expressing
ourselves in our languages, but we have to be exemplary. We have to make an
effort to speak in our own languages because we are not just speaking to
ourselves here; we are addressing the people who have elected us, who have
brought us to this Parliament. Whatever we are saying here must go to them.
They must be able to hear. They must be convinced that we are doing what
they have elected us to do.

I am looking at the time I have left. Let us also make efforts to learn the
languages that we do not speak. We know there is provision for a language
laboratory. We hope that when that language laboratory comes into being,
hon members will go into it in order to be able to at least have
communicative skills in a language other than their mother tongue. I repeat
that I support the budget. [Applause.]

Mnr C H F GREYLING: Voorsitter, ek sal doen wat die vorige spreker
aanbeveel en ook in my moedertaal praat. In wese gaan hierdie begrotingspos
oor hoe die Parlement geld wat deur die belastingbetalers van Suid-Afrika
aan ons toevertrou word, bestee en of dit wel nie net deursigtig nie, maar
ook op 'n verantwoordelike wyse geskied. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr C H F GREYLING: Chairperson, I will do what the previous speaker
recommended and also speak in my mother tongue. In essence this Budget Vote
deals with how Parliament spends money that is entrusted to us by the
taxpayers of South Africa, and whether it is indeed done not only in a
transparent manner, but also responsibly.]

The Budget Vote's core objective is, in the first place, to provide
Parliament with the necessary support service to enable it to fulfil its
constitutional functions adequately.

Tweedens is die kerndoelwit om aan alle politieke partye die nodige
administratiewe ondersteuning te gee om die kiesers te dien, en om derdens
finansiële ondersteuning te bied aan alle politieke partye wat in die
Parlement verteenwoordig word. Waar die partye sedert die aanvaarding van
die oorloopwetgewing van 13 tot 17 in hierdie Huis vermeerder het, beteken
dit ook 'n groter finansiële las ten opsigte van partypolitieke leierskap,
die verskaffing van kantore en dies meer. In hierdie verband kan die vraag
met reg gevra word of partye met slegs een lid werklik vier kantore nodig
het? 'n Koukuskamer? Met wie koukus 'n eenlidparty? Ek vra maar net.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Secondly, the core objective is to provide the necessary administrative
support to all political parties in serving their constituents, and thirdly
to provide financial support to all political parties that are represented
in Parliament. Where the parties have increased from 13 to 17 since the
adoption of the floor-crossing legislation, this also implies a greater
financial burden with regard to party-political leadership, the provision
of offices and so forth. In this regard the question can justifiably be
asked as to whether parties with only one member truly require four
offices? A caucus room? With whom does a one-member party caucus? I am
merely asking.]

Last year when this Budget Vote was debated on 12 June, the Speaker voiced
her disappointment with regard to the lack of a vision and mission
statement for Parliament. In the meantime there has been some progress and,
on 7 February 2003, this was discussed at a workshop which also saw the
appointment of a task team to further pursue this issue. We trust that this
effort will meet with the Minister of Finance's requirements regarding this
Budget Vote and establish a long-term vision and strategy for Parliament.
Mr Harry Charlton, head of finance, and his staff have also been hard at
work to get the budget process up to speed and we wish him all the best
with this difficult task.

The objective of Programme 1 of this Vote, namely administration, is to
build a democratic Parliament which is transparent and responsive to the
electorate. Since the first democratic elections took place in 1994,
remarkable transformation has occurred in the legislative process. However,
during the next phase, Parliament's service delivery will have to ensure
adequate public participation in the parliamentary processes and reinforce
the oversight and accountability of the executive.

In the last financial year, Parliament managed to achieve a number of
objectives. For instance, 85 Bills were introduced and 69 were produced in
printed form. A total of 150 events were hosted, while nearly 22 000
visitors were recorded.

Programme 2, namely members' facilities, has also achieved quite a lot.
Parliament managed to provide its members with the necessary telephone,
travel and logistical facilities.

Die doel van program 3 is in ooreenstemming met artikel 57(2) van die
Grondwet, wat bepaal dat finansiële en administratiewe hulp aan elke party
wat in die Huis verteenwoordiging geniet, verleen word.

Hierdie program finansier ook die Parlement se ledegelde met betrekking tot
sekere interparlementêre verenigings en ons betrokkenheid by internasionale
programme. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The goal of Programme 3 is in accordance with section 57(2) of the
Constitution, which determines that financial and administrative aid should
be granted to each party that enjoys representation in this House.

This programme also finances Parliament's members' fees with regard to
certain interparliamentary associations and our involvement in
international programmes.]

In conclusion, on behalf of the New NP, I would like to thank the Speaker,
the Deputy Speaker, the Chairperson of Committees and the Deputy
Chairperson of Committees for the manner in which they conduct their
duties. It is not always an easy task, but even with 17 different parties
they still succeed in steering the ship through stormy waters.

To the Chief Whip and the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party, we say
thank you for the spirit of co-operation that we enjoy in the Chief Whips'
Forum. I would also like to extend this to all other party Whips.

Aan die sekretaris van die Parlement, die sekretaris van die Nasionale
Vergadering, asook die personeel by die Tafel; 'n woord van dank vir u
dienste wat u lewer, asook ons dank aan alle ander parlementêre personeel
vir u diens, in die besonder aan diegene wat na ons veiligheid omsien.

Die Nuwe NP ondersteun hierdie begrotingspos. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[To the Secretary to Parliament, the Secretary of the National Assembly, as
well as the Table staff; a word of thanks for the services that you render,
as well as our thanks to all other parliamentary staff members for your
service, and in particular to those that see to our security.

The New NP supports this Budget Vote.]

Dr J BENJAMIN: Chairperson, when we arrived at this Parliament in 1994, we
changed the functions of the Rules Committee as a means to democratise this
institution. In 1998, when Comrade Barbara Hogan was the chairperson of the
budget subcommittee, all stakeholders had to make submissions and give
motivations. Eventually a consensual budget submission was accepted, but
unfortunately, the real needs of members went way beyond the budget
guidelines determined by Treasury. We found that as we were in this process
of democratisation, we came up against existing practices of financial
officials, existing budget structure and process, and it proved to be a
frustrating experience - year after year submitting our needs, and not
experiencing any difference. That shows us that institutional
transformation is not easy. It is a struggle that continues.

 This Vote makes provision for members' facilities under Programme 2. It
provides for telephone, travel and other logistical facilities for members
of Parliament and also funds medical aid contributions and travel
facilities for certain former members. I am not sure what percentage goes
to former members for their business flights. Spending on members'
facilities will consume 25,2% of the total expenditure of the Vote in 2003-
04. This of course is not that much compared with administration, that
takes the bulk - 58,4%. Of the 58,4%, more that 30% goes to personnel. The
expenditure of the programme has increased by 14,1% over the four years
from 1999 to 2003. This increase is mainly due to the increase in the cost
of air travel.

In addition to the cost of air travel, members have a range of other needs
to allow them to function effectively, which until now have been eating
away at their pockets. These include the cost of telephone calls, travel by
motor vehicle, both within their constituencies and to and from airports,
parking at the airports, and so on.

At this point, members have to pay for the cost of ink and paper when they
use their own computers. They have to pay out of their pockets. I just want
to give you an idea of how difficult it can be for some members to just get
to the point of having a printed speech. This morning I could not attend my
strategy meeting because I am a duty Whip. I had to run around looking for
a way in which I could print out my speech. Our secretaries don't come in
that early. Eventually I found one secretary in the Old Assembly building -
one of the NCOP's secretaries - and if she had not been there, I wouldn't
have had a speech.

I am saying all of this, fully knowing that our process of making
submissions goes on every year. Every year we try to include these
inadequacies. I am saying that fully knowing that we will make those
recommendations to the Rules Committee.

The needs for members' facilities must be seen in the context of the
transformation of Parliament from the top-down, undemocratic structure that
we inherited, to one which is the custodian of democracy in our country and
which allows also for the democratic process within the institution.

The former emphasis on Parliament as the custodian of the democratic
practice means that the budget must make adequate provision for members to
bring the business of Parliament to their constituencies and to facilitate
the participation of ordinary constituency members in the business of
Parliament. In this regard, the public has been encouraged, through the
media, to participate in Parliament, but the real obstacle against
participation of the poor has been the means for members to travel within
their constituencies. The present budget does not make adequate provision
for this aspect of the transformation of Parliament.

With regard to furthering internal democracy, some strides have been made
in developing a computerised model of budgeting for Parliament,
facilitating input by all stakeholders. However, with regard to members
participating in the final submission through the sub-committee for
members' support and making representations to Treasury, the proposed
structure still awaits full implementation.

Members' facilities refer to the provisional resources to allow members to
do their work effectively. In the beginning, since 1999, we inherited a
budget system determined by officials, without due regard for the provision
of facilities for members. We have, over the years, been faced with the
difficulty of any additional facilities for members being subjected to a
costing process that would inevitably push the budget beyond the guidelines
provided by Treasury.

The result over the last nine years is that members' facilities have fallen
into a backlog, failing to keep up with the rise in price of petrol,
telephone expenses and the continuous shortage of travel facilities to
allow members to travel effectively between Parliament, home and their
constituencies. A new computerised budgetary model promises to be more
effective in taking into account members' needs and allowing for the input
of different stakeholders. Its full implementation is eagerly awaited.

With regard to adequate provision of IT facilities, Parliament has, in the
past, managed to provide members with laptops, with the assistance of EU
funding. An increasing number of members have begun to use their computers
effectively and computer training courses have been provided to empower
them in this regard. In the next budget cycle for the next Parliament,
provision has to be made to supply members with adequate IT support since
the EU funding has been depleted. It may be more cost-effective to supply
members with desktops in the future, so that Parliament may unequivocally
take responsibility for maintenance and supply of IT in a way which is
integrated with the rest of the IT system in Parliament.

With regard to training, Parliament's budget has taken over the
responsibility for this item in accordance with the Skills Development Act.
This means that the content and method of training is no longer subject to
the conditions of an external funder, and courses offered have moved in the
direction of becoming more meaningful, with certification, and providing
opportunities for members to continue with formal studies. As a result of
changes in this regard, members are more interested in training, and
attendance and participation has improved.

Members are thankful for the increase in the budget of members' facilities,
which amounts to 14,1%, although this is by no means adequate to meet the
backlog which has built up over the years since 1994. In a recent strategic
planning session, the subcommittee for members' support made the
recommendation that the parliamentary research unit conduct an audit on the
actual needs and requirements of members of Parliament, which would enhance
their efficiency and effectiveness. This research should include a
comparison of facilities provided to members by at least three African
parliaments and three Western parliaments.

The ANC supports this Budget Vote. Having said everything that I have said,
there is light at the end of the tunnel. We have established a Joint Rules
Committee as a permanent structure allowing for different stakeholders to
account and reach consensus. The new financial manager, with fresh ideas on
how to budget in such a way that members may become effective and
efficient, is part of this light. The presentations, chairpersons, and
committees are part of this light. Improvements in training, in the long
term, to deliver a Parliament using the best technology is a part of this
light at the end of the tunnel. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, Speaker and hon members, the primary
responsibility of Parliament is lawmaking and, further to that, to ensure
that government departments follow the laws. In a democracy such as ours,
laws are aimed at improving the quality of lives of all citizens. In the
main, the laws are meant to ensure that all citizens are equal.

Pieces of legislation that are meant to realise the above objective are
those such as the Domestic Violence Act, which seeks to target all forms of
abuse in domestic relationships, and the Maintenance Act which seeks to
protect and offer security to children. We have seen how Parliament has
called departments that do not provide the necessary services to account to
make sure that people are provided for. Portfolio committees have visited
areas and provinces that needed such pepping up, as was the case with the
Eastern Cape recently.

Members of Parliament have never pulled their punches at question time.
Members of the executive have been called to account individually and
severally for their portfolios. The reconfiguration of Parliament in the
wake of the floor-crossing exercise was handled with the greatest measure
of competence and promptness by Parliament. Those involved deserve our
gratitude for executing the task so well. It is also worth making it known
that Parliament was one of the only two legislatures that reported the
completed floor-crossing exercise to the IEC on time, yet it is this
legislature that had more work to do, with some parties growing, others
diminishing in representation, still others seeing the light of day, and
the number of represented parties growing from 13 to the present 17.

Parliament has been equal to the task of providing services and support to
members within the limits of the existing resources. Notwithstanding that,
we in the UCDP feel that much can still be done. The remuneration of stand-
in leaders of parties whose national leaders are doing duty elsewhere in
the country needs to be looked into. Such parties have grown from two to
four in this current Parliament and there might be more in future.

There is much that Parliament is doing to capacitate members in training on
issues such as the application of Rules and procedure, personal financial
management, computer training and many more. All these are meant to make
members better able to cope as individuals and to serve their
constituencies better. That our Parliament holds its own in the family of
legislatures across the globe is borne out by the number of international
agreements tabled in the House. As signatory to these agreements, South
Africa is an actor on the global stage of politics, and all this through
Parliament.

The trouble taken in trying to level the playing field in presenting
motions and members' statements is noted with appreciation and, as such,
our hope is kept alive that in future the question of speaking time will be
addressed as in other democracies internationally where both equity and
proportionality are considered without the latter being the sole curtain
brought down on the matter. After all, Parliament is the place of vigorous
debate by all involved.

The UCDP supports Budget Vote No 2. [Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, Madam Speaker and hon members, this Budget
Vote forms the pinnacle of the structure and operations of our work here at
Parliament. As parliamentarians, as representatives of the people, we are
charged with the responsibility of being accountable for our actions and to
discharge our responsibilities in a responsible way.

Not only is Parliament constitutionally obliged to exercise a critical
function of oversight over the executive and other legislative functions,
but it also fulfils an integral function in sustaining our democracy. In
this Parliament, the 16 political parties represent a variety of
ideologies, perspectives and ideas. In such a system of multiparty
democracy, it is thus to be expected for a wide range of opinions to emerge
on the role of Parliament in our ever-changing society.

It is important for all parties to recognise the progress that has been
made to transform this institution from what it used to be in 1994, but the
sustained efforts to enhance its oversight role should also be
acknowledged. Previous speakers in this debate have referred to the
mechanisms in place in order to achieve this. In this context, we can
rightfully claim that nine years into our democracy, ground-breaking work
has been done by this Parliament to continuously strive towards the
objective of proper oversight. As far as the prevailing international
practice is concerned, we are acknowledged as being in a league of our own.

It is important to accept that oversight should not only be restricted to
selective areas of interest and excitement. During the past few weeks, we
have heard a lot of hype from certain opposition parties claiming that
Parliament is not executing its oversight function properly and that the
institution is being undermined. This misconstrued perception needs to be
examined in the context of the nature and the role of opposition parties in
this House. The vibrancy of any multiparty democracy is dependent on the
contribution of all role-players, including the opposition and, as such,
this democracy requires an opposition that is critical, though
constructive; independent of Government but patriotic towards the country;
genuinely committed to nation-building without yearning for the privileges
enjoyed under apartheid, and an opposition that resists clamouring for
value systems and a style of governance exercised by the previous regime.

The nature of our parliamentary work requires members of Parliament to
perform duties inside and outside the House. It thus remains vitally
important for all parliamentarians to participate in parliamentary
processes. Too often, situations arise in which members from certain
parties fail to attend crucial portfolio committee meetings and, because of
their absence and lack of participation, fundamental decisions affecting
the lives of our people are taken. In their absence, the legislative and
oversight processes continue.

The irony, though, is that some of these members emerge in society as
activists for one or other cause and are acclaimed in certain quarters as
being exemplary MPs. This is while they fail to utilise the very forum they
were elected to. Instead, they cry foul that Parliament is being undermined
and fails in its oversight function, whilst they are seldom here, if ever,
to make a contribution to improving the situation. [Applause.]

Since the advent of democracy, the ANC has deliberately embarked on a
process to remain in contact with the electorate. This is being done
through various forums designed to sustain contact with the people.
Constituency periods form a very important part of oversight and allow
members of Parliament to evaluate the effectiveness of Government
programmes and also to evaluate the progress made to address the historical
imbalances in order to push back the frontiers of poverty.
This organisational experience and approach of the ANC has had positive
spin-off effects for all parliamentarians. It allows MPs to approach and
interact with the people and government departments and, in so doing, they
are able to analyse and evaluate departmental performances. The
constituency periods have also enabled MPs to become aware of issues
affecting and influencing the lives of the people. In quite a few instances
this awareness has allowed members to make a more informed contribution to
the debates in Parliament.

The operationalisation of Rule 105 which deals with members statements has
provided members with an opportunity to raise matters affecting their
constituencies. However, the system of reporting on constituency work
requires further attention. A need exists for Parliament to co-ordinate a
process where the constituency reports from members are properly engaged
and evaluated. The risk exists that if political parties do not co-ordinate
the current system of reporting, valuable information gained during
constituency weeks will be lost.

Parliament, as the assembly of the people, is very reliant on a management
structure that shares the same commitment it has towards fulfilling our
constitutional mandate. Without the necessary support from management in
creating an enabling environment for members to execute our duties, public
representatives will fail the people who elect them. It is thus of
paramount importance to continue empowering this vital component of the
administration in order for them to perform their duties according to sound
management principles.

Challenges that exist should be dealt with expeditiously by taking firm
decisions coupled with prompt implementation strategies. We should
appreciate and encourage the current efforts of this management to improve
the functioning and work of Parliament.

We heard earlier in the debate a few comments that were passed that made it
seem as if we were sitting in a dysfunctional Parliament. This impression
needs to be corrected. We need to recognise measures undertaken to have a
more sound recruitment policy in place, improved access control at
parliamentary villages, an improved security monitoring system, an improved
budgeting process and also tighter financial management. All these
processes needs to be welcomed. This will contribute, to a great degree, to
our efforts to work tirelessly to push back the frontiers of poverty and to
ensure a better life for all.

The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, multipartyism is an important hallmark of
democracy the world over, and particularly in Africa where parliamentary
systems are not always of the best. [Interjections.]

On a recent visit to Zimbabwe, it became quite clear that the people really
do appreciate it when they see a delegation coming from South Africa that
is made up of different parties. They are surprised to find that
delegations coming to them actually behave normally and don't fight each
other, and that it is normal. I believe this is a very important message
that we send from time to time to the world, not only to Azania.

Our Parliament is a significant player in Africa, in the nonaligned world
and in the world in general. I want to pay special tribute to our Presiding
Officers who play an important part in carrying the flag of democracy in
the world whenever this happens.

I believe that one of the things that has really spoilt our democracy
recently is the floor-crossing phenomenon. I believe that we should waste
no time, as this Parliament, in abolishing floor-crossing. It has done us a
lot of harm, and I believe it should not be allowed. I believe that
democracy must be linked to the will of the people outside and we must
never just do a floor shuffling in the House irrespective of what the
voters say to us. [Interjections.]

I want to refer to time allocation. This is a sore point because we believe
that more time should be given particularly to smaller The parties. I
acknowledge the argument of proportionality, but I fear that we are getting
to a point where the ruling party wants to be listening to itself. In other
words, there is no dialogue. There is no discussion. They just want to talk
one after the other. There is no debate in that way. I believe that, in the
interests of debate, a little more time should be given to others so that
you can hear and you can have a debate. A debate is not made up of people
debating from one side for 10 minutes, 20 minutes, or 30 minutes. I don't
think that is a debate.

I believe that the decorum of this House is improving and this must be
encouraged. The behaviour of our members in the House is becoming better
and better, despite what has been said a few minutes ago. I believe it is
improving.

I want to say that the question of attendance is a sore point. The
attendance is very poor in this House. There are times when departments
have invited a lot of people, and you find that the gallery is full, but
the House is empty. I don't think this does justice to the House. [Time
expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chair. Parliament has successfully completed
another financial year. The National Assembly and the NCOP have proudly
performed their duties, within the budget received, to the best of their
abilities. It has managed to set a global example of true and well-managed
governance of a multiparty system, showing the world that living in
diversity is possible.

The MF is extremely pleased about the transparency and the accessibility
that we may boast about. By achieving seats through democratic elections,
harnessed by our national Constitution, it is promising and encouraging to
note that there is interaction with the public on Government activities and
programmes. This places confidence in the communities that we are here
representing their best interests, and it further allows the public to make
inputs so that we may monitor and ensure delivery to the benefit and
satisfaction of our people. Parliament Live, with its accessibility, has
also facilitated greater knowledge of parliamentary activities among the
South African citizens.

With such a close watchful eye on our activities, the MF feels that the
decorum of the two Houses receives strict attention. Action has always
spoken louder than words. Thus, discipline, attentiveness, punctuality and
respect in the House need to be upheld at all times.

The functions of various committees and departments that allow Parliament
to function effectively has been performed competently, in terms of which
the MF wishes to see the standard maintained in the forthcoming financial
year.

As much as our Parliament tries to meet the needs of all parties, which is
highly appreciated, the MF would like to share its concern with regard to
representation and budget allocation to the smaller parties such as
ourselves. Minimum talk time handicaps us from actively and effectively
participating in the House's debates, and minimum allowances hinder our
performance to a great extent. The MF feels that serious attention should
be given to these factors, and hopefully with effective results. The need
for car allowances, housing subsidies, pensions and air tickets has to be
looked into urgently.

The MF wishes Parliament well in the forthcoming financial year, in its
endeavours for effective management and delivery and fully supports the
Budget Vote. Thank you to Madam Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the
Presiding Officers for their kind co-operation with all parties. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

 Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Chairperson, hon Madam Speaker, as a rule, a parliament
has two core functions, namely that of legislation and that of oversight.
The National Action, however, attributes an unwritten but very important
third function to the South African Parliament; a function which is of
equal and perhaps more significant importance given the young age of our
democracy and the multicultural nature of the South African society.
Let me explain. In 1994 a multiparty agreement was reached at the
negotiation table in Kempton Park, finalised with the adoption of the new
Constitution in 1996. This formally put an end to a long period of
negotiation, of bringing to the table the interests of the country, but
also the interests of the different peoples and communities of South
Africa.

But, this does not mean the dialogue has ended. This does not mean that
every community's interests and aspirations have been enshrined finally in
a piece of paper, only now to be applied in practice. No, the people of
South Africa, the communities in their diversity, are still talking to each
other and are still involved in a sort of ongoing process of dialogue and
negotiation. And Parliament is the main venue for this important process -
a rendezvous, the marketplace for the coming together of the different
communities of our country.

Our proportional voting system serves this purpose, enabling not only
geographical communities, but also cultural communities to be represented
around this important table.

Die groep van 63 bepleit 'n opvolgskikking in Suid-Afrika, 'n weer in
oënskou neem van dit waaroor in 1994 onderhandel is. Dit het meriete. Die
Nasionale Aksie bepleit ook sekere grondwetlike wysigings wat ware
demokrasie in Suid-Afrika sal verstewig. In 'n sekere sin, egter, is ons
hier in die Parlement elke dag besig met 'n opvolgskikking. Ons is elke dag
besig om die kontoere uit te beitel van hoe die verskillende belange van
ons diverse samelewing behartig moet word, hoe soms botsende belange
teenoor mekaar uitgebalanseer moet word en hoe minderheidsbelang en
meerderheidsbehoefte geharmoniseer moet word.

Daar is egter enkele struikelblokke op die weg. Die eerste is
meerderheidsarrogansie: wanneer van hierdie plek 'n blote kykweer gemaak
word van wat die ANC reeds in sy koukuskamer besluit het, sonder die
openheid vir die voorstel en die stem en die belange van ander. Die tweede
is opposisie-arrogansie: blote raas- en skree-opposisie sonder meer, à la
die DA, volgens die Westminster-styl. Dit ontlok veel eerder 'n nydige
reaksie en is teenproduktief. ``Fight back'' moet plek maak vir ``fight
for''. Dit open nuwe horisonne. Die derde ene is koöptering deur die
meerderheid, soos by die Nuwe NP. Dit laat die eie stem verlore gaan en
word te maklik ``His master's voice''.

Die Nasionale Aksie, ook wanneer hy volgende jaar met 'n hele span
verteenwoordigers terugkom, sal hierdie hoogste Raadsaal gebruik om die
belange van hulle wat ons gemandateer het onbevange te verteenwoordig, om
saam te bou aan die ongekarteerde weë waarlangs alle Suid-Afrikaners in
harmonie vorentoe moet stap en om die funksie van oorsig oor die
uitvoerende gesag so uit te oefen dat elkeen sal weet die NA speel nie vir
die pawiljoen nie, die NA krap nie waar dit nie jeuk nie. Die NA lê vinger
op die wond wat werklik behandeling nodig het.

Dan wil ek kortliks die tweede saak aanspreek. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The Group of 63 calls for a follow-up agreement in South Africa, a review
of that which was negotiated in 1994. This has merit. The National Action
also calls for certain constitutional amendments which will strengthen true
democracy in South Africa. However, here in Parliament we are, in a sense,
engaged in a follow-up agreement every day. Every day we are engaged in
carving the contours of how the different interests of our diverse society
should be managed, how at times conflicting interests should be balanced
and how minority interest and majority need should be harmonised.

There are, however, a few obstacles in the way. The first is the arrogance
of the majority: when this place is turned into a mere action replay of
what the ANC has already decided in its caucus room, without an openness to
a suggestion and a voice and the interests of others. The second is the
arrogance of the opposition: an opposition who is merely shouting and
screaming, à la the DA, according to the Westminster style. This much
rather evokes an angry response and is counterproductive. ``Fight back''
should make way for ``fight for''. It opens up new horizons. The third is
co-option by the majority, as in the case of the New NP. This causes one's
own voice to remain unheard and to become ``His master's voice'' too
easily.

The National Action, also when it returns with an entire team of
representatives next year, will use this highest Chamber to represent,
impartially, the interests of those who have mandated us, to build together
the unchartered roads along which all South Africans should walk onwards in
harmony, and to perform the function of oversight of the executive in such
a manner that everyone will know that the NA is not playing to the
pavilion, the NA is not meddlesome. The NA puts its finger on the wound
that actually needs treatment.

Furthermore I want to address the second matter briefly.]

In the pre-1994 dispensation the public representatives' remuneration Act
laid down certain requirements for participation and attention by MPs. At
present, it is only a matter for the party structures to discipline their
members. There are members of bigger parties constantly shining in their
absence, but there are members of smaller and single-member parties who are
not represented in committees, who do not attend committees, debates or
plenary sessions, and who in effect use public money destined to build
capacity for parliamentary work for own-party campaigning. This is not
clean governance.

The NA asks that the attendance and participation of all members and
parties should be made available to the media and we propose that stricter
regulations, or even legislation, should be considered in this regard.

The NA supports the Budget Vote for Parliament. We thank you.

Mr B W KANNEMEYER: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Let me start by assuring
the National Action that the ANC will defend its right to dream about
bringing more members next year to Parliament.
Hon Mike Ellis earlier, in response to the Deputy Chief Whip, denied the
character of the DA that was sketched by the Deputy Chief Whip, but then
continued by starting with one sentence thanking and applauding the staff
of Parliament in the different areas and he concluded with another sentence
thanking the people who are trying so hard to make Parliament work. But in
between those two sentences his entire speech was devoted to shooting down
every single constructive thing that is attempted in this Parliament.

Following up on that, he then does not realise and acknowledge the fact
that there are people who are trying their utmost under extremely difficult
conditions to make this Parliament work, that has inherited a system that
was not designed to represent the people and to do what it's supposed to
do.

In moving on, let me start with the following quote by Simeon Strunsky in
1944. He said that ``people who want to understand democracy should spend
less time in the library with Aristotle and more time on the buses and in
the subway''.

In my contribution to this Budget Vote I would want to deal with oversight
work generally - and I don't think I'm going to spend too much time on that
because a number of members have touched on it, particularly the Deputy
Chief Whip and one or two others - but more so with the work of the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts as well.

I want to reiterate what the Deputy Chief Whip has indicated by saying that
there is a general perception that the oversight work of Parliament is
limited to dealing with instances of fraud and corruption. Unfortunately,
neither the media nor the opposition is playing a role in correcting this
wrong and misplaced perception of what oversight work in Parliament is all
about. A further problem with this narrow focus is that it undermines the
value and importance of the general work of oversight processed by this
Parliament.

In just looking at one portfolio committee, for instance, communications, a
broader understanding of the interactive nature of the oversight work of
Parliament becomes clearer. For the year 2002 the Portfolio Committee on
Communications, in processing only four pieces of legislation, engaged in
more than 200 hours of public hearings, had more than 130 submissions from
the public as well as interest groups and spent days on deliberations. When
considering that this is happening in every single committee of Parliament,
it is clear that the oversight role played by Parliament is not only a post
facto one, as some would want to suggest, but indeed an interactive one and
ensures that the voice of the public is considered in the formulation of
policy into legislation.

During the same year under review, 2002, Parliament passed more than 70
pieces of legislation and a total of 376 committee reports were adopted and
published. Coupled with this is the totally accessible nature of
Parliament, as witnessed by the statistics relating to gallery attendance
for parliamentary sittings. Excluding attendance to standing committee and
portfolio committee meetings, more than 16 500 people visited Parliament
last year. I do not have statistics to back up the following, but I am
convinced that that may be more than the number of people that visited
Parliament in any given year prior to 1994.

The aforementioned is illustrative of the extent of the participatory
nature of this Parliament. In the first democratic Parliament, with the
adoption of the Constitution, as well as the Rules of Parliament, the
oversight role of Parliament was clearly and specifically provided for.
This work was further enhanced and is currently proceeding under the
leadership of Chairperson Chohan-Khota in the Ad Hoc Committee on Oversight
and Accountability, as they have engaged the contents of the Corder report
in continuing the debate on arriving at a best practice framework for
oversight for our very young democracy.

In the same way we have advanced our work on financial management oversight
and accountability. The promulgation of the Public Finance Management Act
has introduced an even more stringent compliance framework and places
focused responsibility on the executive, their departments, institutions
and Parliament. The requirement of strategic plans, outputs, service
delivery indicators, actual performance and outcomes ushers in a new era of
performance measurement and should enable Parliament and the public to
determine whether the funds voted in Parliament are achieving their
intended objectives.

It is important to state this, since too often we forget the direct link
between oversight and service delivery. As indicated by the President and
the Minister of Finance at the beginning of this year, negligent conduct or
mismanagement by Government officials is what leads to my mother in Mossel
Bay not receiving her pension on time or the schoolchildren that were here
earlier not receiving their books on time.

Looking at the role and function of this committee in the apartheid era -
that is the Standing Committee on Public Accounts - the African National
Congress can indeed hold its head high in the full knowledge and wisdom
that we have travelled a long way since then and, despite the occasional
hiccups, have indeed improved every step of the way.

Let me now just focus a little on the work of the committee. The committee
strives to ensure, amongst other things, that institutions at the national
level, through our oversight and interaction work, constantly improve the
quality of their financial management, especially internal controls, and
that national departments remain within budgetary constraints and expend
funds in accordance with purposes determined by Parliament. There are a few
others, which I'm not going to go into.

The committee further considers all accounts and financial statements of
public-sector institutions, constitutional bodies and other public
entities, as well as all reports referred by Parliament and reports of the
Auditor-General referred by Parliament.

Despite the very clear functions and powers of Scopa, as outlined in Rule
206 of the National Assembly and Scopa's own business plan, there are
unfortunately still those that are single-minded in their attempts to limit
the work of this committee to the monitoring of fraud and corruption in the
public sector. Whilst agreeing that this indeed is an important element of
the work of Scopa, it must never be secondary to the pursuit of creating
better systems and control environments in state institutions since the
achievement of that would serve to limit the space for those of corrupt and
fraudulent intent that still find themselves in the Public Service.

It is generally accepted theory that the most effective controls are indeed
those that exist inside institutions. However, as indicated earlier, it is
not in the interests of the more cynical amongst us to keep themselves busy
with these important tasks that do not attract media coverage and sound
bites.

While maintaining our key focus that our key function should be to
constantly improve the quality of financial management, especially internal
control systems, let me deal with some aspects that make dealing with
incidences of fraud and corruption difficult under our current conditions.
One of these difficulties is the perception on the part of some of us that
any semblance or suspicion of mismanagement must lead to a call for the
head of the executive authority. This was again witnessed yesterday, for
instance, by the DA blaming the Minister of Finance for the calculation
errors in the inflation index.

But also, as governing party members we need to realise and accept that a
critical assessment of the financial management of departments and state
institutions is not necessarily a criticism of the relevant Minister or NEC
member. It is an execution of the task defined by some as a very necessary
irritation and it certainly responds to our mandate of continually
improving the Public Service.

The attitude on the part of certain opposition parties that everyone else
is innocent until proven guilty, except when it comes to Government or
Government officials who are first pronounced guilty on the basis of
innuendos and suspicions, creates a further serious problem in dealing with
these matters. Hon Frolick dealt with the type of issues that are expected,
and attitude from an opposition.

Mr M J ELLIS: Not very well.

Mr B W KANNEMEYER: You are quite right, because the President deals much
better with it in the ANC Today of two weeks ago. The President says the
following:


  The ANC made the point that this stereotype necessarily dictated that
  some in our country would proceed from the position that our government
  was corrupt as alleged, unless it proved itself to be innocent ... The
  false allegation of wrongdoing by the ANC was what was vigorously
  implanted in the public mind ... The same stereotypical conviction about
  our government being corrupt, unless it proves itself innocent, has re-
  surfaced with regard to the defence procurement decided by our government
  in 2000.

Accordingly, they even go further. The President continues to say  that  now
the Office of the Auditor-General is being accused of  having  doctored  the
report he presented to Parliament, by omitting some details contained in  an
earlier draft. The President made some of these remarks two weeks  ago,  yet
today in Parliament the wisdom of the President is again proved by  the  hon
Mike Ellis referring to the current allegations of a losing  bidder  in  the
arms procurement package of  editing  of  the  JIT  report  as  the  editing
scandal. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]

The SPEAKER: Chairperson, hon members, in the 10th year of democratic  South
Africa's Parliament and  in  what  may  be  our  last  Budget  Vote,  it  is
appropriate to reflect  on  our  achievements,  but  also  to  consider  the
challenges the next decade will bring.
In addressing the latter, we must take into account that these challenges
will not descend freshly on the new Parliament but are before us now. It is
our responsibility in the months ahead to lay a sound basis, without being
prescriptive, for the postelection Parliament which will, of course,
determine its own direction.

It is inevitable that, faced with the day-to-day difficulties of
functioning with inadequate resources, inappropriate facilities and
systems, and poorly managed support, we may be overwhelmed by frustration
and fail to see the considerable achievements of this Parliament.

In 1994 for those of us - and it was the majority - who had never
previously entered these buildings and who had no experience of governance,
our concern would have been how we would be able to cope with
responsibilities and tasks of whose dimensions, scope and detail we were
still unaware. Over 40% of those members of Parliament are still with us
here, 10 years later. So, we clearly did survive.
Hon members, think back and consider where we are now. We will then begin
to appreciate the true measure of the incredible progress we have made as
members of this Parliament. We have enacted a very large number of laws.
The number, although considerable, is not as important as their nature and
substance.

We have changed the legal framework of this country; in the process we have
transformed this society and given it new direction. We have altered the
fundamental basis of our legal system to one that complies with the
principles in our Constitution and human rights order. There is a lot that
remains to be done, but no one can deny the achievement.

Committees have diligently gone through Bills and rewritten them more
extensively than in most parliaments. Very often Bills have been sent back
to departments for correction, or to meet a significant deficiency. We have
made improvements in Bills sent to Parliament without the necessary skills
in draftmanship that are at the disposal of the executive. We have also
done so without the experience and knowledge that existed within the Public
Service that we inherited. This is a formidable achievement, yet we do not
appear to notice.

We have received praise on our continent, as well as within the established
democracies. We have contributed significantly to the legal framework as
well as to the Constitution, which is now admired and which many countries
strive to emulate. We may need to improve our code of conduct, but not many
parliaments, even in the established democracies, have any code of conduct.

In addition, we have, to an extent, transformed the institution of
Parliament itself. It is no longer a rubber-stamp parliament, functioning
as a facade for an authoritarian executive presidency. The inclusivity
implicit in our chosen electoral system has guided the way in which we
operate. There is no minimum requirement that bars participation in all
activities.

Front benches are allocated to a number of minority parties, in addition to
the Official Opposition. Parties may choose to participate in any debate,
though I am aware of and have heard and share the concern about inadequate
time allocations. A rule that allows any member to participate in the
proceedings of any committee but not vote, however, is not utilised
sufficiently by the smaller parties.

Perhaps because most of us know no other way, we take as normal that all
our proceedings are open and transparent. Many long-established democracies
are still trying to achieve the same, especially that committee meetings
are rarely closed in South Africa. This debate is itself rare. How many
parliaments actually debate their Votes as we do here?

We have tried to extend public participation, but have a long way to go in
engaging the general public rather than lobbyists. Agreement on an expanded
language policy, which I hope we will agree to in the next fortnight, will
assist, as has already been indicated.

However, we have erred in depending almost exclusively on the commercial
print and the eletronic media to communicate. Parliament itself needs to
reach out to the public directly, using radio and new technologies that are
now available. We are finalising plans to do so. For example, it is
possible for the public to see and hear programmes of our debates in a
number of languages. In addition, members of Parliament will be able to sit
in studios in these precincts and respond to questions from the public. It
is hoped that pilot programmes will be run by the end of this year. So,
members had better start honing their language skills. We can then begin to
put in place and build the participatory democracy that is required by our
Constitution.

In every budget debate and throughout the year, there are complaints about
a lack of resources. I agree that we do not have the resources and support
that Parliament needs, but I cannot agree with the context within which we
often frame our complaints. Exactly who is to blame?

We need to link what we request from Treasury with what we want to achieve,
how we intend to do so and over what period. We have failed to come
together and put forward a vision for this Parliament. In these last few
weeks every government department has tabled a strategic plan. Parliament
is not a department of Government, but where is our strategic plan or the
vision which we wish to realise? We have begun a process, as has already
been said, but we need to complete that process.

 We complain of a lack of resources, yet we do not use or manage what we
have. As I informed the Joint Rules Committee a few weeks ago, nearly half
the resources allocated to committees last year were not used, yet other
committees doing excellent work are in dire need of additional funds.

We are negotiating a new agreement with the European Union for support, but
resources will only be available in the new Parliament. An offer of a grant
of $1,8 million - nearly R15 million - remained with the Chief Whips' Forum
for two years and was never referred to the Presiding Officers.
[Interjections.] We hope, however, to finalise this shortly. But Parliament
must be funded from the public purse and not foreign donors. We need,
therefore, to come back to the question of what kind of Parliament we want
to build.

In 1994, as I have indicated, our priority was justifiably to get the
institution we found up and running, and this we have achieved. But is this
what we want and what we need? Parliaments - indeed all institutions -
evolve, taking into account constitutions, the political, economic and
social power relations in society, and the circumstances, culture and
objectives. What today is referred to as a Commonwealth system or
tradition, reflects the evolution, not of South Africa, but of the British
parliament to meet the needs of British society, including its imperial
history.

Had apartheid South Africa remained part of the international community and
participated in the international debates on good governance, democracy and
human rights, it may be possible that we could have inherited an
institution that was more than archaic ritual.

We adopted much of what we thought was Commonwealth practice and tradition
without adequate consideration. This was inevitable, given the speed of the
transfer of power to a democratic order, but we need now to seriously
examine how appropriate the procedures, structures and cultures are that we
have put in place.

Recently, I was looking at a document submitted to Commonwealth Ministers
last year. It referred to the sovereignty of parliament and to other
relationships within the institutions of governance, which run in total
contradiction with our own Constitution, yet this was put forward as the
ideal of democracy.

Democracy has shifted from representation by individuals to representation
by political parties. This is emphasised in the proportional electoral
system we agreed to in 1994. Yet we hanker after a constituency system
appropriate to another period and electoral process. There are many other
ways of ensuring accountability to the electorate and of servicing
constituencies. Should we not even consider them in this Parliament?

We need a greater discussion amongst ourselves on what we mean by oversight
and accountability. I hope the excellent work by the ad hoc committee will
take us further and help us move away from the adversarial Commonwealth
tradition.

In establishing our committees - and let us not ignore the excellent work
that they do - we again drew on Commonwealth practice or systems of
governance. We established committees for every Ministry, and with
democratic exuberance allocated the same time, resources and support to
each one, without considering what the issues were each had to consider,
the legislative load in a particular session and the level of technical
expertise and support that was necessary. How appropriate is this system
still for integrated cross-sectoral policies and laws, and for exercising
oversight over a developmental state?

A re-examination of our committee system is necessary and needs to be
expedited before new vested interests are established after the 2004
elections. Financial, research and administrative support should be
provided on the basis of programmes and workloads. We also need to consider
whether each committee needs to meet throughout the year.

More controversially, I would submit that when the commission on
remuneration of public representatives does its forthcoming evaluation, it
be asked to consider providing differential scales for category A, B and
possibly C types of committees, with appropriate and differential salary
scales for chairpersons. On an ongoing basis, future parliaments will be
able to determine which committees should be allocated to which category
according to their needs and their priorities.

Our current problems and frustrations are compounded by a management system
that leaves much to be desired. There has, however, been some improvement
this last year, with appointments of a chief financial officer, an
assistant secretary and a deputy secretary. However, we have not helped
ourselves because, in the process of democratising decision-making, we have
created a system of subcommittees that make the task of management
difficult. We need to rationalise and simplify the policy-making process.

Members of Parliament are politicians and we should not try to micro-manage
this institution. We have failed to set up a proper directing authority.
Presiding Officers are supposed to ensure that agreed policies are being
implemented, but this is proving increasingly difficult. Though other
proposals were turned down, we have at least agreed to allow the
chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of committees to facilitate the
efficient functioning of committees. I wish them success.

The Presiding Officers of both Houses have repeatedly referred to the
problems in the budgeting process within Parliament, but this remains to be
addressed. Until and unless we address the problem of managing this
institution, we will not be able to enhance the achievements of our first
10 years.

The challenges ahead extend beyond our borders, as new parliamentary
institutions are in the process of being established. The South African
Parliament will be hosting two important meetings of representatives from
African parliaments at the end of this month. When we set up the SADC
Parliamentary Forum some years ago, we provided for its transformation into
a regional assembly. Now, as the African Union takes shape, we note that
its essential building blocks are regional institutions, and we have to
expedite the process of establishing the regional assembly as an organ
within the SADC Treaty. In the next few days - and I stress ``days'' - we
will need to consider mechanisms in Parliament to take this process
forward.
The Pan-African Parliament also brings new challenges of building unity
among the parliaments on our continent. On this continent we have a range
of lawmaking traditions. In South Africa there is the English common law,
Roman Dutch law and laws made subsequently, building a South African
jurisprudence. We also have African customary law. In the last 10 years we
have developed our legal system, guided by our Constitution.

But when we look at the continent we see there is a great deal more with
different colonial legacies. There is the Code Napoléon, which those
countries colonised by France inherited. There is a Portuguese code. We
have Islamic law that has impacted on and is used in a number of African
countries. The challenge is to identify and develop a common system of
governance that will integrate the best of these systems with the values
inherent in traditional African jurisprudence.

In our Constitution-making process, we thought we had developed the notion
of ``sufficient consensus'', and it certainly took us forward. But the
principle of consensus is reflected in many African cultures. Among the
Ashanti there is no long-standing word for voting - aba to is a neologism -
because the driving force in traditional systems of governance was
consensus.

Among the Akan people the focus was on participatory decision-making, hence
the Akan proverb that one head does not hold council. Among Tswana-speaking
people in our own region, the stones of the ``lekgotla'' - where the
governing body gathered - were placed in a circle to signify unity and
inclusivity. One can juxtapose with this National Assembly Chamber, based
on the Westminster system, which in its design reflects the confrontation
between government and opposition, a confrontation that is played out
regularly with those on the left set in an attack mode and those on the
right in a defensive stance, neither of which enhances democracy or nation-
building. [Interjections.]

Islamic law - sharia - is a principal component of many African countries.
Sharia principles of governance are based on two concepts, namely shura:
consultation, and ijma: consensus-building.

The challenge for all of us now is how we weave this very rich and
enriching diversity together, giving something unique to our continent. We
should be careful that we do not consider that what we are trying to do is
create an African concept or tradition that only looks backwards, but that
as we look forward we draw into the development of that tradition the best
practices, the advances in humanitarian law and in universal concepts of
democracy, and of good governance. All this is part of the challenge for
the next decade.

We have to be aware that although we will not resolve this on day one we
should note and be aware, also, of our heritage as we start creating the
institutions on the continent. But, most importantly, we have to deal with
our own shortcomings in this institution, and consider whether we are ready
to meet the challenges outlined so ably yesterday by the hon Barbara Hogan
and by many of you today. We have also to continue with the task of
providing a forum of debate and exchange of ideas on which we can build
unity in our nation.

As I have indicated already, overall, we have achieved much. For this, we
need to thank the many members of staff who diligently carry out their
responsibilities. We find these everywhere: in this Chamber and in the
Office of the Secretary, notwithstanding the many complaints that we make.

The achievements I have spoken of, and there are more, are the result of
the efforts of members of Parliament, Whips, committee members and chairs.
To all of them we owe our thanks. Next year the electorate will have its
say and express its thanks and appreciation wherever it believes it is
deserved. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                   NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson,
hon members, the National Small Business Amendment Bill has undergone
extensive consultation and debate both inside and outside of Parliament.
Last year, we took the proposed amendments to business forums across the
country and received a number of inputs and recommendations, which were
incorporated into the Bill.

The introduction of the National Small Business Amendment Bill took place
in April 2003 and, since then, there have been public hearings which took
place on 23 and 27 May. The issues coming out in these hearings, and the
concerns of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, have all been
taken into consideration in this Bill.

Members are aware that small business development is extremely important
for the growth of the economy, the creation of jobs and to improve the
levels of equity. The support of this sector by Government is therefore
critical and is a priority. The House will recall that the development of
this sector has been a priority since 1994, and one of the first pieces of
legislation to come before this House was the White Paper on the National
Strategy for the Development and Promotion of Small Business in South
Africa, which was later followed by the National Small Business Act, Act
102 of 1996.

The amending Bill before us is amending certain provisions of the National
Small Business Act. Apart from the technical elements aligning the Act with
other pieces of legislation, for example, the Public Finance Management
Act, the amendments essentially seek to give the Minister of Trade and
Industry powers to facilitate the creation of a voice for small business
and have this done in consultation with the business community.

This voice or advisory body is long overdue, as the void that was created
by the liquidation of the National Small Business Council has never been
filled. In order to improve our effectiveness in the support that we
provide to the small business sector and in the creation of an enabling
environment for small businesses, it is necessary that we as Government
formalise and have a structured relationship between Government and a
representative body of small business in the country.

The purpose of this body would be, among other things, to advise Government
on critical issues such as the impact of current and new legislation on
small business; identification of areas of market failure for small
businesses, so that appropriate support and interventions can be made;
providing advice on the constraints, and the needs as well as communication
mechanisms to interface with small businesses, and methods to monitor
support services to the small business sector.

The amendments also seek to streamline the role of Ntsika to focus on
support programmes and to take away the policy aspects of Ntsika and house
them within the DTI. During our consultations and discussions, we heard
concerns expressed about Ntsika and I can assure members that we have
already embarked on a process to rectify the situation.
During the consultative process, there was general support for the
amendments, and the requests made during this process to rephrase chapter 2
of the Bill so that it articulates the terms of reference of the advisory
body, have been accepted. Therefore, as outlined in chapter 2 of the Bill,
we will ensure that the establishment of this advisory body takes place
within a reasonable time and that, through an open and transparent process
of consultation, the constitution for the advisory body is determined. The
provisions of the constitution are outlined in chapter 2, section 3.2, as
are terms of reference for the advisory body.

We are convinced as a department that these amendments provide a
legislative framework to underpin the DTI's endeavours to create an
enabling environment for small, medium and micro enterprises in South
Africa. I therefore urge all members to support the National Small Business
Amendment Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D LOCKEY: Deputy Chairperson, I rise to speak in support of the National
Small Business Amendment Bill. At our 51st Annual Conference in
Stellenbosch last year, the ANC instructed us as a Parliament and as a
Government to work towards the substantial growth in small and micro
enterprises.

This Bill is our first response to the challenges facing the small business
sector since the collapse of the National Small Business Council. The Bill
stipulates a number of critical areas which must be the focus of the work
of the new advisory body. While the Bill is flexible, it is not an attempt
to create yet another talk shop. We intend to create an institution that is
representative of the small business sector which can begin to address the
myriad problems facing this particular business sector.

I will now focus on some of the key areas that require urgent attention.
Regarding business regulation, there are still a host of municipal by-laws
that are currently used by local authorities to criminalise small traders.
Many of these by-laws that govern small business inhibit the growth and
development of this sector. There are currently no national standards set
for small business development and regulation. The Centre for Development
and Enterprise found that there have been more than 500 changes to the
business regulatory environment over the past six years, and this has
significantly increased the cost of doing business.

In the area of business infrastructure, there are also significant
constraints for the development of small business. We believe that new
opportunities must be explored to create more physical business
infrastructure for small businesses. We must also explore opportunities in
consultation with small business to create sites near major rail stations
and taxi ranks. In the current shopping areas, there are also very few
opportunities for small business and we believe that a quarter of trading
space in this shopping centres should be made available to small business.

As a portfolio committee, we have had some very good proposals in this
regard by the African Council of Hawkers and Informal Businesses. The
enterprise density in South Africa is still extremely low. It is around
3,7%, according to the Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency. This could be
attributed to the lack of sufficient small business infrastructure. The
monthly rental in major shopping centres is around R300 per square meter.
This is far too expensive for the majority of small businesses and we find
that many of the small businesses in these centres are struggling to
survive because of such high costs.

I will now focus on the area of skills. Research by the Southern African
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Association found that small businesses
employ around 50% of all employees in the formal sector and accounted for
about 30% of the country's GDP. This statistic is in line with the
worldwide experience that indicates that particularly small businesses in
the service sector are responsible for the highest percentages of
employment creation. But, despite this, up to 80% of small businesses in
South Africa fail because of issues such as Aids, crime and lack of
management skills.

 It must also be acknowledged that small businesses trade under extremely
difficult circumstances, where disposable income is severely limited by
high unemployment rates in the townships, and that they also compete
against very powerful retail chains in South Africa.

Skills development in all areas of running a business must therefore be the
key focus area of the new advisory body and other support agencies to small
business. This could include joint ventures with big business, partnerships
with Government and business, and mentorships where experienced
entrepreneurs can assist new entrants into the entrepreneurial endeavour.
Franchise opportunities also offer some opportunity, but I must caution
that evidence is increasingly emerging of unscrupulous franchisers just
being out there to exploit persons that buy these franchises from them. The
Seven-Eleven case is one such example. We must take steps to protect
persons buying franchises from such unscrupulous operators. In many
instances, people are using their pension funds and their lifelong savings
to acquire these franchise opportunities, and have lost everything in the
process.

As a portfolio committee, we have also had some very good examples of how
codes of conduct can be used in certain industries to assist operators in a
self-regulating approach to improve services and the quality of their
services to the client base. Co-operatives for the production and marketing
of, for instance, agricultural produce are one such example that can also
be used. We also believe that co-operatives offer an opportunity to combine
the procurement power of a number of small operators to get a better
discount from suppliers.

The issue of access is also very important. We believe that steps must be
taken to create better access for small entrepreneurs to suppliers, and
better access to market opportunities, for example, in the export market or
the tourism market, which is one of our fastest-growing markets. We also
believe that there should be better access to offerings by the DTI, and
empowerment opportunities. Procurement opportunities offer another good
case for us. The state procurement system is still largely unexplored as a
mechanism to create a vibrant small business sector and as the most
powerful vehicle to assist in particularly black-owned enterprises.

There are other constraints. The impact of high real interest rates and the
cost of capital is an inhibiting factor. The impact of high administrative
prices is another one. The Growth and Development Summit, over the weekend,
has committed the Government to assessing the impact of this factor, in
particular, on business viability in South Africa.

The advisory body, in terms of this Bill, must interact with Parliament,
the DTI and other statutory bodies in pursuit of its objectives. It is also
required to advise the Minister on the efficacy of support services to the
small business sector. This would include valuable feedback on the work of
support institutions like Ntsika, Khula and the National Manufacturing and
Advisory Council.

It is our sincere hope as the ANC that the National Small Business
Amendment Bill will begin the process of creating a viable, strong and
prosperous small business sector in South Africa. We hope that this Bill
will empower the small business sector to assist us in pushing back the
frontiers of poverty. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: The hon member will be making his
maiden speech in this House.

Mnr J L THERON: Agb Voorsitter, aan die DA wil ek graag my dank betuig vir
die geleentheid wat my gebied word om hier in die Nasionale Vergadering van
die Parlement te dien. Dit was 'n voorreg om in die Nasionale Raad van
Provinsies te dien, 'n voorreg wat ek terdeë geniet het. Ek het waardevolle
ondervinding daar opgedoen. In die besonder aan die agb Mnr Tony Leon my
dank vir sy leierskap en visie wat my hoop en moed gee vir die toekoms. Ek
is baie patrioties teenoor my land, Suid-Afrika, en sal graag my beste wil
lewer om hierdie 'n beter land te maak vir almal wat hier woon.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr J L THERON: Hon Chairperson, I would like to express my thanks to the
DA for the opportunity that has been afforded me to serve here in the
National Assembly of Parliament. It was a privilege to serve in the
National Council of Provinces, a privilege that I have enjoyed. I have
gained valuable experience. To the hon Tony Leon in particular, my thanks
for his leadership and vision that have given me hope and courage for the
future. I am very patriotic where my country, South Africa, is concerned,
and would like to do my best to make this a better country for everybody
who lives here.]

One of the most critical problems South Africa is experiencing is the
unemployment situation. As we all know, 40% of South Africans, or 7 million
people, cannot find jobs. Therefore, any good business-related legislation,
like this National Small Business Amendment Bill, is very important for
South Africa.

The DA supports the consultative approach to be followed to form the small
business advisory body. We urge the Minister to speed up the process as far
as possible to create a consolidated voice for small business in South
Africa. It is also critical that this process leads to a representative
advisory body to represent the broad small business sector in South Africa.

The DA also supports the more strategic focus for Ntsika. We are however
perturbed by the fact that there are still a lot of problems at Ntsika.
This was evident at the hearings that were held as well as at the briefing
that was given on the Bill. Surely it is more than high time that the
transformation process at Ntsika be concluded for the benefit of all
business in South Africa.

All is definitely not doom and gloom at the Department of Trade and
Industry. The DA knows, through its research, for instance, of all the
positive results at the Namac Trust - the National Co-ordinating Office for
Manufacturing Advisory Centres. There are more than 420 business service
centres throughout South Africa where training and business information can
be received. We know of all the success stories at Brain, the Business
Referral and Information Network, Frain, the Fanchise Advice and
Information Network, and Mac, the Manufacturing Advisory Centre programme.
All the information is available in the Support for Small Business in South
Africa publication of the DTI.

But this is surely not enough. We must not rest on our laurels. These
services should still be enhanced and expanded, and building on success
stories is of critical importance. The DA urges the Minister and the
department to appoint only capable and well-qualified people to further the
transformation process.

Dit is die taak van die Regering van die dag om 'n duidelike raamwerk en
gunstige klimaat vir ekonomiese groei en ontwikkeling van besigheid in Suid-
Afrika te skep. Waar die kleinsakesektor ongeveer 40% van die bruto
nasionale produk lewer, en daar meer as 'n miljoen klein besighede in Suid-
Afrika is, is die vraag wat die Adjunkminister moet beantwoord: watter nuwe
aansporings kan die kleinsakesektor gebied word om meer werkgeleenthede te
skep? Maar nie net klein besighede moet aangemoedig word nie. Watter nuwe
werkgeleenthede gaan daar wees vir groot suksesvolle besighede wat nuwe
uitbreiding en ontwikkeling aanpak om meer werk in Suid-Afrika te skep?

Ek wil graag mnr Moeletsi Mbeki steun waar hy sê die Regering se swart
ekonomiese bemagtigings- en transformasiemodel werk nie. Dit is tog voor
die hand liggend dat geen rassistiese ekonomiese ontwikkelingsmodel kan
werk nie. Ook om welvaart sosialisties net rond te skuif bring geen
ekonomiese groei en ontwikkeling nie. Nuwe welvaart en ontwikkeling moet
geskep word deur entrepreneurskap en nuwe besigheidsontwikkeling.

Die DA se resep vir ekonomiese groei en werkskepping sluit onder andere die
volgende in: 'n duidelike raamwerk en gunstige klimaat vir ekonomiese groei
en ontwikkeling; meer intensiewe uitvoerbevordering; groter aanmoediging
van entrepreneurskap en stimulering van nuwe besigheid; meer en beter
opleiding van nuwe entrepreneurs; aanpassing van die onderwys en opleiding
by die nuwe ekonomiese en tegnologiese uitdagings van vandag en môre; en
spesiale owerheidsgefinansierde infrastruktuur ontwikkelingsprojekte.

Die groot vraag is egter hoe suksesvol die ANC-Cosatu-Kommunistiese
alliansie met ekonomiese groei en werkskepping in Suid-Afrika gaan wees.
Dit was tot dusver een van die huidige Regering se groot swakplekke.

Die DA steun die Nasionale Kleinsakewysigingswetsontwerp. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is the task of the Government of the day to establish a clear framework
and a climate favourable for economic growth and development of business in
South Africa. Since the small business sector contributes approximately 40%
of the gross national product, and because there are more than a million
small businesses in South Africa, the question which the Deputy Minister
should answer, is: What new initiatives can be presented to the small
business sector in order to create more job opportunities? But not only
small businesses should be encouraged. What new job opportunities will
there be for big, successful businesses that undertake new expansion and
development in order to create more jobs in South Africa?

I would like to support Mr Moeletsi Mbeki when he says that the black
empowerment and transformation model of the Government does not work.
Surely, it is evident that no racist economic development model can work.
To move prosperity around in a socialistic manner does not bring any
economic growth and development either. New prosperity and development
should be established by means of entrepreneurship and new business
development.

The DA's recipe for economic growth and job creation includes, among
others, the following: a clear framework and climate favourable for
economic growth and development; more intensive export promotion; greater
support of entrepreneurship and stimulation of new business; more and
better training of new entrepreneurs; adjustment of education and training
to the new economic and technological challenges of today and tomorrow; and
special state-funded infrastructure development projects.

However, the big question is: How succesful will the ANC-Cosatu-Communist
alliance be with economic growth and job creation in South Africa? This has
been as yet one of the present Government's major weak spots.

The DA supports the National Small Business Amendment Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr B C NGIBA: Deputy Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members, it has long
been recognised that the small business sector in South Africa could act as
a very important driver for economic growth and job creation. To some
extent, this has certainly been the case. However, one would have to say
that the success of the small business sector has not been as
overwhelmingly positive as one would have hoped for. The crucial element in
the potential success of this sector is the creation of an enabling and
positive environment in which to conduct business. Small businesses often
do not have the capacity or resources to survive in an inflexible and
highly regulated economic environment.

This is also true in relation to the level of Government activity and
intervention in the sector. Generally speaking, less Government activity is
better for the small business sector. Nonetheless, our Government has been
very actively involved in the small business sector through support
policies and other interventions that it deemed fit. These policies have
not all been successful, but, in fairness, one would also have to say that
they have not all been failures either.

A very important function of any government is to revise legislation in
order to rectify shortcomings and to address unintended consequences. The
IFP supports the legislative review undertaken by the amending Bill before
us today. Among other things, the Bill removes the statutory provision for
the National Small Business Council, which was liquidated in 1998.

This move is supported, but one would have to ask why it has taken such a
long time - more than five years - to bring this amendment to Parliament.
We also support the proposal that the Minister of Trade and Industry be
enabled to consult the small business sector to achieve the objectives of
the National Small Business Support Strategy. We shall of course keep an
eye on him to see if sufficient consultation does indeed take place. The
success of the small business sector is dependent on clear governance
policy and co-ordinated institutional focus. The IFP therefore welcomes the
proposal in the Bill that Ntsika's strategic position and core function be
clarified in its relationship with the Department of Trade and Industry. I
thank you.
Dr R T RHODA: Thank you, Chair. In March 1995, the Department of Trade and
Industry published its White Paper on National Strategy for the Development
and Promotion of Small Business in South Africa. Roughly a year later, the
National Small Business Act was promulgated. This Act birthed the
institutional structure which would spearhead and co-ordinate the National
Small Business Strategy in South Africa. Eight years later, there is
widespread consensus that the NSBS had little impact on small business. In
short, the general feeling was that the Bill needed to be amended, and
amended drastically. And I must say today that I want to commend the
department for the bold and radical way in which the Bill has been changed.

Among other things, the Bill provides for an advisory body to be set up for
small business. I hope this body will not just be another talk shop, but
that it will become a real implementing tool. There is much despondency
amongst young people today who have good business plans and well-researched
cash flow projections and so on but who are turned away time and again when
they apply for start-up financial assistance. We must find ways of
unlocking the financial difficulties that face so many of our budding
entrepreneurs.

Lengthy consultative workshops were conducted throughout the provinces with
various stakeholders, which included the provincial SMME desks, business
chambers, service providers, small business organisations, Ntsika, Khula
Finance Limited, the Industrial Development Corporation and The South
African Bureau of Standards, and finally, also the National Manufacturing
and Advisory Centre.

The New NP supports the amendments to the National Small Business Act of
1996. Thank you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you. The ACDP supports this Bill. We believe strongly
that increased employment and support of enterprises that create employment
is a crucial intervention to eradicate poverty. We see this Bill as one of
the tools to help entrepreneurship and job creation by small business.
We hope that this Bill will help to create a much more co-ordinated focus
in this sector. We urge this council to help to increase spending of
unspent developmental funds lying in the department. The council will have
to create ways to make it easy for small business to access help from the
Government and private sector in order to thrive.

In short, we support this Bill. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Deputy Chairman, the PAC welcomes the National Small
Business Amendment Bill to amend the National Small Business Act of 1996.
One of its purposes is to establish an advisory board to represent the
interests of small business.

There is a need to strengthen the institutions which support small and
medium business enterprises. There should be funding, productivity, quality
assurance and improvement in the manufacturing standards. Special attention
must be paid to women-run SMMEs, with an emphasis on  accessing credit from
financial institutions.
Small business is not protected. It is being destroyed. Sheriffs are also
the reason for a lack of growth among the small business. This Bill must be
tightened to protect small business effectively from monopolistic
competition and sheriffs.

Small business is largely indigenous. It is no less important than foreign
business for job creation. It can contribute to the control of our economy,
without which there can be no genuine political independence. The PAC
supports this Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF is pleased to note that there is a
national policy on small business. The placement of Ntsika Enterprise
Promotion Agency and the National Small Business Council appears to have
been put in place for the benefit of small businesses, mainly in terms of
support services and advocacy.

The MF has no reservation as this is a necessary amendment concerning the
council, which no longer exists, and is pleased in allowing for ministerial
power regarding the interests of small business in consultation with
persons representing these interests.

Further, the extension of time necessary to allow the director-general to
submit an annual review of small business to the Minister, from the end of
February to the end of June, is supported but concern is expressed as to
why statistics and information are not available within the allocated
timeframe. Further provisions made in relation to reflecting the current
rand value are also supported.

The MF supports the National Small Business Amendment Bill. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Thank you, Deputy Chair. In support of the amending Bill
by the ANC, we accept that the remarkable capacity of small business to
absorb labour makes the promotion of small business a political necessity.

Small businesses are usually indigenous and small and require various forms
of assistance. Most of their products tend to originate from indigenous
craft traditions, and aim to satisfy the needs of poor people rather than
large enterprises. Small businesses also tend to use less capital and less
management.

Also, although the small business sector is relatively large in South
Africa, it is not yet fully integrated into the economic mainstream. The
regulatory environment has to be re-examined and therefore the National
Small Business Act had to be amended.

The background to the Bill is largely the need for differentiation of small
business categories; a more sectoral approach towards Government support;
the need for support targeting to address spatial disparities; a clearer
alignment of Government initiatives towards small business support, and of
course, the need for a coherent voice which this amending Bill is bringing
about for small business.

Through the establishment of the advisory body, or the voice, as we call
it, the mandates of Ntsika and Khula would be reviewed, and this we
applaud. Both these institutions are not reaching their target at the grass-
roots level as envisaged. The reviewing of their mandates could include the
establishment of microfinance institutions as well as targeted services to
SMMEs.

Many of the submissions we received at the hearings stressed that the
advisory committee should not become a talk shop, and therefore the ANC
thinks that we should make the following proposals in order to make sure
that that does not happen. We think the best that we can offer is the
guidance that is in the RDP principles, and those speak to the fact that
small businesses, particularly those owned and operated by black
entrepreneurs, must form an integral part of the national economy and
economic policy.

Policies to this end, in particular, must focus on women who are
represented disproportionately in the sector, especially in the rural
areas. Equally important, we believe that the advisory committee should
provide infrastructure and skills to raise income and create healthier
working conditions in small business. They must protect the rights of
workers, those with family members and others and provide training in
productive and managerial skills. Experience shows that three major
constraints face small micro enterprises - the lack of access to credit
markets; skills and support of institutional arrangements. In collaboration
with small-scale entrepreneurs themselves, the democratic state should and,
we believe, will develop an integrated approach to all four of the
problems.

Indeed it has been raised and we've been privileged in the committee to be
addressed by small survival businesses and we think that we need to take on
board the fact that local governments must review zoning and licensing
regulations to end discrimination against micro and small enterprises. All
levels of the democratic government must review their procurement policies
and that indeed is happening in the department already. A specific
programme must be established to ensure Government support for women
entrepreneurs and of course it must be easily accessible and it should
include skills training and access to credit, as so many of us have said
already.

A variety of other measures should lower the barriers to micro enterprise,
and the laws that we are putting through now should be improved to allow
people in the sector to collect debts, in particular. Market sites must be
established and access to existing sites should be facilitated.

Deputy Chair and Deputy Minister, I want to take the opportunity to thank
the department for the co-operation that we received as we were addressing
the amending Bill. In his absence, I want to thank the DDG of the
department, Lionel October, who is not here today. I also want to thank
Johan Strydom who has been helping us with legal matters quite a lot. He is
there. I thank the committee members who very actively have put together
quite a number of the amendments and have made sure that the radical
measures that have been put forward in the Bill and that are in front of us
today have been taken on board.
We are quite happy that that has happened in the Bill. I think I must use
the opportunity lastly to say that, in order to make sure that this Bill
and many other Bills that have been put forward by the department are
implemented, I want to invite the members of Parliament to interact with
the centre that the Department of Trade and Industry has opened up on the
sixth floor. I think many of us in the trade and industry committee are
inundated with people asking how the services work in Trade and Industry.
We think the centre is not being used sufficiently. To find out how this
Bill will be implemented, you, particularly those who are members of
Parliament, will be assisted on the sixth floor, in the centre.

The ANC supports the amending Bill. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, Chairperson.
Chairperson, I am going to need the two-and-a-half minutes that were left
over to deal with all the comments.

CHAIRPERSON: You have it, hon Deputy.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you. I thank all hon
members for supporting this Bill and, indeed, most of what the members
raised as concerns are valid concerns and we are, as a department, trying
to address most of them.

I would like to agree with the hon member Lockey with regard to problems
that have been raised by the small businesses in terms of compliance with
regulations and bylaws. And indeed, as a department, whilst we are busy
conducting a study of the cost of compliance by small businesses, which was
a suggestion that came out of the 1999 mid-term review of the National
Small Business Strategy, we feel that the issue of physical infrastructure
for small business and the issue of municipal bylaws that are constraining
them, are really issues best dealt with at the local level. And we are
engaging the local authorities in some of the localities where we used to
own buildings as the agencies that were in the townships. So we were
engaging them.

I do agree also that some of the small businesses have been taken for a
ride by the franchisers and there are a lot of problems of collapsing
franchises. We are, as a department, busy with legislation to regulate the
franchising industry, but the hon member will also know that there is
something called FRN, which is the Franchise Referral Network, which we
have set up specifically to help franchisees to deal with their problems.

I thank the hon Theron for the compliment to the Department of Trade and
Industry, because, indeed, I agree with him. There is a lot of information
out there. The incentives that are available for big businesses are equally
available for small businesses. I would not agree with him when he says
that the President's brother, Moeletsi Mbeki, was talking against black
economic empowerment in the article that he refers to. I think what
Moeletsi was complaining or concerned about was the narrow focus that has
resulted in a few people actually benefiting from BEE transactions.

BEE is not a racist economic model. It is a deliberate intervention by this
Government to correct the imbalances of the past. I just want to say that
everything he said about the DA's framework for growth of the economy is
actually what we are busy doing, and goes beyond what he has spoken about,
including the changing of the education system to create entrepreneurs.
That is what this Government is busy dealing with.

With regard to the hon Ngiba, I thank him for the support for this Bill. It
has, indeed, taken us a long time to come up with a structure to replace
the NSBC, but what happened is that we did not want to make the same
mistakes that led to the collapse of the NSBC, and we are consulting to see
if we can find a voice for small business without legislating on it. And we
have found that we have no alternative but to go the way of an amending
Bill.

I agree with the comments made by the hon Rhoda and also hon Pheko, who
talked about strengthening institutions that support SMMEs and having
programmes that target women-owned SMMEs. We are already busy, as the DTI,
formulating specific programmes that target small and medium enterprises
that are run by women. The programme TWIB, Technology for Women in
Business, is one of those and also the programme SAWEN, South African Women
Entrepreneurs Network, seeks to do just that - to target women as
businesspeople.

 Finally, I would agree with almost everything that hon member September
said, particularly around Khula and Ntsika and women's businesses. I would
like to assure members that the problems experienced, both at Khula and
Ntsika, are about to be resolved.

In respect of Khula, Khula has commissioned a study to look at how it can
act as a retailer of finance, because it was conceived as a wholesaler of
finance and dependent on a lot of intermediaries to retail the money. Now
we are looking, because of all the criticism, at how Khula could act as a
retailer. And we think that will improve the situation.

With regard to Ntsika, I have already said that we are working on
strengthening the capacity of Ntsika by integrating all nonfinancial
support programmes under Ntsika. We are also strengthening the
institution's corporate governance structures by appointing a new board and
we will increase the scale of support that we have been giving to Ntsika.

It remains the Government's intention to have a focal point for small
business support through a statutory institution.

I thank all members for supporting this Bill. I thank you, Deputy
Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Proceedings will now be
suspended and will resume at 14:00. Proceedings are suspended.

Business suspended at 12:27 and resumed at 14:03.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy that had arisen as a result of the
death of Mr R J Heine had been filled, in accordance with item 6(3) of
Schedule 6 to the Constitution, 1996, by the nomination of Mr M H Steele
with effect from 9 June 2003.

                                    OATH

Mr M H Steele, accompanied by Mr D K Maluleke and Mr T D Lee, made and
subscribed the oath and took his seat.

           PRECEDENCE NOT TO BE GIVEN TO QUESTIONS ON 11 JUNE 2003

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as it stands on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 29(8), Questions shall not
  have precedence on Wednesday, 11 June 2003.

                        GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT SUMMIT

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr T JEEBODH (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC congratulates all the
representatives who attended the Growth and Development Summit on 7 June
2003. Delegates to this historic summit agreed on a range of interventions
that are necessary to facilitate growth and development. These include
public investment initiatives, expanded public works programmes, sector
partnerships and strategies, small enterprise promotion, local procurement,
job impact and monitoring. It is reported that an amount of R145 billion is
earmarked for investment in a range of projects around the country. Many
people who are currently unemployed stand to benefit from the project.

The summit also committed itself to halving the number of people who are
unemployed by the year 2014. The commitment of all sectors to tackle the
problem of unemployment marks a huge success for the summit. We believe
that investing in our economy for job creation is an important component in
the struggle to push back the frontiers of poverty.

The ANC welcomes the outcomes of the summit and hopes that all sectors will
work towards implementation of the summit's resolutions. I thank you.
[Applause.]

              DA'S ROAD MAP PROPOSAL FOR DEMOCRACY IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member's Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Madam Speaker, last week, President
Mbeki told this Parliament that Zanu-PF and the MDC in Zimbabwe were, and I
quote, ``engaged in a dialogue to decide what to do about their country''.
Both parties have since denied that there was any kind of dialogue nor is
any kind of dialogue going on between them, either openly or in secret.

Yet President Mbeki told this Parliament and I quote, ``they are having a
dialogue''. Either he was misled or he was misleading the South African
public. Since then, Robert Mugabe has spat in President Mbeki's face by
arresting the MDC leader Tsvangirai and MDC secretary-general, General
Welshman Ncube. He has launched a decapitation strike against the MDC
leadership, just as the apartheid government used to do when faced with
mass protest.

 Dialogue becomes impossible when Robert Mugabe is crushing his political
opponents. The time has surely come for South Africa to take firm action
and present Zimbabwe with a concrete plan. We have proposed, in the DA,
that the South African Government help introduce a road map to democracy in
Zimbabwe. The road map will commit both Zanu-PF and the MDC to a series of
interim goals culminating in new, fresh and free elections. South Africa
should guide this road map process by imposing firm sanctions for failure,
and helping to provide tangible rewards for success.

Zimbabwe's Iraqi-style information Minister, Jonathan Moyo, has blasted the
road map plan on the weekend. That is surely the strongest sign that this
is a very good idea. A road map to democracy would help President Mbeki to
restore credibility.

We strongly urge he take up this plan and drop his failed policy of quiet
diplomacy. [Applause.]

                 SCANDAL AROUND ROBBEN ISLAND MUSEUM COUNCIL

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr E T FERREIRA (IFP): The Robben Island Museum was established to reflect
the history of incarceration of many of apartheid's biggest enemies. The
museum is thus of historical importance, which has been reflected by the
thousands of local and foreign tourists that have been exposed to its
exhibitions. One can indeed call it one of the new South Africa's most
important historical sites.

Yet, the body responsible for managing the day-to-day affairs of the
museum, the Robben Island Museum Council, has been shrouded in controversy
of late. First, the director, Andre Odendaal, resigned after allegations of
maladministration and corruption. Secondly, employees were involved in a
scandal about viewing pornographic material on museum computers. And now a
forensic audit by PricewaterhouseCoopers has recommended that the SAPS
investigate kickbacks and the use of a former employee's bank account for
moving around millions of rands.

The IFP welcomes the decision of the head of the council, Ahmed Kathrada,
to implement that PWC recommendation and to refer the latest allegations to
the SAPS for investigation. An investigation of this nature would no doubt
be necessary to restore public confidence in the council and the museum
itself.
                             YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT

                            (Member's Statement)

Mr L M KGWELE (ANC): The October Household Survey conducted by Statistics
South Africa revealed that 45% of South Africa's youth in the age category
16 to 24 is unemployed and out of school. The Growth and Development Summit
reached an agreement on the need for embarking on, among other things,
public investment initiatives and expanded public works programmes. The
public investment initiatives are aimed at developing and maintaining
economic infrastructure by Government, state-owned enterprises and
developmental institutions in order to facilitate growth and improve
productivity. Many of these projects should be mainstream infrastructural
projects with a strong labour-based component. The expanded public works
programme will provide temporary employment and income relief for the
unemployed.

An important component of the expanded public works programme is the
provision of training to empower those who unemployed to be employed in
other sectors in the economy. Some of the programmes will take the form of
a national youth service programme. The ANC believes that this agreement is
a practical and achievable goal which can successfully alleviate youth
unemployment. The ANC is optimistic that the partnership forged at the
summit will alleviate the endemic problem of youth unemployment. Thank you.

                         SANCTIONS AGAINST ZIMBABWE

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr B L GELDENHUYS (New NP): Speaker, the New NP never supported sanctions
that could hurt the people of a country. We do however, support so-called
smart sanctions aimed at isolating members of governments guilty of huge
violations of human rights. Commonwealth sanctions against the government
of Zimbabwe is a case in point. South Africa, as a member of the
Commonwealth, is supposed to honour the implementation of Commonwealth
sanctions. Yet the opposite happened. The hon Minister of Arts, Culture,
Science and Technology, in his capacity as chair of the Commonwealth
Science Council, invited his Zimbabwean counterpart to attend the meeting
of this Commonwealth Council in South Africa. The New NP strongly objects
to this invitation, and we urge the Government to honour the implementation
of Commonwealth sanctions in future.

Wat opval, is dat die DA, wat tot dusver voortdurend histeries vrees
aangeblaas het oor die gebeure in Zimbabwe, nog nie 'n woord gerep het oor
die jongste verwikkelinge nie. En 'n mens vra jou die vraag af of die DA se
bande met die IVP vir hulle belangriker is as die belange van gewone
Zimbabwiërs wie se lotgevalle hulle elke dag uitbuit vir politieke gewin.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[What is striking is that the DA, who up to now have continuously been
rousing hysterical fear regarding the events in Zimbabwe, have not yet said
a word about the latest developments. And one asks oneself the question
whether the DA's ties with the IFP are more important to them than the
interests of ordinary Zimbabweans whose experiences they exploit every day
for political gain. [Applause.]]

                             RELIGION IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, it has been reported that the Minister
has said that the policy on religion in education has now been finalised.
It has also been suggested that Government is now backtracking on what has
been perceived as the banning of meaningful religious observances at
schools and the imposing of an official state religion education. Changes
to the policy apparently allow school governing bodies to decide if their
schools will observe religious practices.

But I say: Is this really possible, Mr Minister? Have you in fact relented
on the issue of prayer? The reality is, of course, that the powers
allocated to school governing bodies are extremely limited. Some religious
leaders are under the impression that the addition of this paragraph solves
the problem, but does it?

Firstly, school governing bodies must conduct religious observances in
accordance with the policy document, which is strongly opposed to single-
faith observances. Secondly, in terms of the South African Schools Act,
school governing bodies have functions but no powers. Thirdly, the
Constitution stipulates that the observances must follow rules made by the
appropriate public authorities and while you and I may want this to refer
to the school governing bodies, the Minister will gladly enlighten us that
he and his department are confident that they are the relevant public
authorities.

Of course, section 9 of the Constitution is the trump card and whether we
like it or not, religion-specific observances, especially Christian prayer,
are perceived as discriminatory and, as the Minister has said on many
occasions, Christianity in this regard is a problem and he will not
tolerate what he calls Christian indoctrination.
Ideally this policy should be revisited from scratch, but to remedy some of
the problems, at least, offensive paragraphs opposed to single-faith
observances need to be deleted or reworded. School governing bodies must be
empowered to decide how religion education is to be conducted. Allowing
representatives of religious organisations to teach religion education only
if they are also qualified teachers registered with the South African
Council of Educators is absurd and an insult. Thank you.

              MORE BRUTALITY DISPLAYED BY THE APARTHEID REGIME

                            (Member's Statement)

Nksz N MAHLAWE (ANC): Somlomo, ngomhla we-6 kuJuni 1960 amawaka abantu
abamba intlanganiso kwintaba yaseNgquza, eQawukeni ngaseFlagstaff, bexoxa
ngengcinezelo karhulumente wocalucalulo. Amadlagusha ayichithachitha loo
ntlanganiso ngokudubula ngolunya, abulale abantu abalishumi elinanye.
Kwangxwelereka amakhulu evayo, kwavalelwa inkitha yabantu, kwagwetywa
intambo abangamashumi amathathu.
NgolweSine umhla we-6 kuJuni 2003, emva kweminyaka engamashumi amane
anesithathu, uRhulumente wabantu okhokelwa yi-ANC ungcwabe ngokutsha
amathambo aloo maqhawe ngesidima nangesithozela esiwafaneleyo. Lo mzabalazo
ke uyinxalenye yenkquleqhu ye-ANC yokulwa ucalucalulo, njengoko kuqulathwe
kumqulu wenkululeko iFreedom Charter.

Esi siganeko singqamana nesiganeko sonyaka u-1976, nyaka lowo ekwabulawa
ngawo ulutsha olwalusilwela amalungelo alo. Le nyanga yeyomceli ngeni
kulutsha, okokuba, luqhubeke ngokwakha esi sizwe, nasekugxotheni indlala,
babe ngumfuziselo kulutsha olusakhasayo. ndiyabulela [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa member's statement follows.)

[Ms N MAHLAWE (ANC): Madam Speaker, on 6 June 1960 thousands of people held
a meeting at the mountain on Ngquza, in eQawukeni, near Flagstaff,
discussing the oppression of the apartheid government. The boers disrupted
that meeting by firing maliciously, killing 11 people. Several hundred
people were injured and many people were arrested. Thirty people were
sentenced to death.
On Thursday, 6 June 2003, after 43 years, the people's Government, led by
the ANC, reburied the remains of those heroes in the dignified and
respectful manner that they deserved. This struggle is part of the efforts
of the ANC, as enshrined in the Freedom Charter, to fight apartheid.

This incident coincides with the one in 1976, the year in which the youth,
who were fighting for their rights, were killed. This is a month of
challenge to the youth; that they carry on building this nation,
eradicating poverty and being exemplary to the up-and-coming youth. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

                      AVIATION ACCIDENTS IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): The UDM extends its condolences to the families and
friends of the various people who died tragically in two separate aviation
accidents in Mpumalanga over the weekend. A special word of gratitude
should be extended to the recovery teams that assisted with the retrieval
of the deceased from the helicopter crash. During a long and arduous
retrieval effort, hampered by rain, mist and even hail, the search and
rescue teams persevered until they could reach the crash site.

The joint efforts of the Defence Force and Civilian Mountain  Club  members,
many of them volunteers, must  be  commended.  Through  their  efforts,  the
bereaved families have been given the opportunity to pay proper  respect  to
their departed loved ones.

The UDM urges the Civil Aviation Authority to finalise its investigation as
quickly as possible to allow the families to find closure on this difficult
and tragic incident. I thank you.

                        GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT SUMMIT

                            (Member's Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF): Mevrou die Speaker, die meeste van Suid-Afrika se
probleme kan teruggevoer word na werkloosheid. Waar Suid-Afrika se
werkloosheidsyfer ongeveer 40% is, word bereken dat dit by jong mense onder
30 jaar bykans 70% is. Die konflik- en revolusiepotensiaal wat hieruit
voortspruit, voorspel niks goeds vir die toekoms nie.

Besluite van die Regering aan die een kant, en die besigheidswêreld alleen,
soos geneem op die pas afgelope Groei- en Ontwikkelingsberaad, gaan nie
Suid-Afrika se werkloosheidsprobleme oplos nie. Gemeenskappe sal self
verantwoordelikheid vir hul ekonomiese opheffing moet neem. Die meerderheid
Suid-Afrikaners sal ook 'n kopskuif moet maak van die huidige ekonomiese
``jy skuld my``-kultuur'' na 'n ``neem eie inisiatief''-kultuur''.

Die ooreenkomste en besluite wat die naweek op die Groei- en
Ontwikkelingsberaad geneem is, word deur die VF verwelkom as 'n eerste stap
in 'n poging om die probleme op te los. Die finale antwoord vir die
probleme lê egter nie daar alleen nie. Die finale antwoord lê in die
ontwikkeling van selfstandige gemeenskappe wat die verantwoordelikheid vir
hulle opheffing self sal aanpak. Om selfstandige gemeenskappe te skep, en
te laat slaag, moet daar ook 'n ekonomiese skuif kom deur die Regering en
die mense van Suid-Afrika. Die skuif moet wees van die individu na die
gemeenskap, van die huidige ``blameer ander ``-kultuur na die ``neem eie
verantwoordelikheid''-kultuur. Die gevolg hiervan sal wees dat ons van
ekonomies passiewe ontvangers sal beweeg na selfstandige gemeenskappe wat
klêm le op eie inisiatief en produktiwiteit en so Suid-Afrika se probleme
van werkloosheid en armoede self help oplos. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans member's statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF): Madam Speaker, most of South Africa's problems can
be traced back to unemployment. While South Africa's unemployment rate is
approximately 40%, it is estimated that for young people under 30 years of
age it is almost 70%. The conflict and revolution potential arising from
this does not bode well for the future.

Decisions from the Government, on the one hand, and from the business world
unilaterally, as taken at the Growth and Development Summit which has just
ended, are not going to solve South Africa's unemployment problems.
Communities themselves will have to take responsibility for their economic
upliftment. The majority of South Africans will also have to make a
paradigm shift, from the present ``you owe me'' culture to a ``take your
own initiative'' culture.

 The agreements made and decisions taken at the weekend at the Growth and
Development Summit are welcomed by the FF as a first step in an effort to
solve the problems. However, the final answer to the problems does not lie
in that alone. The final answer lies in the development of self-sufficient
communities that will take the responsibility for their upliftment
themselves. To create self-sufficient communities and make them succeed,
there also has to be an economic shift on the part of the Government and
the people of South Africa. This shift should be from the individual to the
community, from the present ``blame others'' culture to the ``take
responsibility'' culture. The result of this will be that we will move from
being economically passive receivers to being self-sufficient communities
that emphasise own initiative and productivity, and in so doing help to
resolve South Africa's problems of unemployment and poverty ourselves.
Thank you.]

                   AFRICAN SUMMIT OF WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM

                            (Member's Statement)

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI (ANC): Madam Speaker, President Thabo Mbeki of South
Africa will host other African leaders and the heads of the world's major
corporations, who will assemble in Durban later this week. They will be
attending the annual African Summit of the World Economic Forum. This
summit will look at ways of providing assistance to African countries to
implement Nepad. The WEF's director commented that: ``It is good to talk,
but we need to have realistic timeframes for the roll-out, action and
review.''

Member states of the African Union have already taken initiatives to
implement some of the Nepad projects. The ANC believes that the outcomes of
this meeting will mark a turning point in the realisation of the noble
ideals and principles of the Nepad programme. The ANC also welcomes the
determination of role-players who will be attending this meeting to
accelerate the implementation of Nepad projects. I thank you.

                   REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF MATRIC STUDENTS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN (DA): Agb Speaker, die DA sê Minister Asmal moet
verantwoordelikheid neem vir sy eie departement se onthulling dat slegs
vier uit elke tien leerlinge wat skool begin uiteindelik matriek behaal.

Sy spog met die verbetering van die matriekslaagsyfer van 48% in 1999 na
68% verlede jaar word hierdeur totaal omver gegooi en verder belaglik
gemaak omdat 110 000 minder leerders verlede jaar as in 1998 matriek
geskryf het. Dat die gehalte van onderwys ook verswak het, word beklemtoon
daardeur dat die leerders wat matriekvrystellings behaal het, merkbaar
afgeneem het. Die Minister se obsessie om die slaagsyfer jaarliks met 5% op
te skuif, forseer skole om leerders terug te hou in grade 10 en 11 waar
tans 'n opeenhoping van leerders of dubbeld in sekere skole teenoor dié wat
in graad 12 is. Dit forseer uiteindelik ook leerders uit die sisteem.

Een van Minister Asmal se grootste mislukkings is die feit dat hy nog nie
na nege jaar se demokrasie 'n nuwe kurrikulum vir Verdere Onderwys en
Opleiding na graad 9 in plek gesit het nie om sodoende voorsiening te maak
vir leerders wat die ekonomie broodnodig het en wat op hierdie wyse nie
werk kan kry nie. Die Minister moet sy aandag gee aan die basiese oorsake
vir die verdwyningsyfers, soos die hervorming van die huidige te
akademiesgerigte kurrikulum wat baie leerders laat uitsak en verdwyn.
(Translation of Afrikaans member's statement follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Hon Speaker, the DA says that Minister Asmal has to
take resposibility for his own department's revelation that only four out
of every ten learners who start school actually achieve matric.

His boasting about the improvement in the matric pass rate from 48% in 1999
to 68% last year has totally had the bottom knocked out of it by this and
furthermore been made ridiculous because 110 000 fewer learners wrote
matric last year than in 1998. That the quality of education has also
deteriorated is highlighted by that fact that there is a noticeable
decrease in the number of learners who achieved matric exemption. The
Minister's obsession with increasing the pass rate by 5% annually forces
schools to keep learners back in Grade 10 and 11, where there is currently
a congestion of learners, or double those in Grade 12 in certain schools.
This eventually also forces learners out of the system.

 One of Minister Asmal's biggest failures is the fact that after nine years
of democracy he still has not put in place a new curriculum for Further
Education and Training after Grade 9, in so doing to provide for learners
whom the economy desperately needs and who cannot get jobs in this manner.
The Minister should devote his attention to the basic causes of the rate of
disappearance, like reshaping the currently too academically aimed
curriculum that causes many learners to drop out and disappear.]

                                TAXI INDUSTRY

                            (Member's Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Madam Speaker, it was appetising to hear yesterday
from the actual Minister of Transport that the bidding process that will
bring new-look taxis to our roads has started.

It  is  important  that  this  industry  which  has  been  bypassed  by  all
developmental events  of  the  previous  government  is  to  be  considered,
recognised and subsidised  as  another  major  component  in  the  country's
transport network that now received the attention of the new Government.

The minibus-taxi industry was a black initiative many years ago on a one-
man, one-taxi basis. No research substantiated this initiative. No capital
was accumulated to start a business. It's a business that started because
there was a glaring need - a need to commute workers between home and their
workplaces, a need to unite families in the evenings, a need to commute
children between home and their institutions of learning and a need to
transport foreign nationals across our borders. These needs were to be
accomplished safely and efficiently, but at an affordable price.

We believe transport authorities have done all possible to negotiate a
mechanism on how best to introduce the new-look fleet on our roads. The
training of drivers, the affordability of new fares, the upgrading of
drivers' licences from code 8 to code 10 in order to drive the 35-seaters,
the delay that may be caused in filling up the 35-seaters as against the 15-
seaters and the question of high voltage syndrome as highlighted yesterday
... [Time expired.] Thank you.

                       REMARKS ABOUT LAND RIGHTS BILL

                            (Member's Statement)

Miss J E SOSIBO (ANC): Madam Speaker, last week it was reported in a daily
newspaper that Inkosi Ngubane has warned that the proposed Communal Land
Rights Bill in its present form could lead to bloodshed if it was to be
implemented. He was addressing a conference on sociopolitical, cultural and
educational issues at the University of Durban-Westville.

The ANC views such utterances in a very serious manner. The proposed
legislation seeks to bring about radical changes in the administration of
land in rural areas. The ANC believes the proposed Bill will, for the first
time, enable poor rural communities to have direct access to the land. The
people of KwaZulu-Natal province deserve peace.

The ANC expresses its disappointment with this utterance and calls on
Inkosi Ngubane to assist in building and strengthening peace, democracy and
development in the province. I thank you. [Applause.]

                               RACISTS REMARKS

                            (Member's Statement)

Mnr J DURAND (Nuwe NP): Madam Speaker, die Nuwe NP neem kennis van dr Daan
Roodt, leier van die pro-Afrikaanse aksiegroep, se belaglike gedagte om die
Stadsraad van Pretoria oor te neem omdat die ANC kwansuis Pretoria gesteel
het. Verder neem die Nuwe NP ook kennis van dr Roodt se rassistiese
uitsprake en dat hy van mening is dat apartheid positief was. Dis duidelik
dat dr Roodt met sy regse uitsprake terug verlang na die verlede.

Die Nuwe NP vind dit veelseggend dat dr Roodt die agb Tony Leon en die DA
beskou as die voertuig waarmee hierdie ideaal verwesenlik kan word. Dit is
duidelik dat dr Roodt die ware kleure van die DA raakgesien het en daarom
vir hom 'n tuiste in die DA sien. Dr Roodt het die agb Leon ook privaat
verseker dat hy sal inval by partystrukture en prosedures in belang van die
groter saak om Pretoria uit ANC-hande te bevry. Dit is baie ironies dat die
DA wat homself so graag wil voordoen as 'n party vir almal so aanloklik is
vir iemand met sulke regse sienings soos dr Roodt en dat die DA gesien word
as die geskikte party om die verlede te laat herleef. Duidelik die
bevestiging wat ons almal lankal vermoed. Soos hulle sê: eers kom
ontkenning, maar uiteindelik aanvaarding. Die Nuwe NP glo die DA is nou
lank genoeg in die ontkenningsfase. Dit is tyd dat die DA uit sy regse kas
klim. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member's statement follows.)

[Mr J DURAND (New NP): Madam Speaker, the New NP notes the ludicrous idea
of Dr Daan Roodt, leader of the pro-Afrikaans action group, to take over
the city council of Pretoria because the ANC ostensibly stole Pretoria. We
further note Dr Roodt's racist utterances and that he believes that
apartheid was positive. It is obvious that with his rightist utterances, Dr
Roodt is yearning for the past.

The New NP finds it significant that Dr Roodt regards the hon Tony Leon and
the DA as the vehicle to realise this dream. It is obvious that Dr Roodt
has seen the true colours of the DA and therefore sees the DA as his future
home. Dr Roodt also privately assured the hon Leon that he will abide by
party structures and procedures in the interest of the bigger cause to free
Pretoria from ANC hands. It is very ironic that the DA, who would like to
keep up a front as being open to all, seems so irresistible to someone with
such rightist leanings as Dr Roodt and that the DA is seen as the
appropriate party to revive the past. This is clearly confirmation of what
everybody suspected all along. As they say: first comes denial, but
eventually acceptance. The New NP believes that the DA has been in the
denial phase long enough. It is time that the DA comes out of its rightist
closet. I thank you.]

                       RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE IN SCHOOLS

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, may I assure you and the House
that I try to mind my own business. Can I assure you that these two
statements made by the hon Doman and the hon Dudley were not planted by me.
In other words, they are not my creation just to give me an opportunity to
reply. Can I assure you that this is the situation.

In relation to the hon Dudley, let me say that I don't want to mess with
the English language, but does she mean I was backing down or backtracking?
I'm not sure which is the right word. I think it sounded like ``backing
down''.

Can I assure you and the House too that we in the ANC actually take
consultation very seriously. On this issue, you are damned if you don't
consult. You are damned doubly if you consult and say we are actually
listening. What has happened, therefore, is that the following position has
occurred. We had to take into account the constitutional provision about
religious observance and that it must be equitable in terms of the
Constitution. If in fact the religious observances are not voluntary, then
it would be unconstitutional. Extensive consultation has taken place, and
we have come to the conclusion that if there are religious observances, and
there are not always in assemblies, then the governing body must take into
account the fact that we are a multireligious society.

It is not good enough for the hon Dudley to say that I am opposed to
Christian prayers. The ones who are most enthusiastic about this are  the
Zion Christian Church. I've said to this House before that they have been
sidelined, demonised. They are the largest Christian denomination in South
Africa. They welcomed this.

It is no longer my policy or the department's. Yesterday, the Council of
Education Ministers in Durban released this as their document now. There is
one month still for further consultation. We don't want thousands from one
address and one-line reports. The result of this is therefore that there
will be religious observances in schools, providing the governing body
takes into account the general approach that we are a multireligious
society, which we are.

When I met the National Religious Leaders Forum, and you can't get higher
than that - well you can actually; there's one above that, but I don't have
direct lines or contact above that - we started off with a common prayer
given by the Chief Rabbi. Everybody was so excited that we might suggest
this common prayer which refers to the deity. No one, except someone who is
absolutely sectarian, can object to a common prayer that is acceptable to
all our multireligious faiths in South Africa.
Beyond that, I can't go. Beyond that, I can't go. Beyond that we are
entering the realm of the quiet, demonised version of sectarian and
religious politics. I am not prepared to go into that.

                   REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF MATRIC STUDENTS

                            (Minister's Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: The point about Mr Doman's statement is that he
should go and do some research. We have lots of research facilities.
Possibly, you might have a lightness of tone also. I understand you are a
former dominee [minister] and a former dominee must have a lightness of
tone too.

The first point to remember is that the Sunday Times article is based on
taking the number of matric pupils, and subtracting them from those in
Grade 1. That is an extraordinary thing. It will give us possibly the
highest intake for school-leaving certificates in the world, by the way, if
we take that view. In fact, far more.

Secondly, I know that your predecessor has been replaced by you, which is
the DP approach to representivity, because clearly, if the DP was
represented by the previous spokesperson ... [Interjections.] Mr Ntuli was
not truly representative of the DP at large, which I see in front of me
now. [Interjections.] That is why you have Mr Doman ... [Interjections.]

The other point is that we released, as a Government department, soon after
the publication of the results, why the matric numbers have fallen.
[Interjections.] The central point was - if you listened - that from 1994
to 1997, we had this huge peak in the number of students who were never ...

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: The hon Leon makes terrible statements in Mexico
about the fact that this ANC Government is behaving like the National Party
government of 1952. We shall have a debate on that. That is by the way.
[Interjections.]

This was a childish trantrum in Mexico. Let's  have  some  real  news  here.
[Interjections.]

Mr Doman, we  published  a  report  ourselves,  out  of  a  sense  of  self-
confidence as to why the numbers had fallen.  [Interjections.]  The  numbers
had fallen because ...

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister!
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I can't speak when they are ...

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, you had more time than the  two  statements  that
were made. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: On a point of order, I had thought it was two
minutes for replies. The response was for one minute. I couldn't have more
time. There were two distinct issues raised. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: You have had four-and-a-half minutes, Minister.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, if you tell these baying wolves to keep
quiet, you can have a real discussion on the hon Doman's point.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 25 - Safety and Security, and Vote No 23 - Independent
Complaints Directorate:
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker and hon members, last
year I dedicated this department's budget speech to my predecessor, Comrade
Steve Tshwete. Allow me to dedicate this one, sadly, to the memory of the
many police officials murdered in the line of duty over the past year. I do
this, not because I like putting a sombre note on the work we do in the
department, but rather as a stark reminder that the battle against crime
goes on and, unfortunately, it leaves in its wake an unwelcome number of
casualties.

At the same time, I wish to give recognition  to  the  sterling  work  being
done by the members of our Police  Service.  Indeed,  our  police  officials
have  exerted  themselves  and  are,  under  very  difficult  circumstances,
continuing to exert themselves in doing all that they can to ensure  a  safe
and secure environment for all the people in South Africa.  I  salute  them.
[Applause.]

Their efforts are being complemented by the great majority  of  our  people,
from all walks of life, who are contributing much time and energy  to  bring
about safety for all of us in this country. They range  from  businesspeople
to reservists and volunteers who have responded warmly to calls  to  lend  a
hand and build a better life for all. I also salute them.

My colleague, Comrade Kader Asmal, was asking me just now why it is that
there are not as many police officials in this House as has been the case
in the past. The reason is that they are out there fighting crime.
[Applause.] Last Friday, a comprehensive operation termed ``Operation
Tswikila'' kicked off in the Western Cape. This operation forms part of our
national crime-combating strategy and is intended to push back the levels
of violent crime in this province, especially in priority police station
areas such as Khayelitsha, Nyanga and Mitchells Plain.

All police members from the Western Cape are participating in the
operation, including members working at the provincial and area offices. A
substantive number of members will also be deployed from other provinces.
The operation has already shown results. For example, Khayelitsha had the
lowest murder figure over a weekend in many years. Only two murders
occurred last weekend compared to an average of 15 murders during weekends
in Khayelitsha generally. Of course, those two murders are regrettable.
There must be no murders in South Africa. National Commissioner Jackie
Selebi is also not here and, as you may be aware, has for a period of three
years been appointed as the vice president for Interpol in Africa. He is
now in France ensuring that Africa and especially South Africa are and
remain in the frontline of international and interregional policing and co-
operation.

You will also notice that the Deputy Minister of Safety and Security, Joe
Matthews, is not here. He had to rush off to Johannesburg where his sister
is critically ill. I am sure our thoughts are with him at this moment and
with our colleague, the Chairperson of the NCOP.

In his state of the nation address, the President emphasised the importance
of the National Crime Prevention Strategy and the progress made thus far.
Continuous efforts to improve the capacity of the Police Service to
discharge its crime prevention and combating responsibility and improve
intelligence capacity, and the reduction of illegal firearms and an
increase in the number of Saturday and specialised courts are at the top of
our cluster priorities.

Last year, I commended members of this House for their commitment to the
search for answers to the country's crime problems. I made the point that
we are increasingly defining crime outside the hurly-burly of party
politics, which is the way it should be as this scourge impoverishes us
all. May I again repeat the call I made then, that I am open to both
suggestions and constructive criticism.

Unfortunately, there are still those who continue to demean our efforts
against crime. Early this year, one national newspaper referred to a task
team on farm killings, concluding that the report has been submitted to my
office and that we were still doctoring the findings. At the time, we still
had not received the report. But, sadly, even when this truth was explained
to the newspaper, no retraction was made.

Yesterday, I received a progress report from Adv Charl du Plessis, the
chairperson of the committee of inquiry into farm attacks. In the report,
Adv Du Plessis gave an indication of the work already completed by the
committee. He also gave an indication of some of the main findings of the
committee thus far, which I quote,


  By far the largest impetus behind farm attacks in the narrow sense of the
  word is of a purely criminal nature, namely the desire to rob. The
  committee could find no evidence that farm attacks per se were part of an
  orchestrated campaign to drive the white farmers off the land so that it
  could be occupied by the black landless people.

The committee is, however, of the opinion that suitable steps should be
taken to deal with illegal occupation of land in order to prevent it from
becoming a crime risk. I will discuss these issues as a matter of urgency
with my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs as well as
with the commissioners of the Land Claims Commission.

In order to enhance rural safety, the committee is of the opinion that
issues such as physical security on farms and smallholdings, a proper
substitute for the commando system, proper policing and rural safety in
general need to receive attention. The committee also indicated that the
full and final report will be presented to me within a month. Whatever
strategies we work out to combat crime, it should be acknowledged that our
efforts will not be appreciated until we reach a position where in many
instances we can stop crime before it happens.

To this end, our crime combating strategy is designed to do this over time
through visibility and mobility. This strategy, as depicted in the
strategic plan tabled in Parliament, which is this booklet, displays a
clear focus on combating organised, serious and violent crimes, commercial
crimes, and crimes against women and children. It is further focused on
those areas with the highest incidence of these crimes and seeks to
stabilise crimes in these areas. Indeed crime has been stabilised in the
majority of these areas.

It is a well-known fact that South Africa has a large pool of illegal
firearms in circulation. Our analysis has shown us that there is a high
prevalence in the use of these firearms during the commission of serious
and violent crimes. The gang problem in the Western Cape, for instance, is
closely linked to drug and gun trafficking. Our operations in the Cape
Flats area have confirmed this beyond any shadow of doubt. That is why our
strategy to deal with the proliferation of firearms has been revitalised,
so to speak, leading to the launch of ``Operation Sethunya'' on 1 April
2003, aimed at tracing illegal firearms and assuring legal compliance.

Our total strategy to eradicate the proliferation of firearms used in crime
and violence in South Africa provides for regulators in the form of
legislation like the Firearms Control Act, regulations, international
protocols and national instructions; effective control processes in the
Central Firearm Register and in relation to state-owned firearms; an
operational crime-combating approach; crime prevention initiatives in terms
of public awareness and education campaigns, and regional co-operation
initiatives.

Steps to implement the Firearms Control Act are now in progress. Firstly,
certain amendments to the Act are necessary. These amendments are of a
lexical and substantive nature. The substantive issues relate to a
redefinition of a ``security company'' to a ``security service provider''
to accord with the Private Security Regulation Act of 2000. The
continuation of a gunsmith's certificate and especially the issuing of
regulations in respect of firearms-free zones are further amendments.

The intention is to implement the Act in two phases. The first phase is to
provide for accreditations required in terms of the Act. Thereafter, the
rest of the Act will be implemented. Regulations pertaining to the
accreditation are at present with the state law advisers and should be
ready for promulgation very soon.

During April and May this year, the South African Police Service
confiscated 7 975 firearms. This is treble the number of firearms normally
confiscated over a two-month period. Furthermore, a total of 1,5 million
rounds of ammunition was confiscated and 1 026 persons arrested for illegal
possession of arms and ammunition.

The destruction of firearms remains a priority and, during the last
financial year, 38 426 state-owned firearms and 20 191 confiscated firearms
were destroyed. I am currently considering the possible declaration of an
amnesty in order to remove further illegal firearms and ammunition from
society.

During his state of the nation address earlier this year, the President
announced the phasing out of the SANDF commando system in the next six
years. The commandos will be replaced by a revised SAPS reservist system,
based on the amended national instruction for reservists. This system is
linked to various initiatives which form part of the National Crime
Combating Strategy normalisation phase, such as the drastic increase in the
SAPS personnel figures over the next three years, the restructuring of
specialised investigation units, the implementation of sector policing and
the establishment of crime combating units for each police area.

The reservists will, among other things, be accommodated in the National
Intervention and Crime Combating Units which have the responsibility to
support provinces with the security of big events and disaster management,
and to stabilise high crime and violent situations. They will also be
accommodated in the Area Crime Combating Units which will establish a
decentralised capacity in each police station area comprising reservists.
They are responsible for implementing specific operational concepts
pertaining to rural protection, to act as a rapid response capacity with
regard to serious crime as well as crime combating operations involving
high-force levels, for example, cordon and search and the saturation of
areas, to mention just a few.

Sector policing will see reservists involved in sector policing in each
police station precinct. The sector policing teams have various functions,
ranging from patrols in a sector to the introduction of problem-solving
projects. The reservists will also be recruited for the following
functions: reservist pilots; crime-scene first respondents who will work
with the detective service; crime intelligence functions; social workers
and psychologists and fleet and financial managers, just to mention a few.

Reservists are in the process of being recruited from existing structures
such as the SANDF commandos and the more than 75 000 volunteers who
participated in the Letsema campaign. In order to phase out the commando
system and to implement the new reservist system, SANDF exit and SAPS entry
plans have been completed. These plans will be implemented over a period of
six years.

What has also become clear is that illicit drugs play a major part in the
commission of violent crimes. In this regard, the interdepartmental task
team which has been established to co-ordinate the implementation of a
multidimensional antidrugs strategy is maintaining its efforts. This
strategy forms part of the drug masterplan which is being co-ordinated by
the Central Drug Authority. Under the auspices of the Central Drug
Authority, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Secretariat
for Safety and Security, other relevant government departments and the
National Youth Commission piloted an antidrug campaign in Mamelodi last
year. This year, on June 26, the same campaign will be launched in Cape
Town.

The SAPS has focused its attention on the supply part of the demand-and-
supply dimensions of the drug phenomenon. The demand dimension is also
being addressed in Government's moral regeneration strategy.
Examples of successes achieved by SAPS include the launch of disruptive
operations in targeted drug hot spots throughout South Africa. Clandestine
laboratories are continuously being identified and neutralised. The focus
has moved to manufacturers, suppliers and pushers as opposed to drug
addicts and users. During the past year, 6  758 individuals involved in
drug-related offences were arrested, and illicit substances to the value of
R330 million were seized.

Addressing this House in my Budget Vote speech last year, I indicated that
I was hearing ominous rumblings of war, albeit soft at this stage and want
to say, before they become a crescendo, that we will not have any political
violence again in this country. Any person who engages in this will be
arrested and criminally prosecuted. [Applause.]

Hon members are already aware of police successes in thwarting alleged
plans of the so-called Boeremag to destabilise the country, murder people
at the World Summit on Sustainable Development and other serious
allegations now before court. Suffice it to say here that we remain alert
for any other eventualities from those bent on political violence.

Organised crime units also reached several milestones with the seizure of
hundreds of million of rands worth of drugs and prohibited substances,
while even greater successes were achieved in vehicle-related crimes, even
across borders. Developments in the latter have shown that the syndicates
do not only smuggle vehicles across the borders, but will ship them across
oceans, as evidenced by the recovery in Mauritius of vehicles stolen or
hijacked in South Africa.

Other seizures in respect of natural resources in large quantities include
abalone, ivory and rhino horn. Most operators in abalone, ivory and rhino
horn have ready markets in the Far East.

While the police devote much effort to combat crime with the assistance of
communities, we cannot tolerate the development of vigilantism. No one has
the right to take the law into their own hands. The police are there and
are making every effort to deal with incidents of crime. Vigilantism helps
people with other agendas, particularly those who are involved in organised
crime who must knock off their competitors and rivals.

Concurrent with our efforts to combat organised, serious and violent
crimes, our strategy for the improvement of service delivery and the
prevention of crime is gaining momentum. Now that the first of the new
police recruits specifically recruited and trained as part of our sector
policing strategy have completed their training, the police will become
more visible and effective in the areas where they are deployed. They will
be deployed to smaller, manageable, geographic areas under the supervision
of a sector commander. Sector policing is a collaborative effort by all
role-players in addressing the root causes of crime, and contributes to
effective crime-prevention initiatives. It is in this environment that
reservists will play a key role in both urban and rural areas. Given that
we already had people performing this function who were not adequately
trained, the deployment of the new recruits will boost both morale and
performance.

The matter of crime statistics has been popping up now and again in this
House. Crime statistics are used internally on a day-to-day basis to
determine crime patterns, hot spots and modus operandi. We use this
information for operational planning and to deploy our members in
concentrated operations. Information is also provided to Community Police
Forums to ensure community involvement in our policing initiatives. The
statistics from the department will be tabled in Parliament later this year
as part of the SAPS Annual Report. This accords with international norms
regarding the release of crime statistics.

Let me report, though, that the stabilisation trend in relation to selected
priority crimes is continuing, with murder still on the decrease and, for
the first time since 1994, a decrease in the rape figures and significant
decreases in aggravated robberies. Street robberies, common burglaries and
theft, however, remain a concern.
The reorganisation of our detective service has, of course, played a major
role in the successes achieved. Obviously, there have been complaints from
various quarters, mostly based on misunderstanding of the intention of the
changes and their effectiveness. The restructuring of the specialised units
of the detective service is almost completed. Units are now structured into
multidisciplinary units to deal with organised crime, serious and violent
crimes, commercial crimes and crimes against women and children. Various
units have been created at provincial, area and local levels to deal with
these types of crimes. The dysfunctions of the past that related to
reactive approaches, non-sharing of information and intelligence, ignorance
of the organised nature of crime and the duplication of payment of rewards
for information have now appropriately been addressed.

Our restructuring needs to be taken further and I intend to ask Cabinet
soon to consider the mandate and capacity of the protection and security
services. This new division was established within the SAPS and the
divisional commissioner was appointed in November last year.

It is envisaged that the following functions will be performed by this
division: provision of in-transit VIP protection; provision of static
protection services to approved venues; provision of security services to
the rail transport sector and port of entry environment, including
identified airports, harbours and border posts; and the provision of a
regulatory service to identify strategic installations.

The following sites will be used as pilot projects: the land border at Beit
Bridge; Johannesburg International Airport; all High Courts in the country;
Durban Harbour and Cape Town train station. Although funds have not yet
been allocated for the full establishment of the protection and security
service division, the transfer of the responsibility for border line
control from the SANDF to the SAPS and expansion of the reservist system to
address community safety needs, we are in the process of preparing
submissions to Treasury.
The department is currently the recipient of donor funding to the value of
R500 million over a period of three years. The biggest donor is the EU with
a R150 million capacity-building programme. A proposed R250 million
programme covering crimes against women and children in the Eastern Cape is
being negotiated and should be signed in the near future.

Other donors include Belgium, Denmark, France, Sweden, the United Kingdom,
the United States, the United Nations and Norway. All donor funding is
utilised to support the priorities and objectives of the SAPS and is
strictly managed to ensure no duplication of donor funding occurs.

Donor support is provided to fund development and training in a wide range
of fields, including human resource management, the Criminal Record Centre,
organised crime and the Forensic Science Laboratory. The SAPS laboratory
is, among other things, supported in the development of a fully automated
DNA database which will be the first in the world, while the work in the
laboratory is already seen as a world best practice.

 As Safety and Security, we have an obligation to ensure peace and
stability internationally, on the continent as well as in the country. We
will continue to meet our obligations on all fronts in helping with
international conventions. We will continue to forge partnerships with
security establishments in pursuing our objectives of combating
international crime.

The skills of the SAPS in certain specialised fields have already been
recognised by various countries in the world. In the next few weeks, the
SAPS will provide an advanced training course in high-risk operations to
police members from the United Arab Emirates and Oman.

On the African continent, we will continue to forge and strengthen
partnerships with police institutions in advancing the objectives of Nepad
and the AU. To this end, we are actively involved in peace initiatives in
the DRC and Burundi, and we have received requests for training support
from various African countries, including Mozambique, Kenya and Nigeria.

We are engaged in a continuous process of reviewing legislation and in this
regard the Explosives Act has been reviewed and the new Explosives Act has
been adopted by Parliament. A comprehensive counter-terrorism Bill has been
formally introduced to Parliament and is undergoing public scrutiny through
a consultative process.

Technology aids optimise our efforts and serve as an important tool in the
fight against crime. We have found a balance between the use of personnel
and technology. That is why the use of technological aids such as CCTV must
now be expanded. In regard to this, we have decided to expand the use of
technological aids such as closed-circuit television which has proved a
very effective tool in the prevention and combating of crime.

Many local government structures, with the business sector acting on their
behalf, have installed CCTV in areas of high crime. In most instances,
partnerships exist within the SAPS and these structures to render a better
service. There is a crying need to install CCTV in residential areas where
unacceptable crime levels are experienced. The SAPS is presently
formulating national standards and policy on the implementation and
realisation of CCTV. The presidential stations will of course enjoy
precedence in this regard.

The Automated Fingerprint Identification System consisting of 118
workstations has now been implemented in all 35 decentralised sites
throughout the country and has been fully operational since September 2001.

One of the greatest technological advances we want to record in our crime
combating strategy relates to the fact that our expanded AFIS programme
will include palm print identification. Concomitantly with this will be a
new programme of live scanning facilities that will enable the electronic
scanning of fingerprints. A pilot project utilising hand-held scanners has
already been completed.

Another area where technology plays a significant role in relation to the
detection and combating of crime is that of the forensic science
laboratory. These facilities are equipped with modern laboratories and the
latest technology such as the DNA system and the Integrated Ballistic
Identification System. We now have four forensic laboratories in the
country, in Pretoria, Durban, Port Elizabeth and Cape Town. Some members of
Parliament's portfolio committee were invited to visit one of our local
laboratories the other day where we do DNA testing.

As a result of advances we have made in technology, we were able to produce
outstanding results in the baby Tshepang and De Klerk cases. We need
legislation of course to enable us to keep some DNA material.

In conclusion ...

The SPEAKER: You have six minutes, Minister, you do not need to worry about
your time.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, I am still
going to come back, so, I will be happy to finish here.

In conclusion, I would like to quote, for the information of the hon
members of this House, an excerpt from a speech which was delivered by the
British Prime Minister, Mr Tony Blair, on the rebalancing of the criminal
justice system in his country. He said:


  Criminal justice systems, born out of a quite necessary and proper desire
  to protect at all costs the civil liberties of the innocent, seem
  cumbersome, out of date and therefore ineffectual in convicting the
  guilty.


  I have argued that the time has come to move to the next stage of our
  overhaul of the criminal justice system - to build on what we have
  already achieved by rebalancing the system to deliver a fair balance
  between the rights of victims, witnesses, the rest of law-abiding society
  and the defendant.

I want to put it to this hon House that this is exactly what the Deputy
President said the other day at Bonteheuwel.

I am also in charge of the Independent Complaints Directorate and I would
like, therefore, to say the following: The ICD budget for 2002-03 increased
by 19% from the previous year, which will enable the directorate to
increase its internal capacity to investigate complaints against the police
and raise the level of its administration in implementing obligatory
legislation on corporate governance.

The number of complaints falling within the mandate of the ICD during the
last financial year amounted to 4 433, representing therefore an increase
of 31,9% from the previous financial year. The number of deaths in custody
or as a result of police action investigated during that financial year was
528, a decrease of 9,7% from 585 deaths investigated in the previous
period.

Persistent interventions of the ICD and SAPS management have not only led
to the decrease in the number of deaths in custody or as a result of police
action, but the decrease also confirms the growth of a human rights ethic
within the SAPS. The most prevalent cause of death as a result of police
action was shootings which occurred mostly during the course of arrest and
while the alleged crime was being committed.

It is important to know that deaths in police custody are not necessarily
due only to negligence on the part of the police but have been attributed
to such factors as natural causes, suicide, injuries sustained in custody
and prior to custody. Reports to the ICD of alleged serious criminal
offence committed by SAPS members have increased by 46,8%. Incidents of
misconduct allegedly committed by SAPS members and reported to the ICD have
also increased by 22,8% compared to the same period in 2001-02.
It is evident that personnel expenditure will dominate this year's budget
and, over the next three years, will rise to 64%. The reprioritisation of
the investigation of complaints means a continued increase in the
allocation of more than 12% of the total budget over the medium term.

The ICD will continue to support Nepad initiatives, hosting later this year
a policing oversight conference to advocate external policing oversight in
different parts of Africa, particularly the SADC region. There is keen
interest in our model of policing oversight by Rwanda and Malawi. It is
envisaged that we will have to support a number of countries on the
continent with technical expertise in the establishment of policing
oversight. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I dedicate this speech,
firstly, to Nas Abrahams, who is sitting in the gallery and whose son was
murdered just a few days ago. We mourn with him and Aisa and the whole
family. I dedicate this speech, secondly, to the tens of thousands of good
cops we have in South Africa. We are glad that we have them. We are
grateful for them, and we want them to know that they have the support of
all decent citizens in this country.

The Constitution states that national security must reflect the resolve of
all South Africans to be free from fear. Our Bill of Rights states that
``everyone has the right to freedom and security of the person'' and the
right ``to be free from all forms of violence''. Yet, quite the opposite is
true. South Africans do not enjoy these freedoms, but many live with the
fear - and the memory - of violent crime. Several millions have become
crime victims since 1994.

The Constitution protects the fundamental freedoms of all South Africans
and it makes clear that it is the Government's duty to maintain the rule of
law, and to ensure the safety of all citizens. Those that break the law
must accept the responsibility for their actions, face criminal charges
and, if found guilty, be sentenced to jail. Those whose job it is to uphold
the law must be properly trained and properly equipped to do so.

 In South Africa today, there is a sickness abroad. That sickness is a
refusal or unwillingness by people to accept responsibility for the things
for which they are responsible. The people who need to accept the
responsibility for bringing the criminals to justice - and for equipping
the police to be able to do so - are those who are in Government.

Yet the Government, led by the hon Deputy President, launches an attack on
the Constitution. Instead of accepting that his Government has a
responsibility to uphold the values of the Constitution which he is sworn
to uphold, Deputy President Zuma blamed the Constitution for the
unacceptable levels of crime. It seems to me that the Deputy President is
tough on the causes of crime and tough on the Constitution. Unfortunately,
he is not tough on the criminals.

I have news for him: It is not the Constitution which murders or rapes or
robs people; it is the criminals who do so. Mr Zuma and the Government must
accept that they need to arrest, try and, if convicted, punish the
criminals. Those who are charged with the responsibility must accept it and
do something about it.

Everyone has the right to freedom and security and the right to be free
from all forms of violence. Yet, the victims of driveway violence in
Johannesburg, which has now become a plague, are treated in a cruel,
inhuman way when they are forced to lie on the ground at gunpoint and hand
over their wedding rings and their watches. They are lucky if they are not
shot.

What the Deputy President must accept is that the Government and two
successive Ministers of safety and security have failed and the present
one, nice man that he is, is in the process of failing. He spent his whole
young life trying to persuade the masses that, come the revolution, South
Africa will be paradise. The tragedy is that the revolution has come and
gone and SA is now a gangsters' paradise. And he is the person who is
responsible for doing something about it, and they are not fully accepting
that responsibility. [Interjections.]

The ANC Government seems very satisfied to claim that crime levels in the
country have stabilised. This makes a mockery of the unacceptably high
level at which it has remained for a number of years, and clouds the fact
that the goal is not to stabilise crime, but to reduce it and then to
eradicate it. At the very least, the criminals must pay for their deeds,
but unsolved crime and unsuccessful prosecutions are increasing and not
declining.

Everywhere I travel in our country, I visit police stations which are
grossly undermanned, underskilled and underequipped. In Uitenhage 10 days
ago, I found that police stations are between 28% and 50% understaffed. The
shortage of detectives is chronic, with some detectives having more than
200 case dockets in places like Kamesh and KwaNobuhle.

How can anyone investigate more than 200 cases and give good service and
deliver reasonable results? You, Mr Minister, set our police up for
failure. And then we blame them; we blame them when we should be blaming
the politicians who do not have the will to really make a difference.

Winning the war aginst crime takes a lot more than ``stabilising'' crime
levels; it urgently requires a full-scale effort to reduce dramatically and
visibly criminal behaviour once and for all. Such an endeavour might be too
much of a tall order for some, but anything less means that the lives of
South Africans continue to be placed at mortal risk on a daily basis.

I challenge you, Mr Minister, to walk the streets and townships of greater
Johannesburg without your bodyguards, so that you can experience what
ordinary citizens encounter daily. [Interjections.] Or come with me to
Diepsloot in my constituency where the police do not go out at night at
all. You have tens of thousands of people who live there unpoliced after
dark. That is how ordinary people in this country live.

South Africans do not base their judgment on the war against crime by what
Government statisticians tell them. They no longer believe the Government.
Ordinary South Africans are the victims of horrific and violent crimes,
they are unwilling witnesses to unspeakable atrocities, and they continue
to be abused and traumatised. They do not accept that the fight aginst
crime is being won, simply because that is not their experience.

 I suggest to you that the ANC Government has lost touch with what ordinary
South Africans feel and experience on a daily basis. [Interjections.] That
includes the hon Minister over there. You must come and walk with me in the
townships and you will see what people say about crime. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Hon members, you may
not drown out the speakers; you may interject, but you may not drown out.
Order! Order! You may not drown out the speaker; you may interject. Hon
member, please proceed.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Chairperson. When I raised the
question of the murder rate with the hon Minister in Parliament recently
and pointed out that although the police statistics showed a murder rate of
21 683 people - that is in one year; I repeat, one year - Home Affairs says
that the figure is 31 000 and the Medical Research Council shows that the
number of murders is 32 482.

The hon Minister had the perfect opportunity in the House of standing up
and explaining to the House and to the people of South Africa what the
situation was and to give us the right figures. Instead of that, he ducked
the issue, he launched a political attack on me and said that crime is not
fought with statistics. [Interjections.]

I want to tell the hon Minister that he might regard the number of people
murdered as mere statistics. The wives and the children and the loved ones
who are left behind do not regard those murdered as simply statistics.
There are bodies and dead people involved, each one of whom was failed by
the criminal justice system.

If the police say only 20 000 were murdered, what has happened to all of
the cases which should be investigated? Does this mean that the police are
not pursuing an additional 12 000 murders? Are they unaware of the fact
that these murders have taken place? All of this is unconscionable and the
Minister needs to explain it to the House today. Just remember: Twelve
thousand extra bodies. Twelve thousand extra bereaved spouses; heaven knows
how many bereaved children. Twelve thousand murderers on the loose.
Minister, do not give us 12 000 damned lies or evasions.

In a democratic country, the people are entitled to know. In a democratic
parliament, MPs are entitled to know what the truth is. How can MPs do
their job properly and assess whether the priorities are correct and
adequate if we do not know what the incidence of crime is, and what the
trends and tendencies are?

As far as the crime statistics are concerned, I will launch proceedings in
terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act tomorrow. The Minister
is right in saying that statistics do not fight crime. The measure of his
performance will not necessarily be the statistics.

The measure of his performance will be whether the crime situation becomes
appreciably better in South Africa, whether the morale in the police force
improves, whether the number of prosecutions which are successfully
completed increases, and whether people regain confidence in the criminal
justice system. But we are entitled to the crime statistics because we have
an oversight job as MPs. And we intend carrying out that job.

This Government continues to lose public credibility. It does not take the
fight against crime seriously where it routinely releases criminals back
onto the streets. President Mbeki undoes the work of the SAPS, prosecutors
and justice officials when he unapologetically pardons hardened criminals -
some of whom will continue to lead a life of crime. Can there be a bigger
insult to those who are fighting crime than a wave of the President's hand
which undoes all their hard work?

And we have suggestions now that more criminals should be pardoned and
should be let out, so that we can have room in our jails for the people who
have not been convicted. So, it is a wonderful system where you let the
criminals out, so that you can let those who may not be criminals have
their places, and we then pay thousands of rands a month for each person to
keep them there.

The DA does not simply criticise and complain. The Government needs to be
reminded of the daily efforts of those on the frontline in this fight. Many
policemen and women put their lives on the line every day and their efforts
are recognised and admired and supported.

But what we must do, Chairperson, is that we must look at where we can do
something about the problem, and we say what you need to do in South Africa
is to have police where the people can see them. That means in the streets
where we live, that means in the townships and the suburbs where we live.

We say that neighbourhood police stations must be strengthened. They must
be brought up to strength. We are talking about 150 000 cops in South
Africa. Once the police stations are up to strength, you must equip the
policemen with the skills to do the job. And then you have to see that they
have adequate equipment to carry out their tasks.

And then once you have done that, the state has carried out its side of the
bargain, then you can start having performance targets and agreements with
police and then you hold them accountable. And those who fail, get fired
and those who succeed, get promoted and rewarded.

Surely, in that way, we can make a contribution towards improving the
situation in this country and start getting crime under control and
regaining the confidence of the people of this country.

Our recently published crime policy was handed to the Minister, and I hope
and pray that some of the suggestions which we make will find their way
into Government policy in due course, as they did with the last lot.

In addition to the performance contracts which we have suggested for
policemen right down at the bottom, I want to say that the hon Minister
should also accept a performance contract. [Interjections.] And if he
succeeds, then he deserves all the credit and he needs to be promoted; but
if he fails, he will have breached his performance contract and then he
should be fired. Thank you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Deputy Chairperson, Minister of Safety and Security Comrade
Charles Nqakula, comrades and hon members, I rise to support this Budget
Vote of 2003-04 on behalf of the ANC. The 11% increase will go a long way
towards achieving the goals that were set by the President in his state of
the nation address, that is, ``improving the capacity of the SAPS to
discharge its crime prevention and combating responsibilities.''

Whilst I do not like to always refer to the past, I must state that the ANC-
led Government inherited a police force that was highly centralised,
paramilitary and authoritarian against any collective challenges to
apartheid. Consequently, the police were poorly equipped for crime control
and prevention under a new democratic dispensation.

Section 205(3) of the Constitution states that the objective of the SA
Police Service, amongst other things, is to protect and secure the
inhabitants of the Republic - note, all inhabitants, not as in the past -
and their property, and to uphold and enforce the law. This objective is in
line with the Freedom Charter's vision that proclaimed in 1955 that:
``There shall be peace and friendship''.

To achieve these objectives, the Government introduced a philosophy of
community policing to make sure that the inherited police force is
transformed into a professional and effective law enforcement police
service, a police service that will never again infringe on human rights.

This community policing approach - true to its premise that a community and
its police service are equal partners with shared responsibilities in
ensuring safety and security - has produced good progress because it has
yielded partnerships with relevant departments, relevant sectors and the
community at large. This partnership is a necessary strategy that is not
only turning the tide against crime, but will also initiate and implement
programmes to fight the scourge of violent crimes, such as rape and
gangsterism.

The budget, informed by our National Crime Prevention Strategy,
accommodates the increase in police numbers by 45 000 members by the 2005-
06 financial year. This holistic approach against crime refuses to look at
crime only in terms of statistics and numbers of police. Of course, I'm not
alluding that statistical data for measuring crime is useless. Any good
democracy needs good statistical data to be able to identify and measure
patterns and trends of criminal activities. However, statistical data must
not be politicised and not be overemphasised as if it is the only measure
for solving crime, as the previous speaker tried to do.

Safety and security for all citizens does not only mean 150 000 more police
on the streets as some would like us to believe. Combating violent crimes
against women and children will not be successful by merely increasing
police in the streets because some of these crimes happen indoors. That is
the reason this Government, led by the ANC, emphasises the importance of
the justice, crime prevention and security cluster, that is the JCPS. The
success of the 16 Days of Activism Against Abuse of Women and Children
during November and December 2002 by this cluster is commendable. To create
an impression or even to say that nothing is being done, as Mr Gibson tried
to do, about the abuse of children and women is highly irresponsible.

The training and enlisting of more police officials will enhance visible
policing, not only in the urban areas, but in the rural areas as well. We
want to make sure that rural areas are given equal emphasis. Some people
would like the farmers to believe that this Government does not care about
farm killings because to them farm killings affect only farm owners. This
Government, however, also acknowledges that attacks against farm residents
or workers are just as much a big problem.

The Government has embarked on a rural safety plan that sees to it that the
police equally protect farmers and farmworkers. Phasing out the commandos,
which have their own history, is a major step taken by this Government to
ensure that all residents on farms, that is farm owners and workers, are
protected. The Government has made sure that rural safety is not
compromised. That is the reason that, each month, 9 000 reservists are
activated to support the envisaged 35 sector policing units.
The restructuring of the SAPS is one of the most critical tasks of the
Government. The closing down of some of the specialised units does not mean
that those tasks have now ceased to exist, but that they are now included
in multidisciplinary units to avoid unnecessary duplication and redundancy.
The restructuring of these units into Organised Crimes, Serious and Violent
Crimes, Commercial Crimes and Crimes against Women and Children, means
leaner, effective and easily monitored units.

Another leg of restructuring was the implementation of Resolution 7 of
2002, which I must state was not meant for the police alone, but for all
government departments. The main aims of Resolution 7 of 2002 are: one,
equal distribution of skills and other resources to bridge the divide on
how the rich and the poor are policed in this country; two, to improve
service delivery; and, three, to progressively implement the SAPS national
employment equity so that the Police Service reflects the true demographics
of this country.

This restructuring and transformation within the SAPS has resulted in a
state of panic among those who are unhappy with the change. They are
threatening to carry out all sorts of actions against the department, and
some of them are even supported by some political parties in this Chamber.
The national commissioner and the Minister will definitely sort out any
genuine problems or complaints. The Minister indicated this when he was
briefing the safety and security portfolio committee. However, it must be
emphasised that the transformation of the SAPS constitutes progress towards
rebuilding the nation, sharing skills and enhancing the safety and security
of the country.

The greatest concern of all peace-loving South Africans is the high rate of
police killings. Community policing is meant to facilitate mutual respect
and understanding between the Police Service and the local community it
serves. This is endorsed by the Constitution, section 206(3)(c), which
says: ``to promote good relations between the police and the community''.
The community must realise that the killing of police officials is against
the Constitution and hence against the hard-fought-for democracy and
related achievements of this country.

This Government will continue to enhance measures of safety and security
for our police members. This Parliament must look at the laws and check if
they are adequate enough to make criminals think twice before killing a
police official. An attack on the police is an attack on our democracy.

 The ugly head of vigilantism is re-emerging. Some politicians in this
House have tried to justify these acts of barbarism by putting the blame on
the police, alluding to the police's inability to deal with crime. These
prophets of doom allege that vigilantism is a manifestation of the public's
frustration with the criminal justice system. Whilst this is debatable,
trying to resolve crime and conflict in a violent way cannot be as a result
of frustration, but criminal aggravation against other human beings.

The police will continue to work with the public to insist on proper law
enforcement rather than resorting to vigilantism. The police - I must
emphasise what the Minister said - will not hesitate to act against any act
of vigilantism of any kind.

Yes, the SAPS is still facing enormous challenges in combating crime.
Corruption within the SAPS and lack of skills are some of the factors
contributing to allegations of sloppy work by police officials. There are
indeed constant complaints against the police for their slow response to
calls of emergency, if they respond at all. The division Crime Prevention
is currently addressing these complaints as a matter of urgency in order to
ensure that the response to calls will be enhanced, thus ensuring
professional and rapid response to incidents of crime. Remedies to the
situation include: one, updating of equipment or technology in 10111
centres; two, developing uniform task-specific training courses to enhance
the knowledge and skills of all members performing functions in these
centres and police stations; and, three, implementing sector policing to
ensure that the response times to attend to complaints decrease and that
service delivery improves.

It must be acknowledged, though, that the following are other inhibiting
factors that also have an influence on response times: one, road and
weather conditions; two, unclear identification of residences and street
names in urban, rural and informal settlements; three, peak traffic
periods; and, four, environmental design of suburbs. These inhibiting
factors are also being addressed in co-operation with local government. The
communities again will be of great assistance in this regard. Report to
CPFs and MPs in your areas where police are responding or not doing their
job properly.

In conclusion, this Government must be commended on turning the tide
against crime. Many of our people are beginning to realise the importance
of their role in fighting crime. That is the reason some serious crimes
were quickly and easily diffused with the assistance of the community.

Community police forums have been established all over the country and they
meet and discuss means and ways of preventing crime, and the role that can
be played by communities. We commend these CPFs for discussing positively
how they can prevent attacks so that they can create a safe environment.

I want to appeal again to members of all parties to speak with one voice
against crime. We have done that successfully in our portfolio committee,
but since the elections are drawing close, I can see that people are
getting lost again. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

It is saddening to discover that some parties are even using crime for
electioneering purposes. They even bring people here so that they can
pretend that they are more sympathetic to the people than anybody else.
They even get carried away by their imagination and suggest that there is
chaos in this country. No reasonable person will believe that there is
chaos in this country. There is only chaos in their minds. Even criminals
are shocked at how the police make it difficult for them to commit crimes.

Though the levels of crime are still unacceptably high, we can say with
confidence that we have turned the tide and the people are generally safer
than they were before 1994. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: The allocation for the Department of Safety and Security
has increased from R19,7 billion to almost R21,9 billion in the current
budget. This is an increase of over R2 billion, which is around 11%.

The budget increases of the SAPS have consistently been over 10%, which is
an indication that Government is at least somewhat serious about getting
the crime rate down. A good case can be made out that this budget will not
be enough to bring down crime dramatically and that not enough money is
being spent on the criminal justice system as a whole.

There are also parties in this House that will be voting against this
budget on the basis that not enough money is given to the department. What
they need to know is that not only have the increases in the police budget
consistently been higher than the inflation rate, but police top management
has said categorically that this budget is sufficient.

At the budget briefing to the committee a few weeks ago, management made it
clear to us that if they do not deliver a good and acceptable service to
the public, they will not be able to blame it on this budget. There can
thus be very little doubt that the police budget has moved a long way in
the right direction during the last few years.

The Police Service needs to be praised for many successes. Financial
management has improved by leaps and bounds; the vehicle fleet is getting
younger; representivity in the service has improved and absenteeism, which
was a major problem a few years ago, was brought down to a much more
acceptable level. In some areas of the country, the police have brought
down crime quite effectively and there is no doubt that many of the
police's units and operations are very successful.

When one takes into consideration, though, that the taxpayer now spends
over R20 billion a year on the Police Service, it is debatable whether the
public is getting a good return on its rather large investment. Too many
people are still having very bad experiences with our Police Service. We
have become so used to mediocre service from the SAPS, especially in some
of our townships, that we are most impressed if we phone the police with a
complaint and the police vehicle arrives within an hour or two. Try and
phone many of our police stations and see whether your call gets answered
at all. I know this is not a popular thing to say, but unfortunately it
happens to be true.

On 14 March this year, three months ago, a member of the public laid a
complaint of theft at the Walmer police station in Port Elizabeth. The case
involved the theft of a R20 000 laptop computer and the name and address
and even the telephone numbers of the suspect were supplied in the
statement from the complainant. Until today, the complainant has yet to
hear from the detective. The complainant contacted the head of detectives
at the police station, who assured the complainant that he would get a
phone call from the detective within an hour. This was a month ago; the
complainant is still waiting.

There are many examples of a similar nature that one can unfortunately
mention. For example, there is the lady who was hijacked at a big shopping
centre in Port Elizabeth at three o' clock on a Friday afternoon. She
phoned the police twice in a matter of one hour and another three times
over the weekend. On the Sunday evening an officer eventually came to see
her. Is this the type of service the taxpayer deserves for the over R20
billion that it now invests in the Police Service in a year? I think the
answer is quite obvious.

We should be very clear on this issue. There are many excellent policemen
and women who do excellent work and we are very thankful to them for that.
However, in general, in South African society, there is a malaise as far as
work ethic is concerned and, unfortunately, many members of the South
African Police Service suffer from this malaise.

Many people say that police morale and work ethic will be greatly boosted
if police personnel are paid better. The IFP believes that there can be
very little doubt that people in especially the lower ranks of the SAPS are
underpaid. Raising their salary levels could well go some way towards
addressing the malaise you find amongst some, although this will not in
itself be the cure for all the ills. Many people in South Africa earn great
salaries but that does not make them that much more productive.

Many other things need to be in place. Your own attitude needs to be in
place as well. Recently, I asked a detective why he had not attended to a
certain case docket for more than three months. He told me that he was
first on leave, then on study leave, and then on sick leave. When I asked
him about the sick leave, I found out that he was on sick leave due to
stress. On further investigation, it became apparent that his stress had
nothing to do withW his work. It was all personal and family-related
stress. The public must now get poor service from the police, because he
and his wife cannot sort out their problems. We all have stress and
problems in our lives, but many of us still come to work, because we have
something called a conscience.

Die IVP is baie opgewonde oor die feit dat baie nuwe rekrute tans opleiding
ondergaan met baie duisende nuwe personeel wat oor die volgende paar jaar
opgelei sal word.

Al waaroor ons effens bekommerd is, is die feit dat basiese opleiding van
ses na drie maande gesny is. Ons vertrou dat dit nie die kwaliteit sal
beïnvloed nie en dat ons nie minder gekwalifiseerde personeel in die veld
sal stoot nie. Die IVP is baie bekommerd oor moorde op polisiemanne en
-vrouens. Ons steun die verpligte lewenslange vonnis vir sulke moordenaars
en waardeer die feit dat die staat nou 'n R200 000 betaling sal maak aan
die gesin van 'n vermoorde polisiebeampte.

Hierdie is alles stappe in die regte rigting. Ons kry egter nog nie die
indruk dat polisiemoorde die aandag kry wat dit verdien nie. 'n Aanval op
'n polisiebeampte moet as 'n aanval op die staat gesien word. Alhoewel
moorde op polisiebeamptes al verminder het, is die meer as 100 per jaar
geheel en al onaanvaarbaar en moet dit as 'n krisis bestempel word.

Alles inaggenome, is daar baie uitdagings en vraagstukke wat die
departement en die polisie mee moet worstel. Met harde werk en goeie
ondersteuning van die publiek, is dit egter nie onmoontlik om misdaad
beduidend te laat afkom en na meer aanvaarbare vlakke toe te bring nie. Die
droom om misdaad hok te slaan is nie so onmoontlik soos wat sommige van ons
dink nie.

Die IVP sal die begroting steun. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The IFP is very excited about the fact that many new recruits are
currently being trained along with many thousands of new personnel who will
be trained over the next few years.

The only thing we are slightly worried about is the fact that basic
training was cut down from six to three months. We trust that this will not
influence the quality and that we will not push less qualified personnel
into the field. The IFP is concerned about the killing of policemen and
policewomen. We support the mandatory life sentence for such murderers and
appreciate the fact that the state will now make a payment of R200 000 to
the family of a murdered police officer.

These are all steps in the right direction. However, we still do not gain
the impression that police killings are getting the attention this
deserves. An attack on a police officer should be seen as an attack on the
state. Although the killing of police officers has already decreased, the
over 100 per year is totally unacceptable and should be seen as a crisis.
All things considered, there are many challenges and questions that the
department and the police are struggling with. With hard work and
sufficient support from the public it is, however, not impossible to reduce
crime dramatically and bring it back to more acceptable levels. The dream
to curb crime is not as impossible as many of us think.

The IFP will support the budget. [Applause.]]

Me ANNELIZÉ VAN WYK: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, die DA het vandag 'n
laagtepunt bereik in goedkoop politiek. Dit is eenvoudig siek om die smart
en hartseer van een gesin so uit te buit vir 30 sekondes van sensasie. Ek
wil namens die ANC verskoning vra vir alle slagoffers van misdaad wie se
werklike pyn deur hierdie optrede goedkoop gemaak word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Ms ANNELIZÉ VAN WYK: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, the DA has reached the
lowest point in cheap politics today. Exploiting the pain and sadness of
one family in such a way for 30 seconds of sensation is just plain sick. On
behalf of the ANC I want to apologise to all victims of crime whose real
pain has been cheapened through this behaviour.]

 For the ANC, fighting crime in South Africa is a priority. This is clearly
reflected in the consistent increase of resources annually for the SAPS
specifically and the justice, crime prevention and security cluster in
general. The commitment of the hon Minister, his Deputy, the senior
management of the South African Police Service and the thousands of loyal
members of the SAPS echoes the fight against crime as a Government
priority. But, above all, it is embodied in those members of the SAPS who
paid the ultimate price in the fight against crime. It is against this
background that I speak in support of this Budget Vote.

It was with a degree of amazement that I listened to the hon Gibson when he
spoke.

Daar is 'n liedjie in Afrikaans wat sê: [There is a song in Afrikaans that
goes as follows:]


  Die kat kom weer, hy wou nie langer wag. Die kat kom weer net die
  volgende dag, en glo vir my dis waar, net die anderdagmôre was die kat
  weer daar!

It seems that the hon Gibson is the DA's proverbial cat with nine lives!
[Interjections.]

In rugby, they talk of impact players. It appears to me, as a novice
supporter of the game, that most of the time these players are not fit
enough to play the full game, so they are sent on the field for the 20
minutes before the end of the game.

The DA has also adopted this game plan. The 20 minutes before the end of
the match for them is the elections and instead of sticking with their
trusted players who constructively try to make a contribution throughout
the match, they send in their impact player. [Applause.] The problem is,
more than often this very impact player also costs the team the match.
For the ANC, crime is a serious issue. It is not something that can be
dealt with in a hit-and-run manner. It affects the life of every citizen of
South Africa. The primary victim is the person against whom a criminal act
was committed. The secondary victim is every South African citizen, because
every criminal act demands resources, human and financial, that could have
been focused on other areas where our society needs urgent intervention.

Every citizen is eventually a victim who has to contend with rising
insurance premiums, potential job losses and a host of other negative
consequences. We are painfully aware of this and of our duty and commitment
to fight it in every way possible.

When looking at the reality of crime and the role that the South African
Police Service must play in combating crime, there are people who forget
where we come from. They conveniently forget about the many challenges that
faced the SAPS after 1994. They forget that prior to 1994, the then South
African Police Force policed the movement of people and supressed the
political opponents of the apartheid regime.

For them, the reality of the amalgamation of 11 police forces into a single
transformed South African Police Service, policing on an equal basis all of
South Africa's people and through that transforming the force into a
service, gaining the trust and support of the majority of South Africans,
is but an academic exercise.

They conveniently forget about the poorly trained and sometimes illiterate
``kitskonstabels'' [special constables]. For them the difference in
training standards and the unequal spread of resources, both physical and
human, are the problems of others; it does not impact on their reality.

I see the impact player is off the field again. [Laughter.]

Jonny Steinberg writes in Crime Wave:
  Crime brings out the dark side of our natures, not least because our
  responses to it are often drunken and ugly. Crime gives rise to populist
  politicians who are cheered on when they call for blood; it gives birth
  to vengeful mobs who execute people on the streets.

A South African novelist wrote:


  We shall live from day to day, and put more locks on the doors and get a
  fine, fierce dog when the fine, fierce bitch next door has pups, and hold
  onto our handbags more tenaciously ... we shall be careful and knock this
  out of our lives and knock that out of our lives, and hedge ourselves
  about with safety and precaution ... They are holding a meeting in
  Parkworld tonight ... And the people will ask for more police and for
  heavier sentences for the housebreakers, and for the death penalty for
  all who carry weapons when they break in.

Alan Paton wrote these words in 1946 in his celebrated novel Cry, the
beloved country. We can go even further back than 1946. Shula Marks, in
Reluctant rebellion, written about the turn of the previous century, writes
about Durbanites complaining that they walk their suburbs in mortal fear.
The truth is that crime and the fear of crime is as old as South Africa
itself. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

And, again, as I believe Jonny Steinberg correctly summarises it:


  Our preoccupation with crime is testimony to how this country was
  stitched together with violence, to how we worry that evil is our most
  abiding pedigree. Fear in this country is saturated with politics; it is
  the product of generations of estrangement between races, classes and
  individuals.

We become hostages of that fear and we need to break free from it. While we
need to realise the seriousness of the problem that faces us, we also need
to allow ourselves the latitude of celebrating our victories. And there are
victories to celebrate. Since 1994 murder has come down by 34%. Why do we
not take the time to celebrate that, to draw inspiration from it and put it
to positive use to motivate those responsible to bring the murder figure
down even further? [Applause.]

For the past two years, we have heard continous murmuring over specialised
units that have been closed down, and claims that, in the process, skills
are lost. I want to use this opportunity to divorce the truth from the
propaganda.

In the past, organised crime, serious and violent crimes were investigated
in a fragmented way by special investigation units - a shotgun approach:
drug-related crime by the Narcotics Bureau, vehicle-related crime by the
Vehicle Crime Investigations Unit, etc.

In 2000, the SAPS implemented an integrated strategic plan which primarily
focuses on combating organised, serious and violent crimes. In combating
organised crime the focus is on syndicates involved in crimes relating to
drugs, firearms and vehicles, corruption and commercial crimes.

In combating serious and violent crimes, the focus is on the proliferation
of small firearms and their impact on incidents of murder, armed robberies,
heists and hijacking. The focus is on high crime areas, intergroup
violence, including political violence, taxi and train violence, gang
violence, faction fighting and flashpoint areas. In practice, this entails
that most of the specialised units will eventually be phased out and their
functions incorporated into organised crime units, serious and violent
crime units and commercial branches, as well as local detective units.

The advantages of such a system are obvious for all to see. In fact, when
the late Minister Tswete - on June 7, 2001, in this Budget Vote -
introduced these steps, it was enthusiastically received by the majority of
the political parties in this House.

Multidisciplinary units could now be placed where major threats exist.
Skewed resource allocation and low productivity were addressed. Suspected
corrupt activities in some of these specialised units were neutralised and
the functionality of the police at local level - that is, the police in the
neighbourhood, hon Gibson - was enhanced. The lack of transformation in
some of these units could also begin to be addressed.

This has numerous benefits for the SAPS and the country and the fight
against crime. It has already had a significant impact on the incidence of
organised crime and priority crimes. It will strengthen our capacity to
deal with crime at local level and contribute significantly to cost-
effectiveness, efficiency and increased productivity.

Allow me to mention one example: On 2 January 2002, the Proceeds of Crime
Investigation Desk was established. It is located at head office and
follows up on suspicious transaction reports, ie suspected money-laundering
transactions. They work closely with the Financial Intelligence Centre.

For the period 1 April 2002 to 3 February 2003, the Proceeds of Crime
Investigation Desk received a total of 1 746 suspicious transaction
reports. Twelve accused were arrested and tried. The Asset Forfeiture Unit,
due to these investigations only, seized R1 084 000 and the Reserve Bank
froze R23 014 000 that, under any other circumstances, would have left the
country. Now this is no small achievement in merely a year of existence,
and bodes well for the future.

Furthermore, in less than a year, more than 95 syndicates were closed down
because of this approach. Imagine the number of crimes that have been
prevented and the number of victims saved because of this. But, yes, hon
Minister, we will not read this in the newspapers, the opposition will not
make statements in the House reflecting on this, and it will not be
celebrated. [Applause.]

Hon Minister, it is clear that despite the negative publicity and the
embedded pessimism on the part of some in this House, this is indeed the
correct approach. We will support and encourage any actions from your side
to enhance this integrated approach, not only within the structures of the
SAPS, but also increasingly between all different role-players within the
justice, crime prevention and security cluster. Indeed, the tide has begun
to turn against criminals. Join me in celebrating this. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I just have a point of order,
Chairperson, a point of clarification.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Is it a procedural matter?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Yes. If a member is standing there
at the podium, and the member refers to the members on this side of the
House, then, because I am on this side of the House, George is on this side
of the House, the other member there is also on this side of the House ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Minister, I think I get your
drift and I think, yes, you have a point.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I am also being blamed, you see.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I am sure it was not the intention of
the member to direct it, but I would like, as a matter of procedure, to
advise you, when you are actually pointing to the side of the House, to be
more specific as to which part of the House you are pointing to. Your point
is taken, hon Minister. Hon Schippers, you may now proceed.

Mr J SCHIPPERS: Deputy Chair, the New NP also wants to echo the words of
appreciation of the hon Minister and others in paying tribute to the fallen
heroes who died in the line of duty in the SA Police Service. We thank them
for their hard work and dedication.

This budget of Safety and Security and the Independent Complaints
Directorate addresses all the issues that the hon President touched on in
his state of the nation address in Parliament on 14 February 2003.

With an increase of 11%, or R2,68 billion, on last year's budget, and
almost 16% of the total Budget, the Government has, for the second year in
a row, showed its commitment that fighting crime is their priority. It is
also pleasing to note that the SAPS spent also 100% of the budget for the
previous financial year. A new feature that has been brought into the
Budget Vote is that the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework is divided into a
baseline allocation and an additional allocation.

Although there is an annual increase in monetary terms, it actually
decreases in percentage over the three-year period. The specifications for
the additional allocation of R819 million are clearly spelt out in the
budget under the item ``Baseline Adjustments''.

If we focus on the six programmes, namely administration, crime prevention,
operational response services, detective services, crime intelligence, and
protection services, we notice that the three main cylinders on which the
SAPS operates show the largest individual increases in the budget. Those
programmes are administration, 13,04; crime prevention, 12,01%; and crime
intelligence, 16,62%. In the administration programme, corporate services
consumes R6, 191 billion of the provided allocation.

According to a document, Human Resource Distribution, presented this year
to the portfolio committee by Commissioner Stander, the SAPS fulfilled
their promise in enlisting 16 000 new recruits. In terms of numbers, the
three major crime-ridden provinces, namely Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and the
Western Cape, benefited, and rightly so. Also, the personnel losses
amounting to a total of 3 141 followed the same pattern. During this
financial year, it is estimated that 9 550 new constables and 4 010 new
civilians will be enlisted, giving a total of 13 000 new recruits.

The expected personnel losses amount to 4 000. The total human resource
distribution for the SAPS will then be approximately 140 000 to combat
crime effectively. I want to agree with the hon Ferreira that the picture
is not as bleak and ominous as the DA document, Freedom from Fear, tries to
suggest. It is not the sole function and the responsibility of the police
only to fight crime, but is also that of each and every individual in this
country. If you take into account all the private security agencies in the
private sector, they also combat crime in a visible and positive way. If we
add their numbers to that of the SAPS, we total approximately 180 000
people.

The Independent Complaints Directorate fulfils a very important role. The
intake of the complaints falling under their mandate up to 31 December 2002
amounted to 2 286, a decrease of 10,3% compared to the same period the
previous year. There was an increase of 14,7% in serious criminal offences
committed by SAPS members. This is alarming and unacceptable. In my
opinion, unions should not only fight for the rights of their members, but
also discipline them to create a work-friendly environment.

Incidents of misconduct reported to the ICD decreased by 8,3%. A total of
427 allegations of criminal offences were reported nationally. The
majority, namely 142, were committed in Gauteng; in the Western Cape, 74;
in Limpopo, 63, and fewer in the other provinces. Misconduct reported
amount to 1 493 cases, of which 89,4% related to negligence of duty by
police officers. In the investigative findings of 222 notifications of
death as a result of SAPS or metro action, only 159 were substantiated,
meaning prima facie evidence of police criminality were uncovered. In 20
cases, no evidence of police criminality could be found, and 43 cases are
still under investigation.

The New NP wants to urge the national commissioner and the public at large
to report all cases that fall within the mandate of the ICD to them, so
that we can have a proper and legal investigation to rid the police of all
the bad apples.

The DA's announced ``Freedom from Fear'' anticrime campaign instils a
disappointing feeling of déjà vu , for almost every one of their self-
claimed solutions were published in the New NP election manifesto of 1999.
Amongst those are a register for convicted sex offenders; tax rebates for
private security expenses; double-time prison sentences for criminals who
prey on women and children; additional sentences for violent crimes by use
of legal weapons and where police officers are attacked or killed, and that
juvenile offenders older than 16 should be held accountable for their own
actions.

On numerous occasions the New NP spokesperson for health and correctional
services has asked that HIV-negative prisoners who have the right to be
protected against fellow inmates who are HIV-positive be separated in
prison. The New NP-ANC co-operative Government in the Western Cape are in
the forefront with regard to negotiations for the establishment of a
register for convicted sex offenders.

In conclusion, the DA can not come up with any true or innovative solutions
for South Africans' crime problems, and they make themselves guilty of
hijacking old New NP policy, claiming it as their own. In true DA style and
fashion, they marginalise the work being done by the SAPS and the Minister
of Safety and Security. I thank you. [Applause.]

Miss J E SOSIBO: Deputy Chair, hon Minister and hon members, it is a
pleasure for me to support, on behalf of the ANC, this Budget Vote for
Safety and Security. I would like to commend the hon Minister for the task
that his department is performing in the battle against crime.

When we assumed power as a democratically elected Government in 1994, we
never pronounced that everything was going to be smooth sailing. We knew
that the real battle and struggle for the total emancipation of our people
from poverty, disease, and the lack of a safe and secure environment was
actually beginning when the overwhelming majority of our people mandated
the ANC to lead them into a new era of a better life for all.

The ANC never promised to provide our people with cake instead of bread,
wine instead of water, mansions instead of decent homes, nor eternal life
instead of a secure and safe environment. We have a track record as an
organisation that has never abandoned its real promises to the people. The
history of the ANC as the liberation movement speaks for itself. When we
vowed under brutal state repression by the apartheid government that,
through sweat and blood, we would lead our people into a free, nonracial,
nonsexist and democratic South Africa, we were not dreaming or making a
mere, unachievable promise. We were making a serious and imminent
revolutionary commitment to our people, which we indeed achieved.

Our crime prevention strategies, as shown by the National Crime Prevention
Strategy, are multipronged and sectoral strategies that integrate various
components such as justice, defence, social development, health, arts and
culture, etc in developing similarly departmental focused strategies to
combat the scourge of crime. The Ministry should be commended for ensuring
that an additional expenditure of R36 million has been set aside over the
MTEF period to promote the implementation of the Firearms Control Act. It
is a foregone conclusion that the majority of violent crimes are committed
with firearms, be they licensed or unlicensed. This new budgeted amount
will now ensure that the department will put in place a firearm control
system, or FCS, to manage effectively the relevant business processes
pertaining to all firearms and ammunition, from the time of manufacture or
import through individual ownership, until such firearms and ammunition are
either exported or destroyed. This is a component of the National Crime
Prevention Strategy.

We are aware that all the objectives of this Act will not be achieved
overnight, but we need to move at a fast pace to give effect to section 10
of the Firearms Control Act of 2000 in terms of ensuring the effective
implementation of the firearm-free zones. The horrible crimes being
committed at various schools here in the Western Cape and in Gauteng, many
of which are attributed to illegal and unlawful use of firearms by pupils,
are becoming a great danger and threat to a free, safe and secure learning
environment. We need to simply introduce measures such as school safety
projects or campaigns to decriminalise the learning environment.

The increased budget with respect to new technology at air, sea and land
borders needs to be commended. It is quite obvious that, judging by the
Minister's report during the ministerial media briefings early this year
with regard to the use of IT by the SAPS, quite a number of successes have
been achieved. The effective use of a computerised system by the SAPS
cannot go unnoticed. The sophistication and complexity of the modus
operandi of organised syndicates calls for a need for our men and women in
blue to gain the upper hand in the fight against crime by matching fire
with fire. It is quite encouraging to notice that a number of priority
crimes were resolved through the use of IT during the year 2002 in terms of
tracing goods and stolen vehicles, and monitoring the movements of suspects
and vehicles at border posts and other ports of entry.

The importance of civilian oversight over the SAPS cannot be
underestimated. Though we are almost 10 years into our democracy, we cannot
claim that all is well within the Police Service. Hence, there is a need to
consolidate the role of these civilian structures.

The Secretariat for Safety and Security and the Independent Complaints
Directorate continue to play an active role in holding the police
accountable for their actions and also minimising deaths of persons in
custody or as a result of police actions.

These two structures continue to inculcate respect for human rights and
contribute to the broader transformation of policing. Whilst we clearly
understand the different and distinct roles and functions of these
structures, and that they are not in competition with or in opposition to
the SAPS, it has, however, got to be emphasised that their continued
existence has ensured that our Police Service is accountable to the
communities they serve and also that they uphold the democratic values and
principles of community policing.

There needs to be more visibility of these structures so that our people
can also begin to exploit and utilise the services they offer. Whilst their
role may not be directly compared to that of the SAPS, they however have a
very great and meaningful function which has to have the support of this
department. Whilst some people may question the existence of these bodies,
we view them as necessary in ensuring the complete and sustainable
transformation of our Police Service.

The strengthening of our community police fora is also another matter that
has to be addressed. The question of the funding and sustainability of
these structures that are vehicles for the transformation of the Police
Service at local level is a matter that needs the serious attention of the
department and all other role-players and stakeholders involved in the
safety and security sector. We cannot have situations where these
independent bodies, established through legislation, are rendered toothless
and ineffective because of financial constraints. More needs to be done to
consolidate those that are already doing a sterling job and further
resuscitate those that might be struggling.

In conclusion, the President highlighted in his state of the nation address
that the success of our criminal justice system will depend on
strengthening the partnerships of the Letsema campaign, with communities
volunteering to assist the security agencies in their work. We need to
consolidate these partnerships so that together we can create a safe and
secure environment. The Department of Safety and Security cannot do that on
its own.

The successes achieved by sector policing have to be commended. We are
already beginning to see police visibility and various demarcated areas,
particularly where there is a high concentration of crime, in areas such as
Langa, Nyanga, Kwamashu and Mdantsane, to mention a few.

In order to ensure that this initiative achieves its intended results, it
has to be further strengthened through the involvement of local
municipalities. There is a great need to bring local government councils in
the NCPS on board. This has to be done through encouraging the formulation
of local crime prevention strategies by local councils. Other provinces
have already commenced with this initiative and it is said to be yielding
fruitful results. Strategies to fight crime, which are being formulated by
local councils, must not be done in a vacuum. They have to be in line with
the NCPS and also take into consideration the recommendations of the White
Paper on Safety and Security with regard to the involvement of local
government in crime prevention.

We are not a crime-ridden society, as pessimists would like the world to
believe. Those that bad-mouth this country abroad for their own political
agendas and those who opt to fight losing battles are continuing to spread
cheap lies about the state of this country's crime using the race card, and
are doomed to failure. The ANC is an old, well-experienced and mighty
movement whose good track record in the fight for the emancipation of our
people is not matched by any other political organisation in this House. We
will still prevail despite the wishful thinking of our opponents. There is
no doubt that we are on course to providing a better life for all and a
safe and secure environment to all our people

I support this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon big mouthÿ.ÿ.ÿ.
[Laughter] ... all parties represented in this House agree that an increase
of 11% in the Safety and Security budget is most welcome, given the high
crime rate in our country. What we differ on is, undoubtedly, how that
budget should have been allocated to different areas of need.

The most important question we need to ask ourselves is whether this budget
presented to us will substantially reduce high crime levels, ensure a
higher conviction rate as a result of more professional investigations by
the police, or result in a better quality service for our communities. A
good question that has been asked is whether taxpayers will get value for
money as a result of this budget.

The ACDP does not believe so for a number of reasons. Firstly, police
officers who should be enforcing law and order say that they are confused
about section 49 of the Criminal Procedure Act. Their work is not made
easier by the Minister and some senior officers who deny that their ground
troops are confused or unsure about what to do to effect an arrest of a
dangerous suspect.

The fact that more than 60% of the police that were killed in 2002 did not
defend themselves when attacked confirms the sad fact that many of them are
not sure whether they can shoot in self-defence or not. Obviously, this has
to be corrected.

It is the responsibility of the Minister of Safety and Security to help
identify the source of this confusion and the reason 60% of the police in
question did not defend themselves when attacked by criminals. Once the
reasons are identified, they must be corrected immediately. We can rightly
ask the question, "Can the police be expected to protect all our citizens
with diligence when they cannot protect themselves?" [Interjections.]

A very interesting observation is that since the national commissioner of
the police revealed that 60% of the police killed in 2002 did not defend
themselves, human rights commissioners and organisations have not cried
foul and these revelations have not made front page headline news in all
our major newspapers.

If the report was about 60% of the criminals who were killed by the police,
then the people, especially human rights organisations, would be spitting
fire even today and demanding a commission of inquiry. I want to ask on
behalf of the ACDP whether the Minister is considering any formal
commission of inquiry into police killings. If yes, when should the report
be expected, and if not, why not? We love and care for all our people and
would love to see them empowered to do their work with courage and
confidence.

Secondly, desperate members of the community are being tempted to resort to
vigilantism because of high crime levels. These members of the community
under siege say that some police are refusing to rid their areas of crime
and that is why they illegally do it themselves.

Mr D V BLOEM: Hey, are you promoting it? Are you promoting it? [Laughter.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Mamela ndoda, mamela! [Listen, man, listen!]
You know I am not. You know I am not. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Last week, five suspected criminals were necklaced by communities who also
claim that the police refused to help them. Why should citizens resort to
such extreme measures when they have a Government that should be protecting
them?

If Government does not want to see an increase in vigilantism, then they
have to do much more than is being done now. An increase in mob justice is
nothing but a wake-up call to Government to take drastic measures to end
crime before the nation slides into anarchy.

Thirdly, the Minister has been calling members of the public to come
forward with information that will lead to the arrest of crime suspects in
their communities. Some heeded the call by coming forward with information,
only to have their identities revealed by some corrupt officials. Why
should citizens continue to risk their lives and safety by reporting
criminals to these corrupt police who will alert those criminals about
those who reported them?

It is Government's responsibility to rid the Police Service of all
criminals in police uniform. We obviously commend those hardworking police
who are doing their service with excellence.

The statistics released by the Independent Complaints Directorate that show
that police corruption has increased by more than 100% in a year are
worrying. Such statistics destroy public confidence in the police and
demoralise those dedicated police officials who want to do their work with
excellence and dignity. We salute such officials.

Government needs to reward and encourage all the police officers who serve
the communities and this country with excellence but, at the same time, be
ruthless and merciless to those that are rotten within the system. The
penalties that must be imposed on the police that commit crime must be very
high to teach them a lesson that crime does not pay, even when it is
committed by the police. [Interjections.]

Supporting this Budget Vote today ... [Interjections] ... ke tlo o thola
wena. [... I am going to get you.] [Laughter.]

Supporting this Budget Vote today would be sending a wrong message that
figures in an increased budget will solve our crime problems. No amount of
money can do that, and only a willing government can do it.  The ACDP urges
this Govenment to truly make crime eradication their priority - and not
just on paper, as we hear. Government must stop talking about stabilising
crime in the so-called ``hot spots'' and start eradicating crime from all
our communities. Our streets must be made safer and our homes must be
safer.

The ACDP believes that this can be done if there is a will on  the  part  of
Government to do it. Enough innocent women and children have been raped  and
murdered.  Enough  is  enough.  This  Government  must   stop   crime   now.
[Applause.]
Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Mnr die Voorsitter, as ek kyk na die aantal lede van
die ANC wat hier teenwoordig is, is dit baie duidelik die ANC gee nie om
vir die polisie nie en misdaad is nie vir hulle 'n prioriteit nie.
Inteendeel, dít is die belangstelling wat hulle toon. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die agb Adjunkpresident sê die media het hom verkeerd aangehaal toe hy sou
gesê het die Grondwet moet hersien word, want dit beskerm misdadigers te
veel. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Mr Chairperson, if I look at the number of members
present here from the ANC, it is very clear that the ANC does not care
about the police and that crime is not a priority to them. On the contrary,
this is the interest they show. [Interjections.]

The hon Deputy President said the media misquoted him when he said that the
Constitution should be revised because it protects criminals too much.]

The hon Deputy President said that it was a misquote by the media and what
he said was that the people have no respect for the Constitution until they
are arrested or in jail, and then call on the Constitution to protect their
rights. I want to say to the hon Deputy President, you were actually
stating the obvious because that is why some people are criminals.
Criminals only misuse laws and the Constitution.

Die gees van die beskerming van menseregte in die Grondwet het nou tot
gevolg dat misdadigers se regte beskerm word tot nadeel van die samelewing.
Die misdadiger word nou meer beskerm as die wetsgehoorsame burger. Hoekom
sê ek dit? Die slagoffer van 'n misdadiger word nou die aangeklaagde en die
misdadiger word nou die slagoffer. Daar is hoeveel gevalle waar mense
hulself verdedig teen misdadigers en kriminele, maar dan word die persoon
wat homself verdedig het, aangekla vir moord of poging tot moord op die
misdadiger, en hy word toegesluit.

Dit is dan geen wonder dat 'n mens gereeld moet lees van vigilantegroepe
wat begin funksioneer in misdaadgeteisterde gebiede nie. As die Grondwet
misbruik word deur misdadigers, soos die agb Adjunkpresident gesê het, dan
moet die Grondwet hersien word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The spirit regarding the protection of human rights in the Constitution
has now resulted in the fact that the rights of criminals are being
protected to the detriment of society. The criminals are now being
protected more than the law-abiding citizens. Why do I say this? The victim
of a criminal now becomes the accused and the criminal now becomes the
victim. There are so many cases where people defend themselves against
criminals but the person defending himself is then accused of murder or
attempted murder of the criminal and is then locked away.

It is then no wonder that one regularly reads about vigilante  groups  which
are starting to function in crime-infested areas.  If  the  Constitution  is
being abused by criminals, as  the  hon  Deputy  President  said,  then  the
Constitution should be revised.]

The amendment of the Constitution  should  be  such  that  it  protects  the
rights of law-abiding citizens above those of criminals. One such  amendment
is to allow the death penalty for murderers and rapists ...

... en die VF vra dit. Dit bring my by artikel 49 van die Strafproseswet.
Die bevindings van 'n navorsingspan is dat die meeste polisielede wat
sedert 1996 vermoor is in teregstellingstyl op kort afstand in hul kop of
rug doodgeskiet is. Die aantal polisiemoorde in Suid-Afrika is die hoogste
in die wêreld. Sewe en sewentig per 100 000, teenoor die VSA se 21 per
100 000. Hoekom is hierdie syfer so hoog? Om 'n ondersoek beampte aan te
haal:


  Ons polisiemanne is huiwerig om te skiet, want hulle weet wanneer hulle
  skiet is hulle in groot moeilikheid.

Dit is juis daardie huiwering wat polisielede se lewens kos. Die uitspraak
van die Konstitusionele Hof oor artikel 49 het na my mening juis hierdie
situasie geskep.

'n Week gelede het die agb Minister die lede van die Portefeulje Komitee op
Veiligheid en Sekuriteit daarvan beskuldig dat hulle, as wetgewers, die
proses rakende artikel 49 strem. Maar wat sê die Minister in die Pretoria
News van 12 Junie 2002? Dis amper 'n jaar gelede: (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

... and the FF is asking for that. This brings me to section 49 of the
Criminal Procedure Act. The findings of a research team is that most of the
police officers who were murdered since 1996 were shot execution-style from
a short distance either in the head or back. The number of police murders
in South Africa is the highest in the world. Seventy-seven per 100 000, in
comparison with the USA's 21 per 100 000. Why is this figure so high? To
quote an investigating officer:


  Our policemen are hesitant to shoot, because they know when they shoot
  they are in big trouble.

It is precisely this hesitation that costs police officers their lives. The
Constitutional Court ruling regarding section 49, in my opinion, has
created this situation.

A week ago the hon Minister accused the members of the Portfolio Committee
on Safety and Security that they as legislators are hampering the process
regarding section 49. But what does the Minister say in the Pretoria News
of 12 June 2002? That is almost a year ago:]

``I am comfortable with the court decision and so are the police.''

Wat sê die Minister verder? Die berig lui: [What does the Minister say
further? The article goes as follows:]


  Nqakula said the use of force would have to be in line with the court's
  ruling and the police were in discussion with the Department of Justice
  to `ensure that our law is brought into synergy with the Constitutional
  Court judgment' as the SAPS did not want to fall foul of the court's
  ruling.

That was said a year ago.

Dit is nou amper 'n jaar later. Hoe lank moet hierdie beraadslaging tussen
die Departement van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit en die Departement van
Justisie nog voortgaan? Intussen word polisielede vermoor. Die VF vra dat
die twee departemente hulle beraadslaging voltooi, en as daar wetwysigings
nodig is, laat dit na die Parlement toe kom dat ons polisielewens kan begin
red en beskerm. Die agb Minister kan nie elke keer daaragter skuil nie.

Laastens, die agb Minister het gesê die verslag oor plaasmoorde is nou
bekend. Ek het vir die agb Minister 'n afskrif gestuur van sy amptelike
antwoord op 'n vraag wat ek al 'n jaar gelede gevra het. Sy antwoord het
toe al gelui dat die oorsake en die motiewe van plaasmoorde toe alreeds
bekend was. Ek wil by die agb Minister weet: hoekom vat hy 'n jaar voordat
hy bekend maak wat daardie motiewe en die oorsake is? (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This is now almost a year later. How long does this consultation between
the Department of Safety and Security and the Department of Justice have to
continue? In the interim police officers are being murdered. The FF is
requesting that the two departments conclude their consultation and if
amendments are necessary, let those come to Parliament so that we can start
saving and protecting the lives of the police. The hon Minister cannot hide
behind that all the time.

Lastly, the hon Minister has said that the report regarding farm murders is
now available. I sent the hon Minister a copy of his official reply to a
question I asked a year ago. His answer then was that the causes and
motives of farm murders were already known at that stage. I want to know
from the hon Minister: Why does it take a year before he makes those
motives and causes known?]

Mr M A MAZIYA: Chairperson, Minister of Safety and Security, hon members
and the department, it amazes one sometimes when you listen to some of the
members. It is worse when you listen to members who attend the portfolio
committee meetings. But it is even worse when you confuse the church with
politics. [Laughter.] On many occasions in the portfolio committee, we have
gone over and over that argument of the money and the police. One member
indicated that you can put in as much money as you want, but if there is no
willingness, crime will never be stopped.

Of course, the matter of section 49, as the members are continuously
bringing up in the debate, is a matter that we have continuously discussed.
We thought, as the portfolio committee, that it was resolved. There is no
confusion in the police. In many police stations that we have visited, the
police have confirmed the workshops that have been conducted for them to
understand and follow this clause in the Criminal Procedure Act. The police
are aware that they have the right to defend themselves.
I want to affirm that our security is in good hands. Yes, indeed, it is in
good hands. Over the weekend, the hon Tony Leon went to Westbury. He was
unable to unpack his programme to fight crime. And, surprisingly, all the
hon Gibson could do was make a noise and nothing else.

The Firearms Control Act restricts the random licensing of firearms without
a proper check of whether you are fit to possess a firearm, or if you have
a safe in your house, and it also seeks to see if you are responsible by
even checking with your family whether or not you are violent. It begins to
set the pace for a fight against firearms, more especially illegal ones and
firearms in the possession of people who are not responsible.

The Act also prevents the use of firearms in crimes and any other negligent
use of firearms. The Act gives authority to the police for the removal of
all unused and illegal guns from circulation by improving control over
possession through control over supply. Of course, this Act will not
succeed if the police as the implementers have no plans for implementation.
One must congratulate programmes like Operation Sethunya, which recovered
141 illegal firearms in one day in the Western Cape. To date, more that 18
000 have been destroyed by the police this year alone. And yes, there may
be parts of the Act that are not ready for implementation since training
must still be provided. The police are doing what they know best - crime
control through disarming and arresting.

Firearms were used in the so-called previously white schools for both
protection and target shooting, as it is alleged. Through this Act, those
firearms have been removed, for they are not even licensed. We have seen
through Operation Rachel, which works based on co-operation between our
Police Service and that of the Mozambican police, that weapons of war were
confiscated and destroyed. These two operations have sent a clear message
to both the criminals and those who believe in the old order. You cannot
own more than one firearm in the name of self-protection. If you have five
firearms in the house, and you are attacked, you cannot go out with all the
firearms to defend yourself. You must only take one. Why own five?

In our country, we have seen how firearms are carelessly handled. According
to the SAPS, 200 000 firearms are still registered in the names of people
who died many years ago, because of the delays in how the lawyers are
handling matters regarding executors of estates. Some have failed to ensure
that those firearms that belonged to those who died were sold or
transferred to their heirs.

This budget seeks to help the police carry out their mandate and that of
implementing this Act. We hope that the process of speeding up the
formulation of the regulations for the Act will be completed soon. I am, of
course, passionate about this Act, for I myself am a victim of illegal
arms. This day, as I enter this debate, is the day my wife and my son were
killed, when vigilantes and the police attacked my house on 1 June 1990. It
was five days later that my mother, who was also shot in the same incident,
died, three days before she was buried. I do not want my children to
experience the same pain I have lived with for 13 years. Hence, I am
confident that the police will never bring that period to us again.

The police will continue to act responsibly in serving their country. This
was demonstrated by the arrest and confiscation of firearms alleged to have
been used when Coin Security was robbed and 17 boxes of assets were removed
by force from their premises. During the day, after the robbery, two brave
police reservists showed their bravery and stopped a vehicle, only to
realise upon searching the vehicle, when they discovered the arms suspected
to have been used in the robbery, that their lives were in danger. This is
the kind of reaction that is expected from our police. We would like to
encourage the two officers to keep up the good work.

The operation to remove firearms from departments is necessary, for we
understand that there are more than one million firearms in the possession
of some departments. The parks board in KwaZulu-Natal alone carries 900
firearms that cannot be accounted for. We are saying that this cannot be
allowed. These firearms must be confiscated, for no one except the Police
Service, Intelligence Service, the SANDF and Correctional Services is
exempted by the Act. Now, who has licensed other departments?

Of course we know that, during apartheid, teachers and some students were
given firearms to kill terrorists. These terrorists today are governing
this country and no one's life is under threat. Those who feel as if their
lives are threatened must go to the police. They will be protected by our
police.

It is for this reason that the ANC supports this budget. We want the police
to reduce the numbers of people who are losing guns daily. We understand
that about 82 guns are lost or stolen daily. This analysis shows that the
theft and loss of privately owned guns is an important source of illegal
firearms for crime. Of course, suicides and domestic violence are committed
by the use of legal and illegal firearms. Family mass killings have also
been reported, where a family member will decide to go on the rampage.

In the last conference of the ANC - the 51st conference - it was clear in
its position when addressing matters of crime in this country. The
instruction given by the conference was for every member of the ANC to go
out and help the police to fight crime in our country, by either joining
them as a reservist or reporting crime to them when you see it being
conducted. The emphasis was put on the proliferation ... [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the PAC supports this Budget Vote but the
PAC believes, however, that there should have been a higher allocation in
view of the challenging work which our police and this nation have to do to
reduce crime in our country.

Crime is an impediment to investment and the  general  economic  development
of our country and job creation. Before I  go  further  in  discussing  this
budget in my limited time, I want to thank our  police  for  the  good  work
they are doing under  extreme  difficulties.  Some  of  their  successes  in
arresting criminals have been superb.  They  deserve  deep  appreciation.  I
want to  pay  tribute  also  to  the  work  of  the  Independent  Complaints
Directorate. They assist some of our people  who  do  not  always  get  good
treatment at some police stations.

The situation on the ground reveals that we need more police, carefully
screened and well-trained. They also need better pay and conditions of
service conducive to boosting their morale for the difficult work the
police are doing, namely looking after the safety and security of our
nation. Police salaries must be looked into. Promotions for hardworking
police should not take long. Promotions must be seen to be done on a fair
basis and on a standard which does not create dissatisfaction among the
police.

Police stations must also be allocated enough vehicles. In many police
stations there is not only a shortage of vehicles, but of manpower itself.
In Bothaville in the Free State, in April when I visited there, they had a
shortage of 20 policemen. This station also has the problem of
overcrowding. It has inadequate cells. Arrested suspects have to be
transported to another town with cells. This makes it possible for suspects
to escape, even before appearing in court. The Bothaville station is also
far from the township and a nearer satellite station was closed. There is
an outcry from the community that it be opened again and upgraded into a
fully fledged police station to relieve overcrowding.

Police stations in rural and African townships continue to be treated as
inferior to those in former white areas in terms of equipment and
maintenance. For instance, the old police station in Soweto where the PAC
launched its antipass campaign in 1960 does not look like it has been
painted since then or since the ANC came into power. [Interjections.] This
practice of treating African areas as inferior must stop. All police
stations must be given equal treatment in terms of cleanliness and standard
of maintenance.

 There are cases of inefficiency. Although this matter is still under
investigation, the PAC is not happy that its constituency office was raided
by police in July 2002 for weapons, while 10 bombs dropped on Soweto by the
Boeremag were not detected. This is a paradox, a conundrum of conundrums.
We hope that, ultimately, the PAC will receive a logical explanation why
our office was raided.

The PAC is a peaceful and nonviolent organisation. It was the massacre of
our people in Sharpeville and Langa in 1960 which provoked the PAC into
resorting to the armed struggle. The PAC has no programme of armed
struggle, nor of terrorising any community. The PAC is opposed to the
political thuggery of such criminal acts as necklacing fellow Africans,
murdering of political opponents and burning homes of citizens.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Deputy Speaker, the SAPS is the heart of the department
with its responsibilities towards internal security and crime prevention.
Further, its functions are stamped by our national Constitution that notes
that the SAPS's objectives are to prevent, combat and investigate crime,
maintain public order, uphold and enforce the law and, foremost, to protect
and secure our citizenry and their property.

From its objectives, the MF notes the high standard and commitment
necessary for the SAPS to ensure delivery. However, many public complaints
on the performance of the SAPS have been made. This poor performance has
been blamed on minimal resources and, at times, on poor management.
Whichever the reason, noting crime infestation in our national state, we
have to embark on efforts to ensure proper safety and security.

The MF feels that the Independent Complaints Directorate plays an important
role in this. The body was established to investigate complaints of alleged
criminality and misconduct against members of the SAPS. The ICD has a
number of mandates over a number of matters connected with the SAPS. This
allows for a watchful eye in monitoring SAPS matters; it steps up the
SAPS's performance in assuring that safety and security is a priority.
While it is disappointing to note an increase of 14,2% in complaints in
2001-02, the decrease of 9,1% in  deaths in custody as a result of police
action during 2001-02 is a relief.

The justice, crime prevention and security cluster has made a major
contribution to the delivery of the SAPS. The SAPS specialised divisions
under crime intelligence and crime detectives, operational services and
management support services appear to be equipped.

The MF, however, is concerned about the SAPS accessibility. It is felt that
police stations have to be set up in areas, especially crime-infested
areas, where patrolling has to be encouraged so as to curtail crime. The MF
appeals to the Minister to seriously look into setting up satellite police
stations within the crime-infested areas and wherever necessary.

It is pleasing to note that communities have joined forces with policing
forums to stand up against crime and encourage a safer society. It is the
profound duty of all our citizens to assist in whatever way we can in
stamping out the crime in our respective communities.

The MF hopes that the department will step up on gang-related violence at
schools. Criminal activities of gun-toting and knife-wielding at KZN
schools have been recently reported. The MF pleads for the department's
intervention in curtailing gangsterism at schools.

It is hoped that measures may be taken to better the situation of minimal
resources that hinders the accessibility and performance of the SAPS. The
MF wishes the hon Minister of Safety and Security and his department all
the success in his mission in preventing crime in South Africa. The MF
supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Hon Deputy Speaker, without the need to specify more
specifically, I can state that this side of the House is failing our
country when it comes to crime. [Interjections.] We are dealing today with
the most basic function of government. If a government fails here, it fails
totally.

The National Action is a party with its ear on the ground and, let me
assure you, this is the most frequent and the most serious complaint from
law-abiding citizens from all ranks of life. It is the most frequently
raised reason for negative perceptions and even emigration. This is the
first issue that is raised when evaluating our country. Crime, crime,
crime. It is a monster spreading its tentacles into every sphere of life.

 There is not enough evidence that we are winning the war against crime.
The National Action wants to point out just a few indicators. A lack of
reliable crime statistics makes it impossible to apply the correct
medicine. The Minister of Finance can tell the Minister more about that.
You said in this House two weeks ago that statistics do not save lives. The
more correct version would be: Withholding statistics saves face for the
Minister.

Wat betref plaasmoorde, agb Minister, is dit nie aanvaarbaar dat ons twee
jaar moes wag vir die verslag oor die ondersoek na die oorsake van
plaasmoorde nie. Twee jaar beteken bykans 300 lewens - dis nie goed genoeg
nie. U het vandag gesê die verslag sal aantoon dat die hoofoorsaak van
plaasmoorde ``purely criminal '' is. Die Nasionale Aksie val nie daarvoor
nie. ``Purely criminal'' en tog word daar in baie gevalle niks gesteel nie,
of as gelet word op die absolute barbaarse en gewelddadige wyse waarop
hierdie moorde gepleeg word, as moordenaars in 'n leë plaashuis kan vat wat
hulle wil en wag tot die boer van die kerk af terugkom. Die Nasionale Aksie
sê onomwonde: Plaasmoorde is georkestreerde terreur en indien dit nie as
sodanig aangespreek word nie, gaan ons plase en kleinhoewes die slagvelde
bly van die wreedste moorde denkbaar. Kan ek die Minister ook in dié
verband vra: Hoeveel van die beloofde addisionele personeel is toe in
landelike gebiede ontplooi en hoeveel van die beloofde 30 000 reserviste is
reeds gewerf en aangestel?

Nou aansluitend by die kwessie van plaasmoorde is die beoogde uitfasering
van die kommandostelsel. Die Nasionale Aksie het met dank kennis geneem van
die verklaring van President Mbeki tydens sy imbizo-besoek in Noordwes, dat
die stelsel nie uitgefasseer gaan word nie, maar herskik gaan word. Hy het
vir ons toegegee en ek haal aan dat die Regering se besluit oor die toekoms
van kommandos wat hy 14 Februarie in sy staatsrede aangekondig het, en wat
sedertdien vir groot kommer oor landelike veiligheid gesorg het, dalk
verkeerd oorgedra is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[As far as farm murders are concerned, hon Minister, it is not acceptable
that we had to wait two years for the report on the investigation into the
causes of farm murders. Two years equates to nearly 300 lives - that is not
good enough. You said today that the report will show that the primary
cause of farm murders is purely criminal. The National Action is not
falling for that. You say it is purely criminal and yet nothing is stolen
in many cases, and there is the absolutely barbaric and violent manner in
which these murders are committed, when murderers could take what they want
from an empty farmhouse, and wait until the farmer returns from church. The
National Action says unequivocally: Farm murders are orchestrated terrorism
and if they are not addressed as such our farms and smallholdings will
remain the battlefields of the cruelest murders imaginable. Could I also
ask the Minister in this regard: How many of the promised additional staff
have been deployed in rural areas and how many of the promised 30 000
reservists have already been recruited and appointed?

Closely linked to the issue of farm murders is the envisaged phasing out of
the commando system. The National Action noted with appreciation the
statement by President Mbeki during his imbizo visit to the North West that
the system is not going to be phased out, but rearranged. He conceded to us
and I believe that the Government's decision on the future of commandos
which he announced on 14 February in his state of the nation address, and
which has since caused great concern about rural safety, was perhaps
incorrectly conveyed.]

Hon Minister, the National Action believes in participatory democracy. If
the public outcry over a matter leads to a Minister or even the President
reviewing the matter for the better, then we do not blame him.

Ons verlekker ons nie en sê hy het ``gat omgeswaai'' nie. Waarom het ons
dan in die eerste instansie gekla? Ons is egter geregtig op duidelikheid en
deursigtigheid oor wat hierdie herskikking alles behels. [We do not take
pleasure in that and say that he has changed his mind completely. Why did
we then complain in the first place? However, we are entitled to clarity
and transparency with regard to what this rearrangement entails.]

The Minister spoke with regard to the commandos about the exit of the SADF
and the entrance of the SAPS.

Ons doen 'n beroep op die Minister van Verdediging en die Minister van
Veiligheid en Sekuriteit om hierdie beoogde herskikking van die kommandos
by wyse van 'n proses van selfregulering te laat geskied. Die Nasionale
Aksie versoek as eerste stap die aanstelling van 'n herskikkingskomitee
vanuit die midde van die kommandos self. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[We appeal to the Minister of Defence and the Minister for Safety and
Security to have this envisaged rearrangement of the commandos take place
by way of a process of self-regulation. The National Action requests as a
first step the appointment of a committee for the rearrangement from within
the ranks of the commandos themselves.]

Another matter of grave concern, and it is on record that the National
Action rejects it, is the action of the so-called Boeremag, which is the
fruit of extreme religious fanaticism and not the result of Afrikaner
alienation. We repeat our stand today. Let there be no doubt. But, hon
Minister, the way in which the Police Service acted in Operation Hopper
gives the impression of our police trying to fish with a net and not with a
hook. Can the Minister give us an indication of the percentage of people
arrested during the early morning hours in Operation Hopper against whom a
prima facie case could be built?

Kan ek op 'n positiewe noot afsluit? Die Nasionale Aksie salueer ons manne
en vroue in uniform vir die uitnemende wyse waarop hulle internasionale
gebeurtenisse beveilig, by uitstek die Wêreldberaad vir Volhoubare
Ontwikkeling in Sandton. Hier moet ek melding maak van die feit dat die
Adjunkkommissaris van Polisie, Andre Pruis, hierdie operasie nie vanuit 'n
lugversorgde kantoor en voor rekenaarskerms gemaneuvreer het nie, maar in
uniform, tussen sy mense op die grond. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Could I conclude on a positive note? The National Action salutes our men
and women in uniform for the outstanding manner in which they safeguard
international events, in particular the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in Sandton. Here I must mention the fact that the Deputy
Commissioner of Police, André Pruis, did not manage this operation from an
air-conditioned office and in front of computer screens, but in uniform,
among his people on the ground.]

That is where we want to see our honoured bearers of the blue uniform.
Bobby on the beat - that is the only answer.

Ms D M MOROBI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister of Safety and Security
and members of Parliament, let me acknowledge the presence of the MECs of
Safety and Security who are in this gallery, especially my MEC from
Gauteng, hon Nomvula Mkonyane. [Applause.]

Allow me to begin my speech by quoting what the President of South Africa
said in his inauguration speech, and I quote:


  Those who complete the course will do so only because they do not, as
  fatigue sets in, convince themselves that the road ahead is still too
  long, the inclines too steep, the loneliness impossible to bear, and the
  prize itself of doubtful value.


  We too, as the peoples of South Africa and Africa, must together run our
  Comrades Marathon, as comrades who are ready to take the road together,
  refusing to be discouraged by the recognition that the road is still very
  long, the inclines very steep and that, at times,  what we see as the end
  is but a mirage.


  When the race is run, all humanity and ourselves will acknowledge the
  fact that we only succeeded because we succeeded to believe in our own
  dreams.

It is unfortunate to say that some people simply refuse to join this
Comrades Marathon together as South Africans. They would rather convince
themselves that the road is too steep and the prize of doubtful value. I am
referring to those who see the system of democracy as slowly collapsing and
unable to protect our women and children, the most vulnerable of our
society. I am referring to hon Gibson and company. [Laughter.]

This Government introduced a philosophy of community policing to make sure
that all the police forces that served under the apartheid regime would be
integrated and transformed into a professional and effective law-
enforcement force which does not infringe on human rights. The approach of
community policing has produced a good departmental and intersectoral
partnership in the fight against abuse of children and women.

 There is an improvement of service to victims of crime, violence and
sexual abuse, especially women and children. Due to the interaction of the
departments, the Department of Social Development has a programme of victim
empowerment, and has also developed an officer training programme to
institutionalise all police stations in co-operation with other departments
and NGOs who are involved in antirape strategies and child justice
initiatives, which is visible policing.

There are national guidelines provided by the national commissioner to be
observed by all members of the SAPS. Therefore, this is a practical power
by the Government in support of the Department of Safety and Security to
fulfil its mandate of interacting with crime preventative and crime-
combating programmes. To confirm the approach of interdepartmental and
intersectoral co-operation, the Department of Safety and Security is part
of the strategic cluster - JPCS. The justice crime prevention and security
cluster has initiated programmes to fight the scourge of rape and other
violent crimes against children, accompanied by activities of socioeconomic
upliftment of survivors and victims.

Through Government policies, department programmes and SA Police Service
strategic projects, the ANC-led Government continues to give special focus
and high priority to rape, domestic violence, crimes  against children and
family violence. We need to know that the Sexual Offences Bill, Children's
Bill, Child Justice Bill and Domestic Violence Act of 1998 are all
progressive policies that facilitate a commitment to overcome violence
against women and children by passing and enforcing these laws that ensure
women and children's legal rights, and severely punish abusers.

The Domestic Violence Act recognises that any domestic violence is a
serious social evil and an obstacle to achieving gender equity. One of the
cluster's achievements included the successful 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence Against Women and Children campaign from 25 November to 10
December 2002.

Another awareness campaign against child abuse ran from 26 May to 7 June
2003. This campaign urged all of us to protect children from conditions of
vulnerability including poverty, HIV/Aids and social ills. The campaigns
are done to promote children's rights towards social responsibility as well
as easy access to Government services which demands of us not to forget
that your child is my child, and my child is your child.

The ANC-led Government knows that any sound and lasting public education
starts with interaction such as awareness campaigns. We ensure that we
focus on empowering women and children, reaching out to parents and
changing the beliefs and attitudes that permit abusive behaviour.

Another success is the training of more than 2 000 officials, including
magistrates and prosecutors, on the Domestic Violence Act. The Minister of
Safety and Security also indicated that a comprehensive manual for training
of all key service providers has been developed. Also, more courts have
been dedicated for prosecution of sexual offences recently, such as a court
that has been opened in Sibasa, Limpopo Province.

Crimes cannot be dealt with by the police alone. Communities must also play
a meaningful role by putting in place preventative strategies, establishing
sustainable and effective crisis centres to aid service delivery. There is
a need for a holistic approach in order to achieve sustainable safety for
all our children. But, unless all stakeholders work together against family
violence and abuse of children, we will continue to experience gruesome
violation of the rights of women and children.

The 2003 budget increase provides for the enhancement of the functions of
the Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Units that have
been prioritised. It is envisaged that some units which deal with child
protection and sexual offences will retain their autonomy so that they can
deal with crimes that require specialised skills.

During the period of six months in the year 2002-03, criminal organisations
and individuals were identified through an organised threat analysis
process. In that, 3 045 cases were forwarded to courts. The Family Violence
Unit together with the Child Protection and Sexual Offences Units
investigated 18 737 cases, of which 14 706 are registered dockets with the
department, and 4 031 enquiries were reported during the same six months.

 People who claim to be experts on child abuse react to the inevitable
challenges that naturally come with the democratic transformation without
having the decency or respect to first go to check a list of incidents that
preceded the change of the fate of our children. I would like to refresh
the memories of these sceptical champions that the ANC-led Government is
progressively turning the tide against the abuse of women and children. The
ANC's policy has always been: Crime against women and children is a
priority in the criminal justice system, especially on the part of the
investigating and prosecution authority.

However, as hon President Thabo Mbeki has pointed out in the ANC Today
column:


  The greatest challenge we are facing is to keep children away from harm
  and abuse and to empower our women and children to identify and report
  any violation of their rights.

Although our commitment is proven by strategies and programmes that are
already in place, we still have to go the extra mile. South Africa is one
of the countries that have ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of
Children. Therefore, the ANC-led Government, by obligation, will continue
to put children's rights high on its agenda. We already have some policies
in place. This Government will continue to provide protection to all South
African children from torture, cruelty, inhumanity and degrading treatment.
The ANC supports the budget. I thank you. [Applause]

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, Charles de Montesquieu said in 1748, and I
quote:


  Political liberty in a citizen is that tranquillity of spirit which comes
  from the opinion each one has of his security, and in order for him to
  have this liberty the government must be such that one citizen cannot
  fear another citizen.

But across our country, from Kleinvlei to Westbury, the people are
shouting, ``Enough is enough, free us from the fear of the criminals!''
Often, the only responses from Government members, most of whom operate
under the illusion that they personally own this land and its people, are
scathing attacks on us - the messengers of those unfortunate victims of
crime out there, and there are millions of them. Very applicable, today, is
the title of the DA's policy programme for positive change on crime,
Freedom from Fear: Making the criminal justice system work. That policy
programme is available on our website: www.da.org.za.

Last year the ICD briefed the portfolio committee about their progress and
fulfilment of their mandate with the available budgetary allocation - which
resulted in our support for that Vote. This year, after a similar briefing,
we wish to compliment them on their very important and hard work. Once
again, we support that Vote. Over this financial year we shall, however,
monitor their progress closely.

The SAPS is just phasing out the anticorruption units - a decision we
disagree with and already the ICD's workload is increasing regarding
complaints against those corrupt officers who still remain within the SAPS.
Whilst it was not the intention of these closures to result in the ICD
dealing with such complaints, it is an unfortunate result or maybe not that
unfortunate - only time will tell.

Hon Minister, let me turn to safety and security, in particular rural
safety. On 17 February, at the GCIS media briefings, three days after the
President's announcement, you told the media that the commandos would be
replaced with a special dedicated division within the SAPS. I thought that,
at last, we were moving forward in addressing the fears of our rural
communities: those who live and work on our farms and smallholdings, and
those in rural settlements with limited or no public transport and often no
telephones, and who have to walk many kilometres to get to sparsely spread
police stations.

How big was the disappointment when, days later, you renounced that and
told me that normal sector policing would replace the commandos. Why?
Because such a dedicated division is exactly what you will find in section
2.19 of our policy document. We believe that to be the only viable option
if you are adamant that you want to replace the commandos. Then, we need
not lose the expertise, movability and commitment of those who, for so
long, have been in the frontline of defence for our rural people with the
advantage of, at last, being properly resourced.

Want die waarheid is dat die landelike beveiligingsplan aan skerwe lê saam
met die lyke van soveel vermoordes en lewens van soveel verkragtes en
beroofdes. Terwyl die Regering toegelaat het dat die SAPD leegbloei van
mannekrag en hulpmiddele, is die landelike gebiede die swaarste getref.
Terwyl al hoe swaarder op die kommandos gesteun is, is hulle
gemarginaliseer deur 'n groeiende gebrek aan geld vanuit die
verdedigingsbegroting. En nou, terwyl die kommandos uitgefaseer word, is
die enigste plan om die leemte te vul, volgens die agb Minister,
sektorpolisiëring.

Die probleem is egter dat die nuwe polisiebeamptes wat in diens geneem
word, almal geoormerk is vir sektorpolisiëring by die sogenaamde ``crack
down''-stasies, waarvan slegs enkeles in die landelike gebiede val. Daar is
net een oplossing en die agb Minister het dit amper raakgevat: 'n Spesiale
landelike beveiligingsdivisie binne die polisiediens, direk onder die
nasionale kommissaris met toerekeningsvatbaarheid by die Minister self.
Hiermee en alleen hiermee sal ons ook voldoende toegewyde landelike
reserviste kry om so 'n divisie by te staan. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Because the truth of the matter is that the rural security plan is torn to
shreds, together with the corpses of so many people who have been murdered
and the lives of so many who have been raped and robbed. When the
Government allowed the SAPS to be bled dry of manpower and resources, the
rural areas were the most seriously affected. While the commandos were
being relied upon to an increasing extent, the rural areas were being
marginalised because of an increasing lack of money from the Defence
budget. And now, while the commandos are being phased out, the only way of
filling the gap, according to the hon Minister, is sector policing.

However, the problem is that the new police officers who are employed have
all been earmarked for sector policing at the so-called ``crack down''
stations, only a few of which fall in the rural areas. There is only one
solution and the hon Minister nearly grasped it: A special rural security
division within the Police Service, directly under the national
commissioner and with accountability to the Minister himself. By means of
this and this only we will also get sufficient dedicated rural reservists
to unite forces with such a division.]

Allow me to make some remarks on the CPUs. We spent a lot of time in this
House debating the plight of our children, those most vulnerable in society
and those on whom the future of our nation depends. Minister, if we are
concerned about them, the very least we should do is to ensure, first of
all, that those special units will be, at all times, fully staffed,
resourced and maintained before we even start to look at other needs in the
department.

My dank en waardering gaan vandag aan die toegewyde lede van die
polisiediens, van senior bestuur af tot by die nuuste konstabel, wat onder
uiters moeilike omstandighede poog om hierdie 'n veiliger land te maak. Ook
aan daardie lede wie se persoonlike lewens deur Resolusie 7 ontwrig is in
belang van die groter taak van die departement. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[My thanks and appreciation today go to the dedicated members of the Police
Service, from senior management down to the most newly appointed constable,
who endeavour under very difficult circumstances to make this a safer
country. Also to those members whose personal lives have been disrupted by
Resolution 7 in the interests of the greater task of the department.]

Hon Minister, I trust that the remaining 600 disputes, mostly in the
Eastern Cape, will be satisfactorily resolved. Only then can we close the
door on what has been a disastrous internal communication fiasco which
caused so much damage to the morale of our dedicated police officers.
Whilst I can and did find the process greatly flawed and damaging, the
result of only 1,8% of the workforce which is to be relocated is, although
not in individual cases, but generally, reasonably accepted. I do however
trust that, Minister, you will take appropriate action against those senior
officers who attempted to misuse the process to settle grudges and, in this
and other ways, deviated from the guidelines.

Hon Minister, I want to believe that you, in your quiet way, want to be as
much a cowboy against crime as your predecessor, the late sheriff Steve.
But, until Treasury is willing to be deputised and join the posse, the
crooks will win the fight or at best we may achieve a standoff which is
what you so eloquently called the stabilisation of crime. Now, how then can
we ever tell those crying mothers and children out there that we endorse
the Government's reluctance to take a bold and committed step to show real
commitment to free them from the pain and fear of crime by supporting this
budget? What is not much more than a year-on-year inflation increase in
this budget will not sufficiently equip us to break the shackles that crime
binds this country with. Let's provide our people with real political
liberty, a time when no citizen needs to fear another citizen. [Applause.]

Nksz M XULU: Mhlonishwa Phini likaSomlomo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe,
bahlonishwa abakule Ndlu, ngizothi ukungena esihlokweni lapha kule nkulumo
yomnyango wezokuphepha ngohambo esiluhambile siyikomidi labesifazane le-
Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
Women. NgoMeyi mhla ka-6 kuya ku-9 sihambele izindawo ezintathu
esifundazweni saseGauteng, eyokuqala kwaba yiJohannesburg, kwalandela
iPitoli neVereeneging.

Ngithi mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe angibonge emaphoyiseni akho ngoba izithunywa
ezazithunyelwe zakhombisa ukusesekela nokusihlonipha singabesifazane.
[Ihlombe.] Ngendlela ababefike ngayo nangendlela ababezimisele ngayo
ekwethuleni izinkulumo zabo kwakukuhle kuzo zontathu lezo zindawo. Nakhu-ke
okukhona esabona nathi ukuthi asikhulume ngakho ngoba izikhalo zabo
ziyefana noma izindawo zingefani. Okokuqala, laphaya eJohannesburg bakhala
ngokuthi ubugebengu buningi. Umnyango wawuholwa umqondisi uJohnson
oyinhloko yabaseshi yena owathi amacala abanawo maningi kakhulu kodwa
banabasebenzi abancane. Abasebenzi bangu-55 bese kuthi umuntu emunye
athwale amacala angu-39. Amasha ngenyanga avama ukuba u-16 bese lokho
kwenza umthwalo-ke ube nzima kubona ngoba umuntu ngokomthetho ngabe uthwala
angu-20. Ngoba isikhathi sincane, bakhala ngezikhungo zokwelekelelela -
okunye okwakuthinta eminye iminyango efana nezenhlalakahle.

NasePitoli nakhona kunjalo kodwa-ke ezakhona zincane izinkinga ngoba
bayakwazi nokuthola abaxhasi futhi banayo imali asebeyenzile ngokwenza
imikhankaso yokuqoqa imali. Kodwa isikhalo sisezindaweni zabantu. Ngigxila
lapha-ke mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ekuthini noma izinto zethu ziye zithathwe
ngepolitiki mina ngikhala ngokuthi sengathi singayibheka ipolitiki le
enigxobana ngayo kodwa bese sibuya siyobheka izindawo zethu emakhaya lapho
abantu besifazane behlupheka khona, lapho kusekhona izindawo njengakithi
nakwezinye izindawo ezifundazweni, lapho abantu behamba khona amakhilomitha
angaphezu kuka-60 kuyiwa esiteshini samaphoyisa esisodwa.

Sengathi-ke kulesi sabelo okukhulunywa ngaso zingabhekelwa lezo zinto ngoba
abantu besifazane babhekana naleso simo imihla ngemihla, ikakhulukazi
ngezimpelasonto obaba uma bedle ukudla kwabo bese beshaya, umuntu
wesifazane angazi ukuthi uzosizakala kanjani. Izigebengu zibadlwengule
abantu besifazane bengazi nokuthi bazobika bese efika nini amaphoyisa ngoba
izindawo zikude. Ngithi, kulesi sabelo sengathi kungabhekelwa izindawo
zasemakhaya nasezindaweni zabantu, imali ithi xaxa ukuze kubhekelwe ukuthi
izinsizakalo zibe khona.

Sizwile ukuthi kukhona uchatha emaphoyiseni. Nami ngithe mangithinta
ngakithi KwaZulu ngezwa ukuthi, cha, bandla bayathokoza, mhlonishwa
Ngqongqoshe. Ingathi-ke kungathi uma kubhekwa bese kubhekwa izindaba
zezinto zokusebenza. Laphaya eMlazi kufike umama nezingane eshaywe ubaba.
Ngishayele esiteshini samaphoyisa ngezwa ukuthi eshantshi hhovisi imoto
iyodwa ngakho ayikwazi ukusiza umuntu ngaleso sikhathi. Nakulokho sithi
siyazi ukuthi kulukhuni ukuthi imali ibe khona masinyane kodwa sithi
ingathi kungabhekelwa ukuthi izindawo lezi zethu, kobantu, ezazivele
zihluphekile kwasekuqaleni zinganakiwe, kubhekelwe zona phela kuthi lezi
ezaziveli zinotho nazo-ke bese zibhekelwa. Kudinga kubhekwe ukuthi
siseThekwini nje lapha ko-C R Swart izimoto zazivele ziyinqwaba kodwa
laphaya kithi, emalokishini, kungekho lutho. Ake kuqalwe ngathi bese
kugcinwa ngalezi ezinye. [Ihlombe.] Ngiyathokoza. Ngiyaseseka isabelo sakho
mhlonihlwa Ngqongqoshe. (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Miss M XULU: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and hon members in this
House, under the subject being debated today on the Department of Safety
and Security, I will discuss the journey we made as a committee of women,
the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
of Women. On 6-9 May we visited three places in the Gauteng province,
starting with Johannesburg, followed by Pretoria and then Vereeniging.

Hon Minister, I would like to express my gratitude to your police staff.
The delegates who were there showed support and respect to us as women.
[Applause.] Their good attendance and the determination with which they
delivered their speeches was impressive in all three places.

However, there are some issues that we realised we needed to raise here
because the complaints were similar despite differences in location.
Firstly, Johannesburg complained about the high rate of crime. The
departmental delegation was led by Director Johnson, who is in charge of
the detectives. He informed us that they have too many cases and yet they
are understaffed. Their staff complement is 55, and each person is
responsible for 39 cases. New cases number about 16 per month, and this
increases the workload. Under normal conditions one person should be in
charge of 20 cases. They also complained about support centres - which
involved other departments such as the Department of Welfare.

The situation in Pretoria is quite similar but their problems are fewer
since they are able to get sponsors and they have also accumulated some
money through their fund-raising projects. However, the complaints they
have emanate from the black areas.

What I want to focus on is this issue, hon Minister. Since issues tend to
be politicised, my request is that while we do need to pay attention to
politics over which politicians keep fighting, we must focus seriously on
rural areas where women are suffering. In places such as the one where I
come from, and others in the provinces, people walk more than 60 km to a
single police station.

It would be a good thing if the budget being discussed today could provide
such resources because women are faced with these conditions on a daily
basis. The situation is worse on weekends when some men tend to drink too
much and become violent. Faced with such a situation, the woman does not
know where to get help. Some women fall victim to rapists and, because of
long distances to police stations, they have no idea how long it will take
for the police to arrive after they have reported the rape. I request that
this budget make provision for rural areas and other places where black
people live. The budget also needs to be increased so as to make resources
available.

We have heard that police salaries have been raised. In my interactions
with people from KwaZulu-Natal, where I come from, I learned that the
police are happy about it, hon Minister. The next step now is to ensure the
provision of resources.

One day at Umlazi a woman came to me with her children after having been
assaulted by her husband. I called the police station and was told that
there was only one vehicle at the charge office, so there was no way of
helping her at that time. As far as situations like this are concerned, we
understand that it is not easy to secure funds immediately. However, our
appeal is that the rural areas, which have previously been disadvantaged
and neglected, be given priority over places which have enjoyed better
resources.

It has to be taken into consideration that places such as C R Swart in
Durban have always had an abundant supply of vehicles while the townships
were not provided for. This time our needs should be given priority over
those of other people. [Applause.]

I support your budget, hon Minister.]

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Deputy Speaker, let me thank you. Minister, the ANC
endorses the budget. [Interjections.] No, Gibson, I will be with you very
soon. We also want to express our thanks for the good work that is being
done by our MECs in different provinces, which is a very good development.
They have shown that they are able to grapple with issues that confront
them.

 Now, Gibson said it is very crucial that ... [Interjections.] Sorry, the
hon Gibson. He said that it is very important that the Minister walks
about. I would just like to be able to allay his fears.

This past weekend one of our MECs, who is a person in whose work I have a
lot of confidence, was able to mobilise, in a short span of time, and fill
a stadium with people in order to be able to bury one of the best cadres we
had in this movement. We are talking about Ephraim Mogale and that
attachment does not just go easily because Ephraim Mogale was one of our
first presidents in Cosas and the work that you did, MEC Thabang Makwetla,
was something that we are very grateful to you for. As a generation of
people and young people that have come across and have worked with Ephraim,
when we saw the number of people who were at the stadium, it clearly showed
that you had done your work. We are also very thankful to MEC Nomvula for
being able to chair and give leadership right through that process.
[Applause.] We are very thankful for the work that you have done there.

Now Minister, you know, this is always good for us. I have been here for 10
years and I have been able to reflect on matters. I have worked on safety
and security issues. It is not the first time now that we are going to
debate with the DA. It has continuously changed its character. It just
continuously changes with whomever it goes into an alliance with. But the
only thing that is very crucial whenever we engage in debate in the House
is that, at least, there should be some truth. People should be honest
about what they have written out.

You know, Swart, I did not have to go to www.da and what-not. I have the
document. I am going to reflect on the document that you have presented and
to us it's very crucial, because this is what Gibson has missed out in the
process. [Interjections.] Gibson has not been able to talk about their own
document, what they have been able to write up and to present to the
electorate, because what they are looking for is votes. They are not
looking at how to resolve the issues that are confronting us during a
period of crime. [Applause.]

Now Gibson, in the document, the executive summary says mismanagement and a
lack of political will have left the SAPS in disarray. Now, the way he was
pleading here and trying to appease and talk about the policemen is a total
contradiction of what is in the document. Now it surprises me how he
appeals to policemen in the way he was appealing here earlier, while in the
document he shows such a lot of disrespect for the way they do their work.
He shows no care. He does not. He does not care, because if ever he knew
exactly what is happening within the service, if he ever knew the type of
work these policemen are doing, he would have been able to acknowledge his
responsibility. Now it is very unfair and the way he is conducting himself
is just not correct. He is a seasoned politician. He is supposed to
continuously know that the battle lines between the ANC and the DA are
drawn on the basis of policy and not on attacking the Deputy President and
going haywire where we cannot even pick up what policies are being
attacked.
To us that is a serious problem because then it shows the bankruptcy that
is within the party itself, because leaders are supposed to be leading, and
to give policy and guidance to our people. [Applause.]

So to me, to us as the ANC, if that lack of leadership is going to continue
permeating right through the manner in which we conduct ourselves, it is
going to come back and it is going to haunt the DA in the way it conducts
itself. [Interjections.]

You know, the other problem that I really sometimes get so shocked about is
when you steal ideas. Now, in the document, they say ``The DA is committed
to winning the war against crime with a well-trained, well-equipped,
nonpartisan and community-based police service''. Tell me what is different
from what we have been saying all the time here. You should not steal. You
should at least acknowledge that the ANC has offered leadership on this
particular issue. We are the ones who have been able to say that we should
go to the communities. We have been the ones that have been working on
community police forums. What is new that the DA is bringing to the table?
That is what we are looking for. [Applause.] You want to be able to say to
them, ``We are bringing something new, and we are willing to challenge
you.''

 We have been ready. That is why I am saying, Gibson, that you have really
misled South Africans at this particular moment. You are looking for people
who have misled others. It is you who has done that. Let us go back again
to what Gibson has not told the public here, to what Gibson has not told
the police that are seated here. [Interjections.] Honourable, OK.

``The concentration of resources in an overbureaucratised central
headquarters ... Now this is in the document that Gibson has. He sits here
and praises the policies, but he criticises them in the document that he
has sent out to the public. Now that is dishonesty to us. It gives us a
particular problem, because how can you say that the police are
overbureaucratized and they are all concentrated at head office and that
all the resources are at head office? That is not being very genuine to the
police. They are saying that the police are not doing any good work. They
are saying that the police do not understand. The police that we work with
at Safety and Security have produced. This is their programme. They
continuously reflect on the work that they are doing. Here is it. They gave
it. We even took it to Gibson so that he understands the work we do.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Gibson. [Applause.]

Mr M S BOOI: Hon Gibson. But let us go ahead. Gibson calls on section 49.
He calls them ... [Interjections.] Hon Gibson calls on the Minister. He
says he has written a letter to the chairperson, and the chairperson is
supposed to make sure that he goes and participates. It was very pathetic,
very pathetic that you realise that the leader of a particular party that
is supposed to be in the opposition did not understand the issue. He sits
there and the Minister said: ``Okay, I am here, I am going to talk about
section 49. What are you accusing the national commissioner about?'' Now,
Gibson has read the newspaper; he has not read section 49. [Applause.]

Now we sit there. We are elaborating, because these things are very crucial
because that reflects the nature of the opposition that we are confronted
with. He sits there. After the Minister spoke, the chairperson said:
``Gibson, speak'', and Gibson went haywire. He is very apologetic.
[Laughter.] Oh, Minister, I accept what the commissioner is doing; it is a
very good job. He goes on as if he is the praise singer of the national
commissioner in a situation where he wanted to challenge the national
commissioner and wanted the Minister to call the commissioner to account.

Now tell us if he is a strong leader, because Gibson has not been in the
safety and security committee for ... [Interjections.] Honourable Gibson,
okay, okay, okay, fine. Hon Gibson has not been in that particular
committee for more than two to three years. Now, come elections, he sits
there. We expect him to argue the issue and then after five minutes, the
chairperson, Maziya, our hon Maziya, starts to object: ``Can't we just
proceed because Gibson does not understand the issues and has really just
proven that he does not understand what the police are involved in here.''
And we are very sympathetic. We continuously say in the ANC and I want to
say it in Afrikaans. [Interjections.] That all ...

Wat ons eintlik wil sê is dat die polisiemanne wat jy altyd so sit en ... I
mean ... [Gelag.] Hulle het ook kinders. Hulle het ook vroue. Hulle maak
seker dat die skelms, verkragters, diewe en gangsters moet tronk toe gaan.
Dit is die polisiemanne wat dit altyd doen. Hulle wil ook seker maak dat
die kinders kan skool toe gaan en dat hul vrouens ook na Pick 'n Pay toe
kan gaan ... [Tussenwerpsels] ... net soos ander lede van die gemeenskap.
Dan wil hulle ook seker maak dat hulle die vrugte van ons demokratiese
proses kan proe. Dit is dus baie, baie belangrik wat ons altyd hier voor sê
en die dinge waaroor ander partye altyd begin praat. Hulle moet seker maak
hulle kom vertel nie leuens in die Parlement nie. Ons vra dus net wat
aangaan. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[What we actually want to say is that the policemen who you always seem to
sit and ... I mean ... [Laughter.] They also have children. They also have
wives. They make sure that the villains, rapists, thieves and gangsters go
to jail. It is at all times the policemen who do it. They also want to
ensure that the children can go to school and that their wives can also go
to Pick 'n Pay ... [Interjections] ... just like other members of the
community. Furthermore they also want to ensure that they can taste the
fruit of our democratic process. Therefore the things we say here in front,
as well as the things other parties always start talking about, are always
very, very important. They should ensure that they do not come and tell
lies in Parliament. Therefore we are just asking what is going on.]

The other issue that we think is very crucial is the policing issue.
[Interjections.] That is the other issue that we think is very crucial. You
know that hon Gibson sits here and goes haywire and on and on about the
issue of 150 000 police. I thought that he would be able to explain where
he is getting that figure of 150 000 from. He does not understand policing.
We do not know if it refers to visible policing or if they wear uniforms,
or walk around. We do not know if it is detectives that he is looking for.
We do not know if he is looking for community police forums. He just looks
for 150 000 police. [Interjections.]

Now to me as a person who is concerned about policing, that is a very
crucial development. If you want 150 000, tell us where you want them, and
who are they? Is it just a simple figure? I mean, you do not understand. If
you say you want 150 000 policemen, we will recruit them, but then where
will we put them? Now we are saying that Gibson does not understand this
thing. He puts numbers without being able to say what we should do with
that number of policemen. He is not able to say; he is not able to
understand how you run a police station. I shall help you, Gibson, because
this thing is very crucial, because as you go about talking, you must be
able to attach some responsibility to policemen. Policemen do their own
administration. Policemen do guarding. Policemen do visible patrols.
Policemen do investigation and other forms of field contact. Policemen do
public administration and responding to calls of assistance and policemen
do incident-related paperwork. So I do not understand what the 150 000 was
for. I was struggling as I sat there. What does Gibson want us to do with
the 150 000?

I work in Crossroads; he does not work there. I interact with the
community. I do not understand why you need the 150 000, if it is even
necessary. What Gibson does not say to the people here, and what he does
not say to the Parliament is that he says in his document ``it's just
getting rid of dead wood''. [Interjections.]

How can he insult people just like that? It is in the document. He says,
``getting rid of dead wood''. [Interjections.] He spread that type of
document. He wants us to be able to do that. I mean, it is so criminal to
25% of SAPS members who are functionally illiterate. A similar percentage
do not have drivers' licences and many are unsuited for the positions they
occupy. That is in this document of the DA.

Now the part Gibson was afraid to express is in here. What we are saying
is: Is it correct to insult people in that particular way? [Interjections.]

This is what the DA also does. If they want to combat crime, I always say
let us have good policies and be able to present ourselves. Let us not go
and insult people. Who are the dead wood in the police? If you say,
``kitskonstabels'' [special constables], those are people that do ...
[Interjections.] Which work are you talking about? So it is important,
Gibson, in all the things that you say and whatever standards you want us
to be able to achieve and in the professional work you want us to follow up
on in the performance of our police so that they are able to attach some
responsibility to what they are raising so that we do not sit here and say
we are listening to a member who is going to do us harm, and show and give
us an analysis of the situation, and he ends up not understanding what he
is talking about. That is just definitive ... I mean, our police ... You
see ... [Interjections.]

The continuously unscientific approach in this particular document is a
worrying aspect. If this is what they are going to be challenged about, I
am definitively sure that we going to come back with a bigger majority.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, when hon Annelizé van
Wyk was addressing us, I was thinking about Hamlet and, in Shakespeare's
play, at the graveyard, Hamlet has the skull in his hand, and I thought of
poor Paul Swart ... [Laughter.] He was a good man. This is precisely what
the DA has done. They shoved the hon Paul Swart aside, and replaced him
with the hon Douglas Gibson, because they wanted someone who has a shrill
voice, who will go and address people about ghosts. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]
What they have been doing is the following: They have produced a document,
and they say this document is an alternative to what we are doing. At best,
we ought to be arresting them for plagiarism. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Because this is what it is. This document is exactly our document. We
presented this document about the strategies of the SAPS to Parliament just
the other day. [Interjections.] But there are certain things I want to
bring to your attention from what they say in the document.

One of the things is: Allowing tax relief of up to R5 000 or 5%, whichever
is the greater, on private security-related expenses. [Interjections.] What
he is saying is that the people in the township he wants me to accompany
him to, who will not be able to afford to have barricades, who will not be
able to afford to pay for this service, should continue to suffer. He does
not care about them. [Interjections.] Those he cares about are the rich,
because this tax relates to them. They can pay for those barricades.
[Applause.] It is the rich, and therefore the rich must be protected. There
must be more security from private security companies to protect the rich.
[Interjections.] He is not talking about black people.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Black people pay tax.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Incidentally, hon Gibson, I accept
your challenge. Let's go to Botshabelo on an evening. Let's go and visit
with Botshabelo, the two of us, without security. Let's go there.
[Interjections.] I am going to write you a letter to confirm what I am
saying, but that visit must happen before the end of July. Let's go at
night to Botshabelo in Bloemfontein. [Applause.]
He forgets that I was born in a township. He forgets that my entire life
growing up was spent in a township. When did he go to our townships? It was
after we had liberated him. [Applause.] That's when he started going to our
townships. [Applause.] He believes, therefore, that he knows these
townships better than I do. But, hon Gibson, Botshabelo, before the end of
July. [Interjections.]

What his party does is that, all the time, they are attacking the police.
And they say they are attacking us. I am not a police official. I don't do
policing. The ANC does not do policing. We do policy. The person who does
policing is André Pruis. He is the Head of Operations. Everything they have
said is an attack on André Pruis. They say he is unable to plan operations,
unable to do his work, and he is including all those who work under André
Pruis.

I was with some of them on the Cape Flats this Friday, and I have been with
them on a number of other raids. We mounted a raid, which is a regular
practice. He says all of those people are not doing any work. They don't
know what they are doing. This is what he is saying. But, he pretends to be
attacking the ANC.

Let's look at some of the things that they say in this document. He says:


  The South African public have a right to certain minimum standards of
  service, and failure to provide this service should have consequences.

I want to ask the hon Minister for the Public Service and Administration to
please hand over our policy document on Batho Pele to this hon member to
read. He does not know there is something called that. That is why they are
speaking in this fashion:


  Accountability should be local, assumed by officials at a local level who
  are empowered to structure their operations as they see fit to ensure
  maximum performance.

This is already happening. They should go and read the SAPS Act. It
stipulates that provincial commissioners are responsible for combating and
investigating crime within their respective provinces. This responsibility
is further delegated to area and station commissioners, and is included
within their performance agreement. It is there, and it has been there
since 1996. [Interjections.] He is unable to read it, because he and his
party do not understand policing matters. He says:


  Performance indicators should be simple, quantifiable, rational, and
  publicly declared, with incentives given for Stellar performance and
  termination an accepted consequence for dismal failure.

The salary increases for the SAPS senior management structure, from the
national commissioner downwards, demand that they sign a performance
agreement, stipulating acceptable performance and productivity.

I can go through this document; everything they say is exactly what we are
doing. They are trying to present it as something new. I said the other day
here that they think it is profound, it is an alternative. [Laughter.]
There is nothing profound in this thing. It is our policy. There is nothing
new they have said in terms of this document, but let's look at other
things that they are saying.

An HON MEMBER: Don't cry.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: He is going to cry just now.
[Laughter.] We will continue by saying: You people are racist in the way
that you raise some of the problems we have. [Interjections.] It is racist
in the first instance to want ... You know one of the things they said ...
The Minister of Minerals and Energy, in negotiations with Telkom, decided
that they were going to write off the debt that our people in Soweto had
worked up regarding the provision of electricity.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: You are talking about Eskom.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: And they are opposing that matter.
[Interjections.] We want it, as the police, so that our areas can be lit
up, as part and parcel of crime combating. We want this to happen.
[Applause.] [Interjections.] Secondly, when all is said and done, these
people are saying that a government that is led by a black-dominated
organisation cannot succeed in combating crime. [Interjections.] We will
continue to say this, because this is how it is coming across to our
people. Our people are asking about it. [Interjections.]

Someone passed me this note:


  A visitor to South Africa, listening to the hon Gibson, would have
  visions of a massive criminal orgy in the length and breadth of the
  country, where bodies of the dead and injured litter the streets. This is
  precisely the impression the DA wants to portray of our democratic
  Government.

That is precisely the point. This is what they want to portray our
Government as being, because they are unhappy about our democratic
dispensation. He has spoken here about murder statistics, and he has quoted
the Medical Research Council. Yet, the Medical Research Council, in their
own document, says the figures can't be used to determine national figures,
because they only monitor a few mortuaries, approximately 20 mortuaries.
Depending on which mortuaries are monitored, one can come to totally wrong
conclusions. This is what they themselves say.

He's talked about figures from Home Affairs. Those figures from Home
Affairs include natural deaths. How do you connect natural deaths to
murders? [Laughter.] He says people who have lost their loved ones will
remember this Government and hold it to account, but our people are not
only going to remember these figures; to them, these figures are part and
parcel of what is happening in South Africa and elsewhere in the world.

If there were no murders anywhere else in the world, maybe this would have
been a profound statement they were making, but he forgets that there are
other murders our people will always remember. [Interjections.] There were
the times that the SA Defence Force mounted cross-border raids and killed
our people. In December 1985 in Lesotho I buried people, including Lesotho
nationals, who were mowed down by members of the SA Defence Force. There
are people who sit here, including the honÿ.ÿ.ÿ. [Interjections] ... you
know who. They sat here, and they supported the cross-border raids by the
SA Defence Force. [Applause.] [Interjections.] Our people will always
remember that.

There was a statement made today about the reburial of the remains of some
of our people who were killed in that fashion. Those deaths were supported
by these people here. [Interjections.]

Hon Mr Groenewald,  you  have  told  this  House  that  you  asked  me  this
question, which you've given me a copy of, about the report, and I said  no.
In this report, you have underlined some words which I am going to read:


  Advocate Du Plessis confirmed that the first part of their report, which
  deals with the causes and motives behind these attacks, has been
  finalised.

You ought to have read the following one as well:


  The committee is currently addressing the prevention and curbing of farm
  attacks.

Die verslag, Meneer, is in twee dele. Die eerste deel ... [The report, Sir,
comprises two parts. The first part ... ]

... is what is referred to here as the causes and motives behind these
attacks.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: I know that.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes. He said we have completed that.
Now, the second one is that we are now working on the second part. Both the
first part and the second part have not been submitted yet. Please, Sir.
This is what I said. I said it this year.

Daar is 'n eerste deel en 'n tweede deel. Die verslag, al twee dele, is  nog
nie beskikbaar nie, Meneer. [Tussenwerpsels.] [There is a first part  and  a
second  part.  The  report,  both  parts,  is  not   available   yet,   Sir.
[Interjections.]]
You also raised the matter of Operation Hopper which forms part of our
broader operation to combat right-wing extremism. It was based on
intelligence obtained during our investigations into the Boeremag. During
the various ``hoppers'', therefore, we have done the following: We have
arrested between 15 and 20 people; we have seized illegal firearms,
explosives, components which can be used to manufacture explosive devices
and maps indicating possible targets, in other words names, addresses and
so on of the targets.

The service realises that the achievement of the strategic priorities has
been, and will continue to be realised, through its workforce. The
challenge, therefore, is to have a dedicated, motivated and suitably
trained and equipped workforce to ensure an equitable supply of human
resources to meet the ideal workforce profile. A multiyear human resource
plan has been developed.

In addition, career centres will be launched in three provinces to equip
employees for possible career pathing and planning opportunities within the
service to promote the principles of job satisfaction and get the right
person with the right skills for the right job. The human rights plan will
provide for a focused profile of personnel losses, and provide guidance as
to the quantity of workforce movement and recruitment required to realise
and sustain an 85% operation workforce. In compliance with this, the
station staff establishment will be increased from 63% to 67%.

The total SAPS workforce will also be increased this year from 131 560 to
140 560. This will provide a thrust to improve employment equity in the
service. The improvement of employment equity in every sphere of employment
of the SAPS is being monitored and evaluated to ensure reasonable progress
in achieving the necessary targets.

At senior management level, the representivity improved from a composition
of 47% blacks in 2000, to 55% in 2003. During this time, the composition of
blacks in middle management rose from 36% in 2000, to 42% this year. At
junior management level, the service comprised 74% black members in 2000,
and this rose to 78% this year. Of significance is the overall composition
of females in the service. We stand at a world record: 26% of our
complement are women. [Applause.]

In last year's budget speech, I promised to request Cabinet to allow me to
appoint two deputy national commissioners as part of our transformation
exercise. Two senior black officers have been appointed: one is a woman who
is today the acting National Commissioner, Deputy National Commissioner
Mala Singh. She is acting in the absence of the national Commissioner.
[Applause.]

I want to thank all of you who have been providing an excellent service to
all of our people. Do your work and simply close your ears to people who
talk about things they don't know anything about. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:47.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills:


     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:
         (i)     National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 29 -
              2003] (National Assembly - sec 76) [Bill and prior notice of
              its introduction published in Government Gazette No 25052 of 3
              June 2003.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
         well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 11 June 2003.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159:


     (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism on 29 May 2003
         submitted the following Bills:


        (i)      National Environmental Management Amendment Bill, 2003
        (ii)     National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Bill, 2003
        (iii)    National Environmental Management: Protected  Areas  Bill,
               2003


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Environmental  Affairs  and
         Tourism  and  the  Select  Committee  on  Land  and   Environmental
         Affairs.

3.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent:


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 10 June 2003:


         (i)     Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B  2B  -  2003]  (National
              Assembly - sec 75).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     On 30 May 2003 the National Assembly adopted the Report of the Joint
     Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests concerning a complaint
     against Minister M G P Lekota. The House thereby imposed on the
     Minister the sanctions as recommended by the Joint Committee. The
     sanctions have been implemented by way of the following written
     communication to the Minister:


         30 May 2003


         Dear Minister Lekota


         BREACH OF PARLIAMENT'S CODE OF CONDUCT


         The National Assembly on 30 May unanimously adopted the  Report  of
         the Joint  Committee  on  Ethics  and  Members'  Interests  on  the
         complaint against yourself. Your presence in the House at the  time
         is appreciated.


         The Joint Committee found that you were  negligent  in  failing  to
         comply with the provisions of the Code  of  Conduct  in  that  your
         disclosure of your  financial  interests  was  incomplete.  It  was
         noted, however, that there  was  no  evidence  that  you  willfully
         withheld information with the intention to mislead Parliament.
         In accordance with the sanctions approved by the House on the
         recommendation of the Joint Committee, a fine of one week's (7
         days) salary is levied. The fine should be paid without delay to
         the Secretary to Parliament.


         I am further instructed to issue a written reprimand to you.


         I note that you took the initiative of writing to me as Speaker
         tendering your apology to Parliament for failing to disclose your
         interests in full. You have subsequently co-operated fully with
         the Joint Committee.


         Nevertheless, your casualness - by your own admission - in regard
         to disclosure of your interests over an extended period of 1999 to
         2003 is both disappointing and regrettable. The Code has been
         voluntarily imposed by members on themselves and flows from our
         commitment to constitutional principles and accountability to the
         electorate. We will only consolidate our democracy to the extent
         that we are able to earn respect as public representatives. When a
         member in a leadership position such as yourself fails to observe
         the letter and spirit of the Code, it represents a setback in our
         efforts to build and maintain public trust in democratic
         institutions.


         The manner in which you conducted yourself subsequent to the
         matter coming to light is to be commended and sets an example.


         This letter will in due course be published in the document
         "Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports" for general
         information.


         Yours sincerely


         FRENE GINWALA, MP

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
         Rights Commission for 2001-2002, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002.


     (b)    Strategic Plan of the South African Human Rights Commission for
         2003-2006.

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Foundation for Education,
         Science and Technology, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for the period 1 April 2002 to
         30 November 2002 [RP 38-2003].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African
         Geographical Names Council for 2001-2002.


3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     (a)    Southern African Development Community Protocol on Forestry,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Southern African Development
         Community Protocol on Forestry.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Supplementary Report of Portfolio Committee on  Provincial  and  Local
     Government to "Report on Study Tour of Municipalities", dated  10  June
     2003:


     The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government  reports  as
     follows:


     The Committee requests  the  House  to  consider  the  following  draft
     resolution as a supplementary report to its report on its study tour of
     municipalities, dated 15 April 2003, which appeared in the  ATC  of  13
     May 2003:


     This House notes:


     1.     The Portfolio  Committee  on  Provincial  and  Local  Government
         undertook a major study  tour  of  municipalities  from  20  to  30
         January 2003. Overall, the study tour covered 63 municipalities,  3
         metro subcouncils,  7  MECs  and  provincial  departments,  4  ward
         committee and public meetings, 3  urban  and  rural  nodes,  and  3
         Planning  and  Implementation  Centres.  In  all,   the   Committee
         interacted with over 2200 people.


     2.     On 15 April 2003 the Committee adopted a  report  on  the  study
         tour. The report was published in the ATC on 13 May 2003, and  5000
         copies of a special printed version distributed to a wide range  of
         stakeholders.


     3.     A debate on the report was held in the House on 27 May 2003, and
         the report was noted by the House.


     4.     The report contained several proposals for action which need  to
         be adopted.


     This House notes, further, the following observations in the report:


     1.     The core principles, values and features of the new local
         government system are sound. Essentially, the challenges are
         around implementation.
     2.     There is a need for greater understanding among councillors,
         officials, communities and other stakeholders on the need for and
         value of the two-tier system of district and local municipalities.
         However, the Democratic Alliance and African Christian Democratic
         Party believe that the two-tier system is fundamentally flawed and
         district municipalities should be phased out as soon as possible.


     3.     Significant improvements in service delivery and development
         will not be possible without greater co-ordination and co-
         operation across the three spheres of government. Provincial and
         national departments tend to ignore municipal IDPs in their plans,
         programmes, strategies and projects.


     4.     Financial issues constitute the biggest challenge confronting
         municipalities. Municipalities have to far more effectively and
         productively manage their funds, raise revenue, and deploy funds
         and other resources. Municipalities also have to do far more to
         collect arrears from those who can afford to pay, especially the
         private sector and government departments. It is clear, however,
         that there is a need for a new local government financial system
         that is appropriate to the new developmental model of local
         government.


     5.     Significant progress has been achieved in the provision of free
         basic services, especially water. It is vital, however, that a
         much higher proportion of people living in the rural areas, who
         are often those most in need, receive free basic water.  Many
         municipalities feel that they will not be ready by 1 July to take
         over water projects and schemes currently being run by the
         Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.  They have concerns
         about capacity, funds and the pressing  need to address other
         challenges in the transformation.  The provision of free basic
         electricity to be rolled out from 1 July 2003 nationally will also
         pose considerable challenges.


     6.     While the considerable potential of community participation in
         the new local government system is far from developed, there has
         been reasonable progress over the past two years. There is a need,
         however, to ensure greater and more consistent participation. Ward
         committees have a vital role to play in this regard. The
         legislation on ward committees did not cater for some of the huge
         wards that have since been demarcated, especially in the rural
         areas, some of which stretch for up to 70 kilometres.


     7.     The quality of leadership in a municipality, especially
         councillors, but also officials and community representatives,
         signally influences its effectiveness, notwithstanding the
         constraints of funds and resources, and the magnitude of the
         challenges.


     8.     Effective capacity-building and training programmes are
         indispensable to the successful implementation of the new system
         of local government and to significant advances in delivery,
         development and democracy. The current programmes are not
         adequate. It is clear that the Local Government, Water and Related
         Services Sector Education and Training Authority is not effective.


     9.     If formal and informal participation in municipal activities is
         put together, traditional leaders are more active in municipal
         affairs than is made out in the public discourse. Clearly,
         traditional leaders can play an extremely important role in
         municipalities. The potential for this has to be developed. The
         Inkatha Freedom Party does not agree with this observation,
         believing that the role of traditional leaders cannot be
         reconciled with the current local government system.


     10.    Provincial governments can do more to assist municipalities,
         notwithstanding their financial and other limitations.


     11.    Despite its limitations of funds, resources and personnel, SALGA
         has to be far more effective than it currently is.


     12.    Understandably, perhaps, the new local government system has
         become a major site of waging intra-party struggles, apart from
         the obvious inter-party struggles. These party struggles should
         not serve to deter the implementation of the new local government
         system. In fact, political parties can play an important role in
         consolidating the new local government system. It is vital that a
         productive relationship develops between all political parties and
         municipal structures.


     13.    Some municipalities, without the most minimal financial,
         economic, revenue or other base do not seem viable - unless
         drastic measures are taken, not just by the municipalities
         concerned, but by provincial and national government, the private
         sector, communities and other stakeholders. Fundamental changes to
         municipal boundaries should be approached cautiously. Boundary
         issues should not, also, be conflated with the many other issues
         affecting the viability of municipalities. But it could be that in
         some cases boundaries might have to reviewed.


     14.    Municipalities find the deadlines set by the Department to
         implement certain provisions of the legislation or other aspects
         of the new local government system too onerous to meet.  The
         deadlines do not sufficiently acknowledge the significantly
         differing capacities of municipalities.


     15.    While the case for increases in the remuneration of some
         councillors is not sound, in the case of others it certainly is.
         There needs to be a much more open and informed debate about what
         the possibilities and limits are of any increases.


     16.    There is a need to provide  a firm framework for the
         remuneration of municipal managers.


     17.    It is clear that unless municipalities get more resources and
         increase service delivery, the new local government system will
         not be effectively implemented. At the same time, unless the new
         local government system is more effectively implemented,
         municipalities will not be able to secure more resources and
         significantly increase delivery.


     18.    Municipalities are in the early stages of a major transformation
         to a fundamentally new system of local government. With huge
         challenges and limited resources and capacity, municipalities are
         certainly making more progress than is commonly made out, even if
         less than they should. However, together with national and
         provincial government and other key stakeholders, they have to be
         significantly effective.


     The House therefore resolves:


     1.     The Ministry and Department of Provincial and Local Government,
         South African Local Government Association (SALGA) and Portfolio
         Committee on Provincial and Local Government meet as soon as
         possible and decide on a programme of action based on the
         observations and proposals in the report. This programme takes
         into account the existing Strategic Plan, programmes and projects
         of the Ministry and Department, including the decisions taken at
         the President's Co-ordinating Council workshop of 14 December 2001
         and the subsequent provincial workshops, that are seeking to
         address the issues raised in the report.  The programme should
         also take into account the wide range of responsibilities of the
         Department and its limitations of personnel, funds and other
         resources, and that there are limits, moreover, on how far the
         Department can intervene, as local government is a sphere of
         government in its own right. The programme should  define clearly
         the respective roles of the Ministry and Department, SALGA and the
         Portfolio Committee. Ultimately, the Ministry and Department will
         be accountable to parliament for the implementation of the
         programme of action.


     2.     The programme includes consideration of the following:


         a) There is a need for more education about the value and need for
              the two-tier system of district and local municipalities.
              Greater clarity on the precise division of powers and
              functions between local and district municipalities to come
              into effect from 1 July 2003 is also necessary, as is ongoing
              support to implement the new powers and functions. The
              financial implications of the new allocations of powers and
              functions needs to be clarified. It is also important that
              there is alignment between the Minister's "authorisations" of
              the four "national " powers and functions of water,
              sanitation, electricity and municipal health and the MECs'
              "adjustments" of the remaining powers and functions.


         b) The Department-led project to provide greater clarity and
              certainty on the constitutional powers and functions of local
              government and the senses in which they are distinct from and
              overlap with provincial and national powers and functions
              should be speeded up.


         c) Legislative and other means should be explored to ensure that
              provincial and national departments take municipal IDPs into
              account when shaping their plans, programmes, projects and
              budgets.  Parliamentary committees should increasingly monitor
              whether national departments are taking into account IDPs in
              their plans, programmes, projects and budgets. Provinces
              should be encouraged to develop new growth and development
              plans that are shaped by and also shape IDPs. Municipalities
              also need to be given more assistance to link IDPs and
              budgets.  That IDPs are dealt with by provincial departments
              of local government and budgets are dealt with by National
              Treasury also needs to be addressed. To ensure more effective
              integrated government, national departments should avoid by-
              passing provincial departments when dealing with
              municipalities. The pending Intergovernmental Relations Bill
              should seek to be part of the response to some of the issues
              raised here.


         d) Municipalities need to do far more to contend with their
              financial challenges. They also need considerable support.
              The current support programmes need to be more co-ordinated
              and effective. The Ministry and Department need to explore the
              possibility of provincial governments deducting money owed by
              provincial departments to municipalities for rates, services
              and agency functions before allocating the departments the
              money due to them in terms of the provincial budget each year,
              provided municipalities provide timeous and verifiable
              accounts. A similar approach should be explored with National
              Treasury in the case of errant national departments. The
              review of the current local government financial system needs
              to be speeded up - and the new system that emerges must be
              commensurate with the new developmental model of local
              government. An important aspect of the new model should be a
              fundamental review of the formula used to decide on local
              government's "equitable share" that takes greater account of
              the developmental imperatives of local government, including
              the need to provide free basic water and electricity services.


         e) Municipalities should do more to ensure consistent and
              effective community participation. All municipalities should
              be encouraged to establish effective ward committees.
              Municipalities not established as ward types should consider
              establishing ward committee-like structures in a way that does
              not transgress the law. The Department should give more
              support for the establishment of ward committees. Section 73
              (2)b of the Municipal Systems Act should be reviewed to
              provide for the possibility of large wards having more than
              ten members.


         f) In consultation with the Ministry and Department of Water
              Affairs (DWAF), the Department needs to more effectively
              attend to the difficulties of capacity, logistics,
              infrastructure and funding in the way of extending free basic
              water to more people in the rural areas.  The legal and other
              impediments to providing free basic services to farm workers
              on private farms needs to be addressed.  The two Departments
              also need to address the concerns of municipalities about
              taking over DWAF water schemes and projects from 1 July 2003,
              and ensure that the hand-over is phased in sensibly and
              sensitively.   In consultation with the Ministry and
              Department of Mineral and Energy, the Department needs to give
              effective support to municipalities to roll out free basic
              electricity from 1 July 2003. Municipalities also need to be
              informed more about the financial implications of the
              restructuring of the electricity industry.


         g) There should be a concerted review of the capacity-building and
              training programmes undertaken so far to establish how useful
              they are and to develop new and innovative courses and
              programmes whose outcomes are more easy to evaluate.  Greater
              and more effective co-ordination and co-operation, within a
              commonly accepted national framework, of all the local
              government capacity-building and training roleplayers is
              urgently necessary. The Department, SALGA and other
              stakeholders have to intervene to ensure that the Local
              Government, Water and Related Services Sector Education and
              Training Authority is more effective.


         h) The White Paper and national framework legislation on the role
              of traditional leadership and institutions should seek to
              address the current differences around the role of traditional
              leadership and institutions and provide for a developmental
              role for traditional leaders.


         i) The pending Intergovernmental Relations Bill should seek to
              develop further the role of provincial government in
              supporting local government.


         j) Without intruding on the autonomy of SALGA, the Department and
              other relevant stakeholders should contribute more to SALGA
              playing a more effective role.
         k) The Municipal Demarcation Board explores the possibility of
              reviewing the boundaries of municipalities referred to in
              section 13 above.


         l) The task team, comprising representatives of the Department,
              National Treasury and SALGA , reviewing the remuneration of
              councillors needs to act with due expedition. Municipalities
              without a rates base to remunerate councillors adequately
              should be supported from the national fiscus to meet the
              costs. Over time, the possibilities should be explored, within
              the constraints of the national budget, of the national
              government meeting a substantial part of the costs of
              remunerating councillors.


         m) The Minister's guidelines on the remuneration of municipal
              managers need to be finalised as soon as possible. If it is
              constitutionally possible, the Minister should issue
              regulations instead, and, if necessary, legislative amendments
              should be effected to allow the Minister to do so.


         n) In setting deadlines for municipalities to effect key aspects
              of the new model of local government, the Department should
              consult more with SALGA and take greater account of the
              differing capacity of municipalities.


         o) There are other aspects of the observations from the report set
              out above for which practical decisions for action should be
              explored. In particular, there should be appropriate focus on
              the need to ensure gender equity in the implementation of the
              local government transformation process.


     3.     Consideration should be given to exploring the possibility of
         parliament allocating a week, some time in the next twelve months,
         for MPs to visit every municipality in the country, to evaluate
         progress in the local government transformation process and
         provide support for the consolidation of the new system of local
         government.  If effected, members should submit their views to the
         Portfolio Committee to prepare a report for debate in the House.


     4.     There should be a report from the Ministry on progress in
         respect of this resolution given to the House within a year.


     5.     Consideration  should  be  given  to  allocating  the  Portfolio
         Committee  on  Provincial  and   Local   Government   a   full-time
         researcher for a one-year term to assist the Committee  to  fulfill
         its monitoring and oversight role in respect of  the  programme  of
         action that flows from this resolution.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and  Local  Government
     on Budget Vote 5: Provincial and Local Government, dated 10 June 2003:


     The Portfolio Committee on  Provincial  and  Local  Government,  having
     considered Budget Vote 5: Provincial and Local Government,  reports  as
     follows:


      A.    Introduction


          1.      The budget review of the Ministry and the Department of
              Provincial and Local Government was undertaken from 10 to 14
              March and on 3 June 2003.   As a precursor to the review, a
              workshop was held with the Department on 19 February to
              consider the strategic plan and programmes of the Department.


         2. Those who appeared before the Committee included Deputy
              Minister N Botha; Director-General Ms L Msengana-Ndlela; Chief
              Financial Officer Mr C Clerihew; Deputy Directors-General Mr E
              Africa, Ms J Manche and Mr G Mokate; Chief Directors Mr L
              Buys, Ms G Gumbi-Masilela, Mr S Selesho, Ms T Mketi, Mr D
              Powell and Mr S Dzengwa; and Directors Mr R Kruger, Mr W
              Nkuna, Mr Y Patel, and Ms K Harrison.


         3. SALGA (South African Local Government Association) was
              represented by its Chairperson, Father S Mkhatshwa; Treasurer,
              M J Mokoena; Chief Executive Officer, Mr T Mokwena;
              Councillors Mr S Somyo, Mr D Masemola, Ms N Dube and Ms N
              Mayathula-Khoza; Director of Policy and Strategy, Mr M Soni,
              and Director of Programmes, Ms J Sibisi.  The National House
              of Traditional Leaders was represented by its Chairperson,
              Inkosi M B Mzimela; Members Kgosi S V Suping, Morena M F
              Mopeli and Khosi F P Kutama; Chief Executive, Mr M Gobe; and
              Senior Planner Mr ZM Matebese. The delegation from MIIU
              (Municipal Infrastructure Investment Unit) consisted of the
              Chairperson, Ms M Hesketh; Chief Executive Officer, Ms K
              Pearce; Director, Ms N Mjoli-Mncube; Financial Operations
              Manager, Mr J Lesaoane; Project Managers, Ms D Magagumela, Ms
              J Levister; Business Development manager, Ms A Bassa; and
              Municipal Infrastructure Specialist, Mr J Leighland. The
              Municipal Demarcation Board was represented by Chief Executive
              Officer, Mr H Monare and the Head of Research and
              Implementation, Mr R Willemse.  The Local Government Water,
              Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority
              (LGWSETA) was represented by Chairperson, Mr V Magagula;
              Leadership Manager, Mr S Mofokeng; and Communication Manager,
              Mr E Mnyakeng.


     B.     Political Overview of Budget


         1. Deputy Minister Ntombazana Botha explained that the budgetary
              allocations to the programmes of the Ministry and Department
              of Provincial and Local Government have to be located in the
              context of the Department's commitment to ensuring greater
              integrated governance and planning.  This is directed towards
              "pushing back the frontiers of poverty" - the theme of the
              President's "State of the Nation" address and the Minister of
              Finance's Budget speech.


         2. The Deputy Minister said that a key focus of the Department is
              on partnerships as part of the process of consolidating
              integrated governance and development.


         3. The Ministry and Department have recognised the need to focus
              more on provincial government and contribute to strengthening
              its role in IGR (Intergovernmental Relations). Provincial
              governments need to give more support to local government.
              Consideration needs to be given to provinces developing
              provincial growth and development plans that align with
              municipal IDPs (Integrated Development Plans).


         4. The Ministry is aware of the need to  expand  the  provision  of
              free basic water services and ensure the  successful  roll-out
              of free basic electricity from 1 July this year.


         5. The Ministry is aware that people  are  getting  impatient,  but
              the  current  pace  of  progress  on  the  ISRDP   (Integrated
              Sustainable  Rural  Development  Programme)  and  URP   (Urban
              Renewal  Programme)  has  the  advantage   of   ensuring   the
              sustainability of these programmes and  allows  for  a  better
              measure of progress.  Progress on ISRDP so far is greater than
              progress on URP.  The Deputy Minister suggested that it  would
              be useful for the Portfolio Committee to visit the nodes.


         6. The Ministry is to contribute to ensuring that the capacity-
              building programmes of municipalities are improved, especially
              for women.


         7. The Ministry recognises that issues of traditional leadership
              are sensitive and need to be managed appropriately. Progress
              is being made, but there is a lot of misunderstanding that
              needs to be addressed.  The Ministry is aware of the concerns
              of traditional leaders and is addressing them. The Ministry
              welcomes the increasing involvement of traditional leaders in
              municipal issues.  The Ministry intends to finalise the White
              Paper on Traditional Leadership and Institutions and introduce
              national framework legislation soon.


         8. The Deputy Minister expressed the appreciation of the Ministry
              to the Portfolio Committee for the major study tour the
              Committee undertook of municipalities and the useful report it
              published.


        C. Overview of the Budget


             1.   Of the R6 579 638 000 overall budget for the 2002/03
                 financial year the Department spent 99,6%. R22 878 000 was
                 unspent.


             2.   The most significant case of under-spending was R9 958 000
                 in respect of Auxiliary and Associated Services. The under-
                 spending in this programme was due mainly to the R8 923 000
                 unspent allocation of the Commission for Promotion and
                 Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
                 Linguistic Communities. This is because the Commission will
                 only be established in this financial year.


         3. R9 399 001 000 has been allocated to the Ministry and
              Department of Provincial and Local Government for this
              financial year. This represent a nominal increase of about 43%
              compared to last year. The Ministry and Department's budgets
              are expected to increase by 13% in 2004/05 and 9% in the
              2005/06.


         4. There has been an increase of about 60% in local government's
              "equitable share" from R3 963 614 000 to R6 343 478 000 this
              financial year.  The increased funds are mainly to be directed
              to municipalities to improve their capacity to deliver quality
              services.


         5. The Department is committed to focussing more on policy
              implementation as from this year. An allocation of R1 100 000
              000 to municipalities will be utilised to provide free basic
              water and electricity.  3 million more people have been given
              access to free basic water in the past financial year. 28
              million people are targeted to have access to free basic
              electricity in 2003/04.


         6. The Department drew attention to the following:


              *   The LED (Local Economic Development) and Social Plan Grant
                  is to be incorporated into CMIP (Consolidated Municipal
                  Infrastructure Programme) in 2004/05. The MIG (Municipal
                  Infrastructure Grant) will be a new grant from this year.


              *   Local government capacity-building is to be incorporated
                  into the Municipal Systems Improvement Programme in
                  2005/06.


              *   The Local Government Transitional Fund will be
                  incorporated into the local government "equitable share".


              *   There will be two new items in the budget: a Commission on
                  Claims and Disputes relating to traditional leaders, and
                  the SA Cities Network.


         7. Overall, the majority in the Committee feels that the
              Department made reasonably good use of its budget in the past
              financial year. The Department must be complimented for its
              negligible under-spending.


         8. The Committee welcomes the rationalisation of the different
              grants allocated to local government.
         9. The Committee recognises that there is a significant increase
              in the "equitable share" allocated to local government over
              the MTEF period. It believes that municipalities have to be
              more productive and effective in raising revenue, managing
              their resources and spending money. But it is clear that for
              municipalities to effectively fulfil their constitutional
              mandate their equitable share has to be increased
              significantly. The review of the "equitable share" formula
              underway needs to be speeded up.


         10.     The Committee is aware that allocating more money does not
              necessarily mean better outcomes, and that departments have to
              have appropriate capacity to productively use increased funds.
              However, given the magnitude of the local government
              transformation, and the responsibilities of the Department,
              its budget has to be increased appropriately so that it can
              more effectively fulfil its role.


      D.    Administration
         1. The new Director General of the Department, Ms L Msengana-
              Ndlela, was appointed on 1 August 2002. The Committee
              congratulated her on her appointment and noted the effective
              manner in which she had assumed leadership of the Department.


         2. The Department has decided to create units on:


              *   Urban Renewal Programme (URP) and  Integrated  Sustainable
                  Rural Development Programme (ISRDP).


              *   Targeted Provincial Support.


              *     Intergovernmental   Fiscal   Relations   and   Municipal
                  Viability.


              *   Free Basic Services and Infrastructure.


              *   Corporate Governance.
              *   Public Participation and Empowerment.


         3. Twenty posts have been created at senior management level and
              the Department is in the process of filling these posts in the
              2003/04 financial year.


         4. The Committee feels that with the introduction of new internal
              policies and systems, the overall administration and
              management of the Department has improved.  The Committee also
              feels that the Department has done well in terms of the
              requirements of labour equity, particularly in terms of gender
              equity.


        E. Governance and Development


             1.   Intergovernmental Relations (IGR)


              1.  R5 570 000 has been allocated to the intergovernmental
                  relations sub-programme for this financial year. This
                  represents a decrease of about 13% from last year.


              2.  The Department acknowledged that it needs to focus more on
                  the provincial government. Because of its primary focus
                  on local government, this has not been possible until
                  now. Stronger provincial government will also serve to
                  strengthen local government. Among the support programmes
                  for provincial government are the following:


                  *    Supporting the Premiers' Offices to coordinate
                       Intergovernmental Relations (IGR).


                  *    Aligning the Provincial Growth and Development Plans
                       (PGDs) with local government Integrated Development
                       Plans (IDPs).


                  *    Working with National Treasury in supporting
                       provinces to assist municipalities to implement the
                       municipal finance management legislation.


              3.  The Committee pointed out that one of the main issues that
                  emerged from a recent major study tour it had undertaken
                  of municipalities is that there is need for much greater
                  integrated governance if service delivery and development
                  is to be advanced. The Committee stressed that
                  municipalities generally complained that national and
                  provincial departments ignored IDPs in their plans,
                  programmes and projects. The Committee feels that the
                  Department has to do more to ensure integrated
                  governance, and is to pursue this further with the
                  Department. The Committee welcomes the Department's focus
                  on the Premiers' Offices being responsible for
                  coordinating integrated planning.


              4.  Given the importance of the IGR, the Committee expresses
                  its concern about the reduction of the allocation to the
                  sub-programme.


              5.  The Committee expresses its concern about the capacity of
                  municipalities to effectively implement the new division
                  of powers and functions between local and district
                  municipalities to come into effect from 1 July this year.
                   The Committee refers the Department to its "Report on
                  Study Tour of Municipalities" published in the ATC of 13
                  May 2003 regarding its concerns on this issue and other
                  issues relating to the division of powers and functions
                  between district and local municipalities.


         2. Consolidated Municipal Infrastructure Programme (CMIP)


              1.  The allocation to CMIP has increased by about 33% from R1
                  730 853 000 last year to R2 246 253 000 this year.  The
                  Department is aiming to benefit 650 000 additional
                  households through CMIP. R309 000 000 from CMIP will be
                  allocated to new investment and the rehabilitation and
                  upgrading of basic infrastructure for local
                  municipalities with budgets of larger than R200 000 000.
                  Of this, R43 996 000 will be allocated to local
                  municipalities in which there are nodes. In the case of
                  district municipalities, R1 400 000 000 will be
                  allocated. A significant part of this, that is R385 659
                  000, will be allocated to district municipalities that
                  have nodes. In respect of metropolitan municipalities,
                  R549 000 000 will be allocated.


              2.  The Portfolio Committee notes the progress made in terms
                  of CMIP and will monitor further progress in this regard.


         3. Local Economic Development


              1.  The LED (Local Economic Development) Fund will be
                  allocated R120 000 000. It is expected that 3 000
                  temporary jobs will be created.
              2.  From the LED Fund, local municipalities will receive R94
                  100 000 in order to contribute to job creation and SMME
                  (Small, Medium, and Micro Enterprises) development.
                  Additionally, R26 700 000 of the LED Fund will be
                  allocated to rural nodes in order to promote agriculture
                  and tourism. The metropolitan municipalities will receive
                  R9 200 000.


              3.  The Committee feels that the LED is vital and that the
                  Department should assist municipalities more to put into
                  effect LED programmes.  Most municipalities attend to LED
                  on an ad-hoc basis and do not locate it strategically.
                  There needs to be a much more co-ordinated and focussed
                  approach to LED.


         4. Urban and Rural Nodes
              1.  R1 200 000 000 of CMIP funds will be allocated to rural
                  projects.  Of this R307 700 000 will be allocated to the
                  13 development nodes in 55 local municipalities.


              2.  Consideration is being given to introducing more nodes
                  through consultation with the President's Office.


              3.  The URP (Urban Renewal Programme) and ISRDP (Integrated
                  Sustainable Rural Development Programme) have identified
                  227 anchor projects, with 60% currently in the design and
                  implementation phase.  Due to major backlogs that still
                  characterise nodal areas, about 67% of anchor projects
                  are infrastructure related.  All nodal municipalities
                  have completed their Integrated Development Plans (IDPs).
              4.  According to the Department, key stakeholders such as the
                  National Coalition for Municipal Service Delivery, the
                  Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the World Bank are also
                  collaborating with government to support the programmes.
                  The Department believes that the key challenges are
                  getting the three spheres of government to co-operate
                  around the budgeting and planning of this key government
                  initiative and resourcing the management of the
                  programmes in the various nodes.


              5.  The Committee is interested to pursue further with the
                  Department the criteria by which further nodes would be
                  decided on and to get a better sense of the progress
                  achieved so far. The Committee is to visit the nodes in
                  the 2004/5 financial year. The Committee reiterates its
                  request to the Minister to write to all the MPs living in
                  the nodes or have constituency offices there to enlist
                  their co-operation in monitoring progress and
                  contributing to the more effective implementation of the
                  programmes.


      F.    Institutional Reform and Support


         1. Disaster management


              1.  R13 317 000 will be allocated to disaster management to
                  enhance disaster preparedness and management capacity.
                  The Department feels that this will improve human
                  security and reduce the vulnerability of urban and rural
                  communities to natural and human-made disasters.


              2.  The Department noted that the IDPs of a significant number
                  of municipalities did not include disaster management
                  plans and is to attend to this.


              3.  Given the magnitude of the challenges of disaster
                  management in the country and the need to effectively
                  implement the new model of disaster management, the
                  committee feels that the budget allocated to disaster
                  management is inadequate and needs to be increased
                  appropriately next year.  The Committee is also aware
                  that many IDPs do not include disaster management plans
                  and believes that the Ministry should draw this to the
                  attention of the MEC's for local government and SALGA to
                  act upon.


         2. Institutional Capacity Building and Support


              1.  R12 478 000 has been allocated to this sub-programme.


              2.  While recognising short-term needs, the  Department  feels
                  that there has to be long-term perspectives  on  capacity-
                  building within the Department and in the  provincial  and
                  local spheres of government.


              3.  The Department feels that the offices of the Premiers have
                  a crucial role to play in coordinating capacity-building
                  in the provinces.


              4.  The Department is seeking to consolidate all the grants
                  for local government capacity-building, including the
                  grants offered by National Treasury.
              5.  The Department explained that the  creation  of  a  single
                  public service for all three spheres of  government  would
                  also contribute to ensuring that capacity is  more  evenly
                  spread across the spheres.


              6.  The majority in the committee welcome the move towards a
                  single public service. The Democratic Alliance expressed
                  its reservation about this.


              7.  The committee welcomes the merger of the local government
                  capacity-building grants and support the view that all
                  these grants should be co-ordinated by the Department.


              8.  The Committee feels that effective capacity-building and
                  training is indispensable to the successful
                  implementation of the new system of local government and
                  to significant advances in delivery, development and
                  democracy. The current programmes need to be reviewed to
                  establish how effective they are.  The Committee feels
                  that new and more innovative courses and programmes need
                  to be developed whose outcomes are more easy to evaluate.


              9.  The Committee reiterates its concern that there needs to
                  be greater and more effective co-ordination and co-
                  operation, within a commonly accepted national framework,
                  of all local government capacity-building and training
                  role-players. As a contribution to that, the Committee
                  will host a workshop of all relevant stakeholders on 14
                  May 2003.


             G.   Auxiliary and Associated Services


         1. Commission on Claims and Disputes Relating to Traditional
              Leadership


              1.  The Department explained that the above Commission is to
                  be established after the national framework legislation
                  on traditional leaders is passed.  The Commission will
                  address claims and disputes relating to issues of
                  succession and legitimacy of traditional leaders.


              2.  The Committee welcomes the formation of such a Commission.
                  It feels that for the Commission itself to be legitimate
                  it must be established only after proper consultation
                  with traditional leaders.


         2. South African Cities Network


              1.  The South African Cities Network sub-programme has been
                  allocated R1 500 000 for the 2003/04 financial year. The
                  Department explained that networks, engagements and
                  partnerships would become increasingly important in
                  governance and matters of local service delivery.


          2.      From the study tour of municipalities undertaken by the
                  Portfolio Committee it emerged clearly that the
                  "secondary" cities see themselves as "emerging metros"
                  and expect to be constituted as metros by the time of the
                  next local government elections.  The Committee feels
                  that the Ministry and Department need to engage with the
                  "secondary "cities to address this matter.


   H. South African Local Government Association (SALGA)


         1. The financial year for municipalities is from 1 July in one
              year to 30 June the next year. This therefore influences the
              way SALGA expends money and report to parliament. SALGA
              reported that its total income for the past financial year was
              R120 000 000. It received a grant of R22 000 000 from the
              national fiscus, of which R7 000 000 was earmarked for
              restructuring. R98 000 000 was raised from levies from its
              affiliates.


         2. The budget expenditure estimate for the 2002/03 financial year
              is R96 700 000.  Of this, R56 800 000 is budget expenditure
              for the national office.  The provincial organised local
              government budget expenditure estimates are:


                  *    R7 800 000 for Gauteng.
                  *    R3 500 000 for Limpopo.
                  *    R2 400 000 for North West.
                  *    R1 800 000 for Mpumalanga.
                  *    R3 900 000 for Free State.
                  *    R20 500 000 for the other four provinces.


         3. R20 250 000 has been allocated to SALGA for the 2003/04
              financial year. There is an 8% decrease from the previous
              financial year.


         4. SALGA feels that the allocation it gets from the national
              fiscus is far from adequate. It consulted the provincial
              associations on the need to increase levies. The provincial
              associations consulted with municipalities falling under them.
               SALGA recognises that some municipalities cannot afford the
              levies due from them, and is to consider exempting them.


         5. SALGA reported that it has adopted a new administrative
              structure and has developed new internal systems and policies
              on human resources and finance, audit and procurement
              committees, performance management as well as draft governance
              charter.


         6. SALGA also reported its achievements for July 2002 to April
              2003 as including:


              *   Participation in the formulation of a new IGR Framework.


              *    Anumber  of  municipal  interventions   in   respect   of
                  governance issues, including Quakeni in the Eastern  Cape;
                  Moqhaka in Free State; Dihlabeng, Taung and Bela  Bela  in
                  the North West.


              *   Agreement on a shift to multi-year bargaining and multi-
                  year salary and wage agreements.


              *   Development of a Skills Development Strategy.


              *   Agreement with the Department on a joint approach to
                  developing an Integrated Capacity Building Strategy for
                  the Sector.


              *   Training of 93% of approximately 8000 councillors through
                  Core Councillor Training Programmes.


              *   Training of about 700 councillors on Module 1 of the
                  Financial Management Training Programme.


              *   Training of approximately 600 councillors through the
                  HIV/AIDs Programme.


         7. SALGA stated that its priorities for the medium term include:


              *   Improving intergovernmental relations.


              *   Improving the operations of ward committees.


              *    Building  local  capacity  to   develop   effective   and
                  sustainable economic development strategies.


              *   Exploring and strengthening urban-rural linkages and
                  increasing SALGA's involvement in URP and ISRDP.


              *   Developing effective strategies to deal with the
                  operational and economic impact of HIV/AIDS.


              *   Improving the relationship between development strategies,
                  IDPs and council budgets, service delivery systems and
                  institutional arrangements.


              *   Improving municipal performance management systems.


              *   Mainstreaming gender.


              *   Develop labour relations environment that promotes service
                  delivery.


              *   Development of an integrated support and capacity building
                  strategy.


              *   Improving the public profile of SALGA.


         8. The Committee stressed the vital role that SALGA has to play.
              It pointed out that it had emerged from the study tour of
              municipalities undertaken by the Committee, that SALGA needs
              to play a more effective role, notwithstanding its limitations
              of funds, resources and personnel. The Committee would like to
              meet with SALGA at an appropriate stage to discuss the
              legislative and other implications of the restructuring that
              it was envisaging.


      I.    Municipal Infrastructure Investment Unit (MIIU)


           1.    The MIIU's allocation has increased by 43%, from R7 000
                 000 last year to R10 000 000 this year. Although the
                 primary concern of MIIU is to draw private sector
                 investment to municipalities, it is also interested in
                 facilitating public-public partnerships. The MIIU is also
                 increasingly interested in appropriately assisting in the
                 implementation of CMIP. It has extended its programme to
                 provide municipalities with training to negotiate contracts
                 on services. The MIIU also has an increasing number of
                 projects in smaller municipalities. The MIIU explained
                 however that its projects are largely determined by demand,
                 and there are budget constraints on how much it can do.


         2. The MIIU is also aware of the need for its work to advance
              government programmes on Black Economic Empowerment.


         3. The MIIU raised the need for clarity on the applicability of
              section 94 I (c) of the Municipal Systems Act which allows the
              Minister to set a limit on tariff increases on services
              provided through public-private partnerships.


         4. The Committee expressed its appreciation for the very competent
              report presented by MIIU. Following consultations with the
              Minister and Department, the Committee would respond to MIIU's
              concerns about section 94 1 (c) of the Municipal Systems Act.
              The Committee would like to pursue further issues with the
              MIIU and would seek an appropriate time to engage with it
              further.


    J.      Municipal Demarcation Board


         1. The Municipal Demarcation Board budget allocation has increased
              by 23% from R11 670 000 in the past financial year to R14 311
              000 in this financial year. The MDB feels however that its
              budget is inadequate. The Board feels that it cannot fulfil
              its mandate without a larger budget as it needs to review all
              the ward boundaries before the 2005 local government
              elections. The Board also explained that there are 64 requests
              for re-determinations of the outer boundaries of
              municipalities before it at present. The Board feels that it
              is untenable that it has to rely on donor funding to perform
              certain key functions.


         2. The Board's main activities have centred around boundary
              determinations, advice to MEC's for Local Government on the
              capacity of municipalities to perform functions, advice to
              departments on the alignment of functional boundaries with
              municipal boundaries, and the development of an integrated
              database.


         3. The Committee acknowledged the excellent work that the Board
              has done, with very limited resources and budgets.  However,
              the study tour of municipalities revealed that there are some
              municipalities that are not viable as they do not have the
              most minimal financial, economic, revenue or other base.
              There is a need for drastic measures to be taken, not just by
              the municipalities concerned, but by provincial and national
              government, the private sector, communities and other
              stakeholders to rescue these municipalities. The Committee
              recognises that fundamental changes to municipal boundaries
              should be approached very cautiously. Boundary issues,
              moreover, should not be conflated with the many other issues
              affecting the viability of municipalities. But the Board might
              well have to reconsider the boundaries of these
              municipalities.


         4. The Committee also expressed its concern that there should be
              alignment between the Ministers "authorisations" of the four
              "national" powers and functions and the MECs "adjustments" of
              the remaining powers and functions, in the division between
              district and local municipalities. As the Board conducted the
              capacity assessments of municipalities on which the MECs based
              their decisions, the Committee feels that the Board can play a
              role in this regard.


      K.    National House of Traditional Leaders


         1. The National House of Traditional Leaders reported that the
              past financial year has not been a fruitful one because of the
              lack of progress on defining the powers and functions of
              traditional leaders.  The House also feels strongly that it
              should be funded to establish a permanent chamber in Cape Town
              to be near parliament so that it can participate effectively
              in legislation and policies affecting traditional leaders.  It
              also believes that all policies and legislation affecting
              traditional leaders should be referred to the House, and
              legislative amendments should be effected to ensure this.


         2. The House repeated its call for greater  autonomy  and  to  have
              more control over its own budget.  It also reiterated that  it
              wants to be "de-linked" from the Department and relate instead
              to the Presidency,  since  its  concerns  and  activities  cut
              across all departments.


         3. The House stressed the need for the finalisation  of  the  White
              paper  and   legislation   on   traditional   leadership   and
              institutions as soon as possible.


         4. The Committee pointed out that all the issues raised by the
              House in the previous year's budget review were taken up with
              the Ministry and Department. The Minister had several
              discussions with the Chairperson on these issues and had
              written to him to explain how the issues are being addressed.
              The Committee indicated that it cannot prescribe to the
              President as to which Ministry the House should fall under and
              suggested that the House takes this matter up with the
              President. It also suggested that while the House is
              negotiating with the Minister and Department on establishing a
              chamber in Cape Town, it should consider appointing a Cape
              Town-based parliamentary liaison officer. In respect of
              legislation to make it compulsory for all policies and bills
              affecting traditional leadership and institutions to be
              referred to the House, the Committee suggested that this
              matter should be addressed through the White Paper process and
              the legislation to follow.


         5. The Committee noted that the report of the House was much
              better this year than last year, but it needed to be improved
              to meet the norms set out in the PFMA (Public Finance
              Management Act) and those defined for a parliamentary
              committee in its oversight role.


   L. Local Government, Water and  Related  Services  Sector  Education  and
        Training Authority


         1. The LGWSETA (Local Government, Water and Related Services
              Sector Education and Training Authority) undertook a review of
              the current SSP (Sector Skills Plan) at a cost of R2 500 000.
              The review was undertaken because the existing SSP was
              inadequate to address the needs of the sector.  It was also
              not researched in great depth and lacked a "strategic analysis
              of the sector needs in respect of sector labour market
              economics".


         2. The LGWSETA stated that only 102 municipalities have submitted
              their WSPs ( Workshop Skills Plans).
         3. The LGWSETA further stated that it has not disbursed the R90
              000 000 levy contributed by employers.  This is because
              municipalities did not register  or submit WSPs to LGWSETA or
              failed to implement their WSPs.


         4. The Committee referred to its recent study tour of
              municipalities that revealed that the LGWSETA is not being
              effective. The Committee recognises that SETAs in general are
              not performing well, but stressed the vital role the LGWSETA
              has in the consolidation of the new system of local
              government. While acknowledging that the LGWSETA alone canoe
              be held solely responsible, the Committee expressed alarm
              about its failure to spend the R90 000 000 levy from
              employers.  The Committee is also aware of the perennial
              crisis of leadership in the LGWSETA and hopes that the
              appointment of a new CEO and the election of a new leadership
              will mean that the LGWSETA finally begins to become effective.
              For the past three years, the Committee has stressed its
              dissatisfaction with LGWSETA's performance. While recognising
              the independence of the LGWSETA, the Committee urges the
              Department to play a more active role in ensuring that the
              LGWSETA functions more effectively.  The Committee will pursue
              its concerns about the LGWSETA at the workshop set for 14 May.


     M.     Conclusion


         1. The Democratic Alliance has  expressed  its  reservations  about
              voting for this budget.


         2. The Department's presentations were much clearer and more
              directed and focused this year than previous years. The
              Committee welcomes this.
         3. The reports from SALGA, the National House of Traditional
              Leaders and LGWSETA do not meet the norms of the PFMA and
              those of the oversight role of a parliamentary committee. The
              Committee needs to discuss this with the Budget Committee of
              parliament and further pursue with it the request the
              Portfolio Committee raised that the Budget Committee should
              provide statutory bodies guidelines on the preparation of
              reports for portfolio committee budget hearings.


         4. The Committee also needs to improve its capacity to more
              effectively undertake its oversight role in respect of the
              budget. This matter should also be raised with the Budget
              Committee.


         5. The Committee also needs to play a part in the processing of
              the Division of Revenue Act and needs to pursue this further
              with the Finance Portfolio Committee and the Budget Committee.


         6. The Committee expresses its appreciation to the Ministry,
              Department and statutory bodies for their co-operation in the
              budget hearings.


         7. The Committee acknowledges the contribution of Mr C. Sibanyoni
              from the parliamentary research unit in the preparation of
              this report and expresses its appreciation.

