---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol42 - FRIDAY 2 FEBRUARY 1973'
layout: debate
year: 1973
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 2ND FEBRUARY, 1973</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER and members met in the Assembly Chamber of the House of Assembly, Cape Town, at 10.30 a.m.</p>

<p>By direction of Mr. Speaker,</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 13th June, 1972, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No. 151, 1972.]</p>

<block name="quote">Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday, the Second day of February, 1973, and I declare that the Fourth Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</block>

<block name="quote">Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Cape Town on this Thirteenth day of June One thousand Nine hundred and Seventy-two.</block>

<p>J. J. FOUCH&#x00C9;, State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council.</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess vacancies had occurred in the representation in this House of the following electoral divisions:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Klip River, owing to the resignation with effect from 1st August, 1972, of the Hon. T. J. A. Gerdener;</li>

<li>(2) Caledon, owing to the resignation with effect from 23rd August, 1972, of the Hon. F. W. Waring;</li>

<li><span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0015"/>(3) Johannesburg West, owing to the resignation with effect from 23rd August, 1972, of Dr. the Hon. C. de Wet;</li>

<li>(4) Vereeniging, owing to the resignation with effect from 23rd August, 1972, of the Hon. B. Coetzee;</li>

<li>(5) Wakkerstroom, owing to the resignation with effect from 23rd August, 1972, of the Hon. H. E. Martins;</li>

<li>(6) Malmesbury, owing to the nomination of Mr. J. W. van Staden as a member of the Senate with effect from 23rd August, 1972; and</li>

<li>(7) Colesberg, owing to the resignation with effect from 27th January, 1973, of Mr. M. J. de la R. Venter.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced further that the following vacancies had been filled during the recess:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Caledon, on 8th November, 1972, by the election of Dr. L. A. P. A. Munnik;</li>

<li>(2) Malmesbury, on 8th November, 1972, by the election of Mr. E. Louw;</li>

<li>(3) Johannesburg West, on 29th November, 1972, by the election of Mr. D. J. de Villiers;</li>

<li>(4) Klip River, on 29th November, 1972, by the election of Mr. V. A. Volker;</li>

<li>(5) Vereeniging, on 29th November, 1972, by the election of Mr. F. W. de Klerk; and</li>

<li>(6) Wakkerstroom, on 29th November, 1972, by the election of Mr. W. L. Weber.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>Mr. F. W. de Klerk, Mr. D. J. de Villiers and Mr. W. L. Weber introduced by Mr. J. E. Potgieter and Mr. G. P. van den Berg made, and subscribed, the oath and took their seats.</p>

<p>Mr. E. Louw and Dr. L. A. P. A. Munnik introduced by Dr. W. L. D. M. Venter and Mr. S. F. Kotz&#x00E9; made, and subscribed, the oath and took their seats.</p>

<p>Mr. V. A. Volker, introduced by Mr. P. C. Roux and Mr. J. P. C. le Roux made, and subscribed, the oath and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that a letter had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, stating that the State President would open Parliament at 11 o&#x2019;clock a.m. today in the Senate Chamber.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER and members proceeded to the Senate Chamber to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_presidents_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the Fourth Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">*During 1972 there were signs of a more relaxed atmosphere in relations between the countries of the Western world and the communist bloc. Although South Africa, as a peace-loving country, welcomes these signs, it is not inappropriate to warn against over-complacency. These new trends in no way mean that communism has suspended its subversive activities. We hope that the peoples and leaders of the Free World will not relax their vigilance.</block>

<p>Efforts are being continued to improve relations with our neighbour states, as well as with other countries in Africa. South Africa will continue to pursue its <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0016"/>policy of economic and technical co-operation. Although, as a result of circumstances beyond our control, we have had a setback in one case, the bonds with certain other African states have been strengthened.</p>

<p>Recently, for instance, there has been an important development in the field of tourism. An International Tourist Council for Southern Africa, comprising South Africa, Portugal, Malawi, Swaziland and Mauritius, has been established to promote and co-ordinate tourism in Southern Africa. The Ministers of Tourism concerned will meet shortly to bring the agreement into effect.</p>

<p>On the other hand, the past year was marked by, among other things, an alarming increase in violence and terrorism in different forms, in various parts of the world, and in most cases with a political objective. This terrorism with all the misery and suffering it causes, has horrified the civilized world. South Africa, which is also a target in this campaign, strongly supported the initiative taken in the United Nations to combat terrorism. Together with many other responsible countries we deplore the delaying tactics of those who have wrecked this effort. We shall welcome any further attempts at constructive international action.</p>

<p>It is in the interests of the whole of Africa&#x2014;especially Southern Africa&#x2014;that the current tense situation which has arisen from terrorist activity from Zambia should return to normal. Only if the principle of peaceful coexistence becomes a reality, can economic growth and social well-being be achieved to the benefit of all the inhabitants of this subcontinent.</p>

<p>If, after all our efforts and those of others as well, this should prove to be impossible, the Government could not be blamed if it were to take more active steps to protect the lives and property of our people and our territorial integrity.</p>

<p>The earlier contact between the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Government led to further discussions on South-West Africa with the Secretary-General&#x2019;s personal representative towards the end of 1972. A basis for the continuation of consultation is embodied in Dr. Escher&#x2019;s report, and South Africa remains willing to continue with the exchange of views within that framework.</p>

<p>Without any aggressive designs, we are making satisfactory progress with the expansion of the South African Defence Force, and during the past decade we have made exceptional progress in the field of armaments manufacture. We have no desire, however, to threaten others, nor do we want to conquer or to occupy any territory. The military strength to defend ourselves should on the one hand ensure that we do not become the victim of blackmail or rash aggression, and on the other hand serve as a guarantee of stability which is indispensable for progress in every other sphere of life.</p>

<p>The continued peace and good order we enjoy here is largely due to the exceptionally effective action of the South African security forces. Unfortunately subversive forces are continuing their attempts to undermine South Africa&#x2019;s security. It is not so much the local subversive elements and organizers who are responsible, as intensive organization by hostile elements operating from abroad, and well-known expatriate South African communists, as was proved in recent cases in our criminal courts.</p>

<p>The fact that the World Council of Churches and other bodies are giving financial and moral aid to terrorists, thereby furthering violence and the shedding of innocent blood, cannot be too strongly condemned.</p>

<p>The Government extends its condolences to the next of kin of the members of the South African Police who were the victims of attacks by terrorists, and trusts that those who have been injured will soon recover.</p>

<p>The present trends of personal contact, negotiation and dialogue between world leaders has underlined the necessity for an effective and dynamic information service. Consequently it has been decided to place the structure of the country&#x2019;s information service on a more streamlined functional basis. The necessary adaptations have been made during the past few months. In addition, progress is being made with the review of priorities, methods and techniques required to keep pace with the changed international circumstances.</p>

<p><span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0017"/>The events of the past year in the field of international finance were of considerable importance to South Africa. When the British authorities decided, in June, 1972, to allow the pound sterling to float, the Government deemed it inadvisable at that stage to permit the rand to appreciate in value against sterling, and it was therefore decided to allow the rand temporarily to float with sterling. By October, 1972, however, conditions had so changed that the Government decided to terminate the floating of the rand and to fix a new par value, equivalent to an official gold price of R29-75 per fine ounce.</p>

<p>Clearly, the stability of the international financial system still leaves much to be desired. A Committee of the Governors of the International Monetary Fund is at present considering the reform of this system. South Africa is represented on this Committee and will endeavour to make a positive contribution to its deliberations.</p>

<p>The substantial improvement in South Africa&#x2019;s balance of payments since the beginning of 1972, which was due to a notable increase in exports as well as a decline in imports and a continued inflow of foreign capital, resulted in an increase of approximately R430 million in the Republic&#x2019;s gold and other foreign reserves over the year and in certain relaxations being made possible in import restrictions.</p>

<p>The improvement in the balance of payments, as well as other factors, created a favourable climate for more rapid economic growth. Although clear signs of a recovery could be discerned in many sectors of the economy, the general rate of growth of the economy remained somewhat sluggish, and the authorities accordingly took certain steps to stimulate the economy moderately, <i>inter alia,</i> by relaxing credit restrictions and reducing certain sales duties. The incentive measures introduced are expected to accelerate the country&#x2019;s economic growth rate. The Government is keeping a close watch on the situation and will from time to time take the steps required by circumstances.</p>

<p>Inflation remains a serious problem and in nearly all countries, including South Africa, prices increased at a substantial rate during the past year. In South Africa this increase was largely due to price rises in other countries, to the devaluation of the rand, and to unusual increases in the prices of certain types of foodstuffs. The Government will, however, continue its fight against inflation.</p>

<p>During 1972 an important change also occurred in the foreign trade sector. The difficulties experienced in granting protection to certain local industrialists on account of South Africa&#x2019;s obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade have already been investigated and the necessary steps are being taken to overcome these difficulties.</p>

<p>As a result of the United Kingdom&#x2019;s accession to the enlarged European Economic Community on the 1st January, 1973, some export industries will gradually lose the preferential treatment which they had enjoyed for many years in the British market. While the devaluation of the rand will to some extent alleviate the anticipated harmful effects of these developments on the South African economy, the Government is doing its utmost to negotiate the best possible terms of entry into the enlarged Community for our exports.</p>

<p>Exports are playing an increasingly important role in the economic welfare of the country. Much attention is, therefore, being devoted to the promotion of the Republic&#x2019;s export trade, as is also evidenced by the fact that a Commission of Inquiry into the Export Trade of South Africa was appointed in July, 1971. This Commission has already submitted its report to the Government, as a result of which certain additional export promotional measures have been introduced. The other findings and recommendations of the Commission will receive attention during the present session of Parliament.</p>

<p>In the development of South African industry, decentralization is still one of the most important objectives of Government policy. The creation of employment in decentralized areas, especially in and near the Bantu homelands, is of vital importance. In this regard the manufacturing sector undoubtedly plays an important role, since it is this branch of the South African economy which can and must give impetus to the development of decentralized areas. An earnest appeal is made to industrialists for still greater co-operation in the pursuit of this important objective.</p>

<p><span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0018"/>Although the revenue from gold sales in 1972 increased by 30 per cent as a result of the higher price of gold, there was a slight drop in gold production due to the mining of lower grade ore. Although State aid was granted to 20 gold mines, the total amount paid out was a good deal lower than in 1971.</p>

<p>Agreements entered into in view of the proposed use of platinum group metals for combating air pollution have led to a strong revival in the platinum mining industry. The demand for diamonds as well as for certain base minerals has risen sharply.</p>

<p>The pilot plant for the extraction of uranium by the Atomic Energy Board&#x2019;s own process has demonstrated beyond doubt the feasibility and advantages of that process. A method developed by the Board to apply nuclear radiation for upgrading the quality and durability of South African timber is arousing great interest in the industry.</p>

<p>The search for natural oil in the sea is being continued with determination.</p>

<p>The Government continues to treat the better utilization of the country&#x2019;s most important water resources as a top priority.</p>

<p>Construction work on the Tugela-Vaal Scheme is being speeded up, so that the pumping of water over the escarpment can be expected to commence in February, 1974. The final break-through in the Orange-Fish Tunnel is due to take place shortly, and good progress is being made with the work on the P. K. le Roux Dam. The Water Research Commission has practically completed its first major task, namely the collection of particulars on water research being done in this country. Although the first licence and permit for the artificial modification of weather conditions were issued in October, 1972, a warning should be sounded against over-optimism since weather modification is still in the experimental stage.</p>

<p>During the summer of 1971-&#x2019;72 climatic conditions were exceptionally favourable and field crop production reached bumper levels. Pasture conditions and the fodder position improved to such an extent that almost all districts could be removed from the pasturage distress list. The outlook for agricultural production has, however, become considerably less favourable during the present season as a result of a scorching, country-wide heat-wave accompanied by drought conditions. Grain crops in the summer rainfall areas have been dealt a severe blow and pasture conditions in the extensive-grazing regions are giving rise to grave concern. In fact, it has become necessary to place certain areas on the pasturage distress list again.</p>

<p>It is the Government&#x2019;s earnest endeavour to maintain our vulnerable agricultural resources in good productive condition. Satisfactory progress is being made with the long-term project of determining our agricultural potential according to soil and climatic factors. A comprehensive research programme is being carried out, and really outstanding successes have been and are being achieved.</p>

<p>The Republic of South Africa is one of the 21 countries, and the only one in Africa, to which the European Community has granted equivalence for the different categories of certified seeds. This means that our certification of seed is considered to be up to international standards, which should promote the exportation of our seed to countries belonging to the European Community.</p>

<p>Our programme of agricultural technical aid in certain African states is yielding encouraging results and also promoting international co-operation.</p>

<p>From a financial point of view 1972 was a very good year for agriculture as a whole. Good summer and winter crops were harvested, and higher incomes were derived from the marketing of vegetables and certain kinds of fruit. The demand for meat was at a high level and good prices were realized. There was a considerable improvement in the wool and mohair market, and karakul pelts fetched record prices. The prospects for 1973 are, however, not so bright as far as agricultural production in general is concerned.</p>

<p>The Government is continuing its policy of providing credit on a continuous basis for farmers who have to turn to the State for credit facilities, The steady rise in the prices of land, agricultural machinery and means of production is, however, a factor that complicates matters when it comes to considering applications for assistance. It is necessary to ensure a sound ratio between the burden of debt and the productive <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0019"/>potential of the enterprise at all times.</p>

<p>A committee of experts is exploring the possibility of a uniform approach and procedure in the acquisition of fixed property for Government purposes.</p>

<p>&#x2020; The rate of expansion of commercial afforestation to provide for our future timber needs is disquietingly slow. It is hoped that the report of an interdepartmental committee set up to indicate priority areas for afforestation will serve as a blueprint for future development.</p>

<p>Because of the State&#x2019;s active participation in the forestry and timber industries the early establishment of a statutory council has become essential to ensure the closest possible co-operation between the public and private sectors and to promote forestry in general, including research.</p>

<p>The Government welcomes the &#x201C;Our Green Heritage&#x201D; campaign which will be launched by the private forestry sector this year to make the public more alive to the importance of trees.</p>

<p>The past year was marked by considerable activity in connection with the consolidation of the Bantu homelands and their continued constitutional development. This year several more homelands will become self-governing areas within the Republic and will hold general elections for the first time. The Transkei is soon to establish its own Supreme Court.</p>

<p>The Government is of opinion that it should now be made possible for the Bantu homelands to obtain funds, on certain conditions, from other sources in addition to Government sources for development purposes. This system of additional financing, which will involve the Governments of Bantu homelands more than in the past, may make it necessary to review the existing system of corporations.</p>

<p>In order to bring university education within easier reach of a greater number of students the Bantu universities will be authorized to extend their services to other homeland centres.</p>

<p>Indian education in general has shown exceptional growth at all levels in recent years. The high-school population has more than doubled over the last ten years, and today approximately 98 per cent of the potential Indian school-going population are attending school. The four-category system of differential education has been introduced from this year.</p>

<p>The Coloured and Indian communities will in the near future enjoy a more meaningful share in the control and administration of their respective universities. The advisory councils and advisory senates will be abolished. Indians will be given direct representation on the Council and the Senate of the University of Durban-Westville when the term of office of the present members expires. In the case of the University of the Western Cape, vacancies have already occurred and two leading members of the Coloured community have been appointed to the Council with effect from the 1st January, 1973.</p>

<p>The Government has decided to appoint a commission of inquiry to make a thorough evaluation of the socio-economic and constitutional progress of the Coloured people during the past decade, to examine the present position and to make recommendations for their future development. This Commission will consist of White and Coloured experts and its composition will shortly be announced by the Minister of Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs.</p>

<p>In spite of a slight increase, the number of registered unemployed in 1972 was still less than one per cent of the number of persons employed. By international standards, therefore, the Republic continues to enjoy a state of full employment. The shortage of certain categories of skilled labour is receiving the attention of all concerned, and a Manpower Survey completed during the past year will be tabled during this session.</p>

<p>Man&#x2019;s sudden awakening to his relationship with his environment is undoubtedly one of the striking phenomena of our time. It can be claimed with some measure of justification that the environmental problems of mankind in their widest sense are approaching a critical point, and appeals are being made from all quarters for a closer study of these issues.</p>

<p>The root causes of environmental problems are to be found in the increase in population, greater demands on the soil, sea and air, damage to the physical <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0020"/>environment, and pollution itself. It is hardly surprising that the first countries to become alive to these problems, especially pollution, should be the industrialized countries of Western Europe and North America. The United Nations decided at its Twenty-third Session in 1968 that it was desirable to hold an international conference on the human environment. This led to the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, which was held in Stockholm in June of last year and at which South Africa was duly represented. In these matters the aim should be to achieve an effective balance between the economic, the ecological, the social and political, the technical and the physical features of the country. Fundamental to this is proper, sound and purposeful physical planning in the use of the environment. With continuing emphasis on economic development, more stress will have to be laid on future planning. In the opening address to Parliament last year reference was made to these aims when attention was drawn to a national development plan that was being prepared.</p>

<p>The Department of Planning will henceforth be known as the Department of Planning and the Environment, will be responsible for overall co-ordination and will attend to both the positive and negative aspects of environmental problems. The intention is to ensure co-ordination, to identify spheres of action and research, and to solve the problems of organizations concerned in the matter.</p>

<p>In this task the Minister of Planning and the Environment will be assisted by a Cabinet Committee on which will serve the Ministers of Transport, Economic Affairs, Water Affairs, Agriculture and Health.</p>

<p>A South African Committee on Environmental Conservation on which various Government departments, semi-Government bodies, provincial administrations, the C.S.I.R., etc., are represented, has been created to advise the Cabinet Committee.</p>

<p>It is also gratifying to find so many private bodies taking an interest in the problems of conservation and the improvement of our habitat, and the Government would like to express its appreciation for their work. Ways are being devised of enlisting their active assistance in this important matter.</p>

<p>Specific proposals to combat the increasing problem of air pollution more effectively will be laid before Parliament during the session.</p>

<p>The controversial question of abortion will receive attention during this session. Before Parliament makes any decision on the principles involved, all interested parties will be given an opportunity of expressing their views on the subject.</p>

<p>There is a great demand for more dwelling-units, especially in the middle income group. The Government&#x2019;s purposeful efforts have, however, prevented the development of a real shortage of housing for the lower income groups. Local authorities have again made use of the means made available to them by the Government and have fulfilled their function in regard to housing most commendably. The R54 million which was appropriated for the National Housing Fund for the 1971-&#x2019;72 financial year, plus the repaid capital of R14 million, was spent in full.</p>

<p>The existing Government Villages Act, 1950, is obsolete. The original aim was to make provision for ex-volunteers of the last world war, but few, if any, ex-servicemen are still living in the villages. It is therefore intended to propose an amendment to the Act.</p>

<p>Impressive progress has been made with various urban renewal projects.</p>

<p>Now that the portion of the Cape Flats known as Mitchell&#x2019;s Plain has been proclaimed a group area for the Coloured community, the authorities will proceed with the acquisition of the necessary land and the planning of an extensive housing scheme which will house approximately 250 000 Coloureds.</p>

<p>The people of the Republic are noted for their generous support of welfare and other worthy public causes, and an appreciable amount of money is collected from the public every year for a wide variety of purposes in the Republic as well as abroad. Although the readiness of our people to serve the interests of their fellow-men is commendable, there is, unfortunately, reason to believe that existing legislation is inadequate to safeguard the public against exploitation by organizations which are entering the fund-raising field in increasing numbers, but are not registered welfare organizations or subject to statutory control. The whole matter is being investigated.</p>

<p><span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0021"/>During and after the periods of student unrest at some of our universities in 1972 various Government spokesmen and members of the public called for steps to prevent the disruption of normal academic functions. In view of this the Commission of Inquiry into Universities in November, 1972, submitted, on request, an interim report on the non-academic activities of students. This report, together with the findings of the Commission of Inquiry into the affairs of, <i>inter alia,</i> Nusas, which will become available during the session, will enable the Government to consider the measures recommended and to take whatever steps are deemed necessary.</p>

<p>The issuing of identity documents began on the 1st February, 1972. The great demand shows that this document is popular with the general public. In the initial stages practical problems caused some delay and the issuing of documents had to be limited to certain essential categories. Most of these problems have now been solved, and the project is at present progressing satisfactorily.</p>

<p>Arising from a report of an interdepartmental committee submitted last year, a bill to amend the Publications and Entertainments Act, 1963, will be introduced this session.</p>

<p>A general registration of White voters commenced on the 24th July, 1972, and was concluded on the 5th September, 1972. The new voters&#x2019; rolls have already been supplied to all political parties and have come into operation. Later this year the Government will appoint a Commission for the redelimitation of constituencies.</p>

<p>With a view to greater uniformity in the entry and departure arrangements for aliens visiting South Africa for a temporary purpose, as well as better regulation of the labour market, the Government proposes to withdraw certain exemptions granted in terms of the Aliens Act, 1937.</p>

<p>The year 1972 was a very active one as far as the participation of South Africans in sport at both the national and the international level, is concerned. Despite the so-called isolation in sport which was given much prominence in certain local and overseas newspapers, visits to South Africa by overseas sports teams and individual representatives of different kinds of sport, totalled 47 in 1972, involving more than 600 participants from 35 different countries.</p>

<p>During the same period, 300 South Africans participated in 21 different overseas countries on 55 occasions. These statistics exclude professional sport.</p>

<p>An important milestone will be reached when the Open International Games take place in Pretoria in the near future. A large number of overseas competitors will take part.</p>

<p>Apart from participation in competitive sport at both the international and the national level, much has been done through a wide range of sporting and recreational activities to make the South African nation aware of the value of physical fitness.</p>

<p>The Public Service Commission is continuing to make a concerted effort to increase productivity and to promote efficiency. The Government would like to express its appreciation to the efficient and dedicated body of public servants for their loyal services, often in the face of unjustified and ill-founded criticism.</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</p>

<p>I now declare this the Fourth Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1973-02-02T11:46:00">11.46 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

