---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol28 - FRIDAY 27 FEBRUARY 1970'
layout: debate
year: 1970
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 27TH FEBRUARY, 1970</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Prayers&#x2014; <recordedTime time="1970-02-27T10:05:00">10.05 a.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS</heading>

<p><i>For oral reply:</i></p>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Application for visa received from Japanese jockey Seuo Masazawa</heading>

<question by="#fisher" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>*1.</num>

<from>Dr. E. L. FISHER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether an application for a visa to enter the Republic was received from Seuo Masazawa; if so, what is this person&#x2019;s (a) nationality and (b) profession or occupation;</li>

<li>(2) whether this person was invited to the Republic; if so, (a) by whom and (b) for what purpose;</li>

<li>(3) whether the visa was granted; if not, why not.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#fisher">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.

<ol>

<li>(a) Japanese</li>

<li>(b) Jockey</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2) Yes.

<ol>

<li>(a) Germiston Sporting Club</li>

<li>(b) To take part in horse racing at Benoni and Pietermaritzburg.</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(3) Yes.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Postponement of national service granted to American Field Service students</heading>

<question by="#stofberg" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>*2.</num>

<from>Mr. L. F. STOFBERG (for Dr. A. Hertzog)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a postponement of national service has been granted to persons proceeding to the United States of America under the American Field Service scheme; if so, to how many persons in each year since 1965;</li>

<li>(2) whether the exchange scheme of the American Field Service is for this purpose recognized as a study course.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#stofberg">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>(1) and (2). It is the policy to postpone the national service of national servicemen who wish to attend study courses abroad until completion of such courses, to enable them to do so. As the exchange scheme of the American Field Service in fact entails a study course this policy is also applicable thereto. Since 1965 postponement of national service was granted to the following numbers of national servicemen for the attendance of such courses:</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>1965</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2026; 15</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1966</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2026; 1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1967</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2026; 2</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1968</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2026; 16</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1969</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2026; 29</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1970</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2026; No applications have thus far been received.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_2077-2078" refersTo="page_1053"/>Indian and Bantu persons removed from Coloured areas</heading>

<question by="#stofberg" to="#minister_of_community_development">

<num>*3.</num>

<from>Mr. L. F. STOFBERG (for Dr. A. Hertzog)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Community Development:</p>

<p>Whether he has taken any steps (a) to remove from Coloured areas Indian and Bantu persons who profess to be Coloured persons and (b) to prohibit such persons from occupying houses intended for Coloured persons; if so, what steps.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_community_development" to="#stofberg">

<from>The MINISTER OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:</from>

<ol>

<li>(a) and (b) Yes, in so far as Indians are concerned since I am not responsible for the resettlement of Bantu. Disqualified persons occupying in Coloured group areas are, in terms of the Group Areas Act, 1966, resettled as soon as possible. Disqualified persons are not allowed to settle in Coloured areas.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Publication of industrial agreements; registration of industrial councils; registration of amendments to trade union constitutions, etc.</heading>

<question by="#hopewell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>*4</num>

<from>Mr. A. HOPEWELL (for Mr. S. J. M. Steyn)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) What is the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period required to publish an industrial agreement in the <i>Government Gazette</i> once the parties have agreed on the new conditions of employment that are to apply and (b) what has been the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period during the past year;</li>

<li>(2) whether any instances have come to his notice where delays in his Department in this connection have resulted in loss of income to workers;</li>

<li>(3) (a) what is the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period required to register an industrial council once the parties concerned have submitted their application to establish such a council and (b) what has been the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period during the past year;</li>

<li>(4) (a) what is the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period required by the Industrial Registrar to register amendments to Lade union constitutions and (b) what has been the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period during the past year;</li>

<li>(5) (a) what is the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period required by the Industrial Registrar to grant an application for variation of scope by (aa) a trade union, (bb) an employer&#x2019;s organization and (cc) an industrial council and (b) what has been the (i) shortest and (ii) longest period during the past year in each case.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#deputy_minister_of_finance" to="#hopewell">

<from>The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Labour):</from>

<ol>

<li>(1)

<ol>

<li>(a) When the parties to an Industrial Council have agreed upon new conditions of employment, the first step is for the Council to reduce the agreement to writing and to submit a draft copy to the Department for scrutiny. Agreements are dealt with by the Department in the order in which they are received and the time which has to be devoted to an agreement depends on a number of factors such as the size of the agreement, drafting deficiencies, noncompliance with standing departmental requirements, overlaps with other agreements, etc. The Department&#x2019;s comments are transmitted to the Industrial Council as soon as possible and the Department can take no further action until the final documents are received back from the council. It is not possible therefore to say what is the shortest or longest period required to effect publication in the <i>Gazette</i> after the parties have agreed upon new conditions.</li>

<li>(b) I regret that the time allowed by the hon. member for a reply to this question and also questions (3) (b), (4) (b) and (5) (b) did not permit of the extraction of the desired particulars which involves the examination of a large number of files relating to industrial councils, trade unions and employers organizations.</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2) No. The parties normally agree to implement improved conditions from a date prior to publication of the agreement.</li>

<li>(3) (a) Application, for the registration of industrial councils must be published for objections and the period required to register a council depends largely on the objections which may be lodged.</li>

<li>(4) (a) The position here is similar to that outlined in reply to question (1) (a) relating to agreements.</li>

<li><span class="col_2079-2080" refersTo="page_1054"/>(5) (a) The reply to question (3) (a) is also applicable here.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Pollution of Durban Bay</heading>

<question by="#mitchell" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>*5.</num>

<from>Mr. M. L. MITCHELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Transport:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has caused any investigations to be made to determine the cause of the recent pollution of Durban Bay which resulted in the killing of marine life; if so, with what result;</li>

<li>(2) whether any representations have been received in connection with the matter; if so, (a) from whom, (b) what was the nature of the representations and (c) what was the reaction thereto;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Railways Administration proposes to take steps to ensure that it is not responsible for similar pollution in future; if so, what steps; if not, why not.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#deputy_minister_of_transport" to="#mitchell">

<from>The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, but the cause and source of the pollution have as yet not been established.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.

<ol>

<li>(a) Representatives of the Angling Union, the Parks Board and the Department of Water Affairs.</li>

<li>(b) To ascertain the cause of the pollution.</li>

<li>(c) Senior technical Officers of the Railways together with experts of the Durban Corporation and the Department of Water Affairs have investigated the matter extensively to determine the cause of the pollution,</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(3) The source of the pollution has not yet been established but the results of the investigation thus far indicate that the Railways are not responsible for the pollution.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Pollution of Durban Bay</heading>

<question by="#mitchell" to="#minister_of_water_affairs">

<num>*6.</num>

<from>Mr. M. L. MITCHELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Water Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the recent pollution of the sea in Durban Bay resulting in the killing of marine life;</li>

<li>(2) whether he proposes to take steps to prevent such pollution; if so, what steps; if not, why not.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_water_affairs" to="#mitchell">

<from>The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) The steps that are normally taken in terms of the Water Act as regards the prevention and control of pollution, are still being applied.</li>

</ol>

<p>[The following further reply was subsequently furnished in writing:</p>

<p>Matter investigated and investigation being continued with the purpose of trying to prevent a recurrence. Legal steps against pollution will be taken if it can be proved that pollution was in conflict with the provisions of the Water Act No. 54 of 1956.</p>

<p>The origin of the pollution has not been determined except that it appears to be the release of one or other unidentified substance, either poison or acid. If released by a ship it would not be a matter under the Water Act. Various Ships were investigated without success. The South African Railways appears to be innocent as well as other industrial instances which might have been responsible. The poison disappeared on the 24th February.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Presentation of medals to staff of prisons service at Pollsmoor, 24.2.1970</heading>

<question by="#hopewell" to="#minister_of_prisons">

<num>*7</num>

<from>Mr. A. HOPEWELL (for Mr. J. W. E. Wiley)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Prisons:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) What are the names of the guests of honour invited to the presentation of medals to staff of the prisons service at Pollsmoor on 24th February, 1970, and (b) in what capacity were they invited.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_prisons" to="#hopewell">

<from>The MINISTER OF PRISONS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(a) and (b):</li>

</ol>

<p>Mr. and Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley, M.P., Simonstown: Pollsmoor falls in Mr. Wiley&#x2019;s constituency.</p>

<p>Adv. and Mrs. L. Pienaar, M.P.C. Bellville: Three members stationed at <span class="col_2081-2082" refersTo="page_1055"/>Bellville prison which falls in Adv. Pienaar&#x2019;s constituency received medals. Adv. Pienaar is also a personal friend of one of the senior Officers who received a medal.</p>

<p>Brig, and Mrs. J. Fourie: Officer Commanding, Western Province Command, South African Defence Force.</p>

<p>Col. and Mrs. M. C. Lamprecht: Divisional Representative for the South African Police.</p>

<p>Mr. and Mrs. D. J. Visser: Regional Representative, Department of Information.</p>

<p>Dr. C. K. Edelstein: District Surgeon, Wynberg.</p>

<p>Dr. and Mrs. A. M. van Bergen: District Surgeon, Robben Island.</p>

<p>Mr. and Mrs. H. J. Bester: Manager of Volkskas, Wynberg. They are personal friends of one of the recipients.</p>

<p>Mr. and Mrs. P. Schreider: Principal, Swaanswyk High School.</p>

<p>Mr. and Mrs. M. Greeff: Principal, Kirstenhof Primary School.</p>

<p>Fourteen Officers and their wives from prison institutions in this area were present as guests at the Medal Parade.</p>

<p>Invitations were extended to the following guests of honour who were unable to attend but were represented by staff members.</p>

<p>Mr. P. Cillie: Die Burger.</p>

<p>Mr. W. McKenzie: The Argus.</p>

<p>Mr. J. Patten: The Argus.</p>

<p>Mr. A. Lake: Dagbreek.</p>

<p>Mr. V. Norton: Cape Times.</p>

<p>Mr. R. Norval: Cape Times.</p>

<p>Mr. A. Marais: Die Beeld.</p>

<p>Mr. P. van Niekerk: Die Burger.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Land required in Paarl area by Dept, of Community Development</heading>

<question by="#timoney" to="#minister_of_community_development">

<num>*8.</num>

<from>Mr. H. M. TIMONEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Community Development:</p>

<p>Whether his Department has recently acquired land in the Paarl area; if so, (a) to what extent, (b) where is the land situated, (c) what price was paid and (d) for what purpose was it acquired.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_community_development" to="#timoney">

<from>The MINISTER OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:</from>

<p>Yes, my Department negotiated for the purchase of several pieces of land. In respect of four of the pieces, agreements have been reached with the owners.</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>(a)</p></td>

<td><p>(b)</p></td>

<td><p>(c)</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Purchase price</p></td>

</tr>

<tr><td><p>(i)</p></td>

<td><p>148·4741 morgen</p></td>

<td rowspan="4"><p>All situated between Klapmuts and Paarl</p></td>

<td><p>R175,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr><td><p>(ii)</p></td>

<td><p>30·9876 morgen</p></td>

<td><p>R36,500</p></td>

</tr>

<tr><td><p>(iii)</p></td>

<td><p>Approximately 45 morgen (not yet surveyed)</p></td>

<td><p>R1,350 per morgen</p></td>

</tr>

<tr><td><p>(iv)</p></td>

<td><p>Approximately 21 morgen(not yet surveyed)</p></td>

<td><p>R1,304 per morgen</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol>

<li>(d) The land is favourably situated for future township development and is being purchased in terms of the policy that sufficient reserve land should be acquired at a reasonable price to provide for the future housing needs of the lower income groups.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<p><i>Replies standing over from Tuesday, 24th February, 1970</i></p>

<question by="#marais" to="#minister">

<num>*17. </num>

<from>Mr. J. A. Marais</from>

<p>&#x2014;Reply standing over further.</p>

</question>

<question by="#marais" to="#minister">

<num>*18. </num>

<from>Mr. J. A. Marais</from>

<p>&#x2014;Reply standing over further.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<p><i>For written reply</i>:</p>

<writtenStatements>

<question by="#wiley" to="#minister">

<num>1.</num>

<from>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley</from>

<p>&#x2014;Reply standing over.</p>

</question>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Old age pensions paid to Coloured persons</heading>

<question by="#wiley" to="#minister_of_coloured_affairs">

<num>2.</num>

<from>Mr. J. W. E. WILEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Coloured Affairs:</p>

<p>What total amount of old age pension was paid to Coloured persons in 1968 and 1969, respectively?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_coloured_affairs" to="#wiley">

<from>The MINISTER OF COLOURED AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>Republic:</p>

<p>1968 R9,129,471.71</p>

<p>1969 R10,563,540,02</p>

<p><span class="col_2083-2084" refersTo="page_1056"/>South West Africa:</p>

<p>1968 R169,366,00</p>

<p>1969 R175,478,00</p>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Old age pensions paid to Indians</heading>

<question by="#wiley" to="#minister_of_indian_affairs">

<num>3.</num>

<from>Mr. J. W. E. WILEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Indian Affairs:</p>

<p>What total amount of old age pension was paid to Indians in 1968 and 1969, respectively.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_indian_affairs" to="#wiley">

<from>The MINISTER OF INDIAN AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>1968 R1,172,924</p>

<p>1969 R1,288,730</p>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Old age pensions paid to Bantu persons</heading>

<question by="#wiley" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<num>4.</num>

<from>Mr. J. W. E. WILEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Bantu Administration and Development:</p>

<p>What total amount of old age pension was paid to Bantu persons in 1958, 1968 and 1969, respectively.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development" to="#wiley">

<from>The MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT:</from>

<p>1958/1959 R7,388,000</p>

<p>1968/1969 R10,489,000</p>

<p>1969/1970 R10,489,000 (as estimated)</p>

</answer>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister">

<num>5.</num>

<from>Mr. L. F. Wood</from>

<p>&#x2014;Reply standing over.</p>

</question>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Commercial films made by production companies in S.A.</heading>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister_of_economic_affairs">

<num>6.</num>

<from>Mr. L. F. WOOD</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Economic Affairs:</p>

<p>How many feet of commercial film were made by production companies in South Africa during 1969.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_economic_affairs" to="#wood">

<from>The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>According to available information approximately 91,000 feet in respect of feature films qualifying for subsidy. Information on commercial films produced in South Africa but not qualifying for subsidy is not available.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister_of_economic_affairs">

<num>7.</num>

<from>Mr. L. F. Wood</from>

<p>&#x2014;Reply standing over.</p>

</question>

</writtenStatements>

<p><i>Replies standing over from Tuesday, 24th February, 1970</i></p>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Application for visa for correspondent of Los Angeles Times</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS replied to Question 12, by Mrs. H. Suzman:</p>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_foreign_affairs">

<p><b>Question:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether an application for a visa for a correspondent of the <i>Los Angeles Times</i> was submitted to the Offices of (a) the South African Embassy in Washington or (b) any South African consulate in the United States of America during 1969; if so, (i) which Offices, (ii) on what date and (iii) on what date was the application referred to the Department of the Interior;</li>

<li>(2) whether there was any delay in referring the application to the Department of the Interior; if so, what was the (a) period of and (b) reason for the delay.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_foreign_affairs" to="#suzman">

<p><b>Reply:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>(1)

<ol>

<li>(a) Yes.</li>

<li>(b) No.

<ol>

<li>(i) South African Embassy Washington.</li>

<li>(ii) On or about 7th November 1969.</li>

<li>(iii) 10th February 1970.</li>

</ol></li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2) (a) and (b) The matter was submitted to the Department of the Interior two or three days after the receipt of final comment from the instances consulted.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Police agent X54</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF POLICE replied to Question 17, by Mrs. H. Suzman:</p>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_police">

<p><b>Question:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the judge&#x2019;s comment on the credibility of a police agent referred to as X54 in the trial of 21 Bantu on a charge of sabotage in the Supreme Court, Cape Town, during 1968-&#x2019;69 has been brought to his notice;</li>

<li><span class="col_2085-2086" refersTo="page_1057"/>(2) whether steps have been taken or are to be taken to prosecute this person on a charge of perjury; if not, why not;</li>

<li>(3) whether this person&#x2019;s services as a police agent have been terminated; if so, on what date; if not, why not.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_police" to="#suzman">

<p><b>Reply:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) No, because if a judicial Officer has doubts about the credibility of a witness in any particular case, it does not necessarily follow that such a witness has committed perjury.</li>

<li>(3) It would be prejudicial to the safety or interests of the Republic to disclose the required information concerning a police or security matter.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Relief measures taken i.r.o. drought in Transkei</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT replied to Question 18, by Mrs. H. Suzman:</p>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<from>Question:</from>

<p>Whether special relief measures have been taken to counter the effects of drought in the Transkei; if so, (a) what measures and (b) what was the cost involved in each year that these measures have been in operation.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development" to="#suzman">

<p><b>Reply:</b></p>

<p>Yes, by the Transkei Government, as follows:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) 12,050 units are employed daily on relief works.

<p>300,0 childern are provided with supplementary foods.</p>

<p>The ploughing of land is subsidised.</p>

<p>Stockfeed is provided.</p>

<p>Stock is transported to other areas where grazing is available.</p></li>

<li>(b) 1968/1969 R783,000

<p>1969/1970 R1,209,000</p>

</li>

</ol>

<p>Other expenditure has also been incurred but this is not identifiable with the relief measures.</p>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Pension increase for Bantu social pensioners</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT replied to Question 28. by Mr. G. N. Oldfield:</p>

<question by="#oldfield" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<p><b>Question:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether Bantu social pensioners are to receive an increase in pension; if so, (a) from what date and (b) to what extent;</li>

<li>(2) what will be the maximum (a) old age pension, (b) blind person&#x2019;s pension and (c) disability grant as from that date.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development" to="#oldfield">

<p><b>Reply:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.

<ol>

<li>(a) 1 April 1970.</li>

<li>(b) An increase of 50c per month per pensioner.</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2) (a), (b) and (c) R5.00 per month.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Amendment of means plus pension limitation i.r.o. Bantu persons</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT replied to Question 29, by Mr. G. N. Oldfield:</p>

<question by="#oldfield" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<p><b>Question:</b></p>

<p>Whether the means plus pension limitation in respect of the payment of social pensions * to Bantu persons is to be amended; if so, (a) from what date and (b) to what extent.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development" to="#oldfield">

<p><b>Reply:</b></p>

<p>Yes.</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) 1 April 1970.</li>

<li>(b) This matter is still receiving attention.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

<writtenStatements>

<heading>Bantu persons in receipt of pensions and disability grants</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT replied to Question 30, by Mr. G. N. Oldfield:</p>

<question by="#oldfield" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<from>Question:</from>

<p>How many Bantu persons are receiving</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) old age pension, (b) blind person&#x2019;s pension and (c) disability grants.</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development" to="#oldfield">

<p><span class="col_2087-2088" refersTo="page_1058"/><b>Reply:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>(a) 272,579</li>

<li>(b) 12,150</li>

<li>(c) 66,677</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</writtenStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#second_bantu_laws_amendment_bill">

<heading>SECOND BANTU LAWS AMENDMENT BILL</heading>

<summary>(Second Reading)</summary>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, unfortunately there was a misunderstanding on the importance of this Bill, and I want to avail myself of this opportunity to convey to the hon. the Leader of the House, as well as to the Opposition, my sincere gratitude for their having given us this opportunity of proceeding with this Bill at this late stage of the Session. I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a Second Time.</block>

<p>To start with I want to point out that the various provisions of this Bill are aimed at either bridging problems which are being experienced in practice in the application of certain existing statutory provisions, or of adjusting existing statutory provisions in subsequent legislation or to make provision for altered circumstances which have resulted from existing legislation. There are in fact no principles in the legislation which are not in line with existing legislation, and I therefore trust that both sides of this House will see their way clear to accepting the Bill in its present form without any hesitation.</p>

<p>Although the various provisions of the Bill have already been explained in the explanatory memorandum which has been laid upon the Table. I nevertheless want to elucidate the Bill further for the information of hon. members.</p>

<p><i>Clause 1</i></p>

<p>In clause 1 we are dealing with a problem which originated with the establishment of the South African Bantu Trust.</p>

<p>Since the Trust was established its books and accounts have been audited by the Controller and Auditor-General. Prior to 1949, this audit took place in terms of regulations under the Trust and Land Act, but this arrangement was formerly authorized in that year by the insertion of section 9<i>bis</i> in the Act. <i>Inter alia</i>, this section requires that a balance sheet be submitted. I am no auditor, but hon. members who have specialized in that direction know that a balance sheet must indicate the actual assets. Now, however, we are faced with the following position, namely: In 1936 certain land was transferred to the Trust, and subsequent to that date the Trust has also purchased land. The land and the improvements which in 1936 were transferred to the Trust, have never been valuated and it would now cost a considerable amount to have the land valuated to-day. Furthermore, although the purchase price of the land which was obtained since 1936 is known, this purchase price cannot be accepted as the current value of this land and the improvements thereon for the purposes of drawing up a balance sheet.</p>

<p>It is therefore not possible to submit a properly recognized balance sheet unless the present value of the Trust&#x2019;s land is indicated thereon, and to obtain this information will necessitate considerable expenditure. After discussion in the Select Committee on Public Accounts, and with the consent of the Controller and Auditor-General it is now being proposed that section 9<i>bis</i> be amended as indicated in clause 1 of the Bill. Otherwise this amendment of course remains entirely in accordance with section 57 of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1956, in so far as that section relates to statements of accounts of other statutor bodies which are being audited by the Controller and Auditor-General.</p>

<p><i>Clause 2</i></p>

<p>Clause 2, which deals with the liability of Bantu Governments in regard to the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Fund is in fact self-explanatory. The effect of the envisaged amendment is simply that with effect from a date determined by the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Commissioner, a territorial authority and the corresponding bodies in South West Africa&#x2014; just as in the case of the State&#x2014;will be exempted from assessment in terms of the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Act, 1941, and will therefore carry the risk of compensation for accidents themselves. The date will be determined by the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Commissioner and it will therefore be possible to arrange that only bodies who are of sufficient financial strength will take this obligation upon them.</p>

<p>As appears from the amendment, the old Transkeian territorial authority was automatically exempted so that this does not constitute any new principle. In addition, this was always the case with the State itself. I must emphasize that this legislation has nothing to do with the right of an injured employee of such an authority to obtain compensation from the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Fund.</p>

<p><i>Clause 3</i></p>

<p>Clause 3, which deals with the exemption of Bantu Governments and authorities from the payment of certain moneys should not give rise to any problems. The principle that Bantu Governmental bodies are exempted from the payment of taxes and levies, except in regard to customs and excise or levies on agricultural produce, was accepted as long ago as 1943. The provision is simply being streamlined here so as to include corresponding bodies in South <span class="col_2089-2090" refersTo="page_1059"/>West Africa and in order to eliminate certain obsolete provisions.</p>

<p><i>Clauses 4, 5 and 6 (a)</i></p>

<p>I am dealing with clauses 4, 5 and 6 (a) together because all three concern the auditing of the books of the various kinds of Bantu authorities and in this regard I should like to refer to the explanatory memorandum.</p>

<p>In terms of the existing section 8 of the Bantu Authorities Act, 1951, there has to be a treasury for each tribal, each regional and each territorial authority and the Controller and Auditor-General has to audit the accounts of each regional and each territorial authority. Nothing is said about the auditing of the accounts of the tribal authorities, although control over them is vested in the Minister and he can transfer this control or portion thereof to the senior authority concerned, i.e. a regional or territorial authority. Section 9 defines clearly what moneys belong to the treasury of a tribal authority, while sections 10 and 11 on the other hand provide what moneys belong to the treasury of a regional or territorial authority.</p>

<p>According to the present dispensation (section 57 of the Exchequer and Audit Act 1956) the Controller and Auditor-General must submit a copy of his report of an audit of such a Bantu authority to the Minister, and a copy to the Bantu authority concerned. The Minister must then lay the report and statement of accounts upon the Table in this Parliament.</p>

<p>Clause 5 provides that the Controller and Auditor-General shall continue to audit the books of regional and territorial authorities, but certain tribal authorities can by notice in the <i>Gazette</i> be designated as authorities whose books shall also be audited in this manner. The larger and more advanced tribal authorities will gradually be designated in this way.</p>

<p>But then the clause proceeds to provide that if the Controller and Auditor-General has undertaken such an audit, he must submit his report to the Minister and the territorial authority, although it may have a bearing on a regional authority or on a tribal authority. In this way the higher level of authority is being involved in the financial matters of its subservient authorities. The territorial authority must then deal with this report and in due course make comment to the Minister. The report and this comment is then laid upon the Table in Parliament.</p>

<p>The intention is to encourage increased responsibility on the part of the Bantu authority and to interest it in a positive way in the affairs of its subservient bodies for whose actions it also has to accept responsibility.</p>

<p>Clause 6 (a) takes this development a step further by adjusting the power to make regulations in regard to the Bantu authorities.</p>

<p><i>Clause 6 (b)</i></p>

<p>Clause 6 (b) expands the power of the State President to make regulations in regard to the conditions of service of the staff of Bantu authorities so that regulations can also be promulgated in regard to matters such as discipline, dismissal, retirement arrangements and pensions.</p>

<p><i>Clause 7</i></p>

<p>Clause 7 relates to the revenue which has to be paid into the Transkei Revenue Fund. Included here are moneys which are obtained owing to the application of the laws of the Transkei Legislative Assembly&#x2019;s own laws. However, this source of revenue is not relevant here. In addition one of the sources of revenue are moneys which are obtained owing to the application of Proclamation 180 of 1956, which established Bantu authorities in the Transkei. <i>Inter alia</i> moneys such as cattle tax and dipping fees are collected in terms of this proclamation and it is this kind of revenue which is affected by this clause. It is pointed out in the explanatory memorandum that these moneys&#x2014;the revenue of the lower authorities &#x2014;is paid over to them directly, something which according to the Controller and Auditor-General cannot be done since all such and other moneys paid by Transkeian citizens, should in the first instance have been paid into the Transkeian Revenue Fund. In 1966, however, an amendment was made to make direct payment to the Bantu authorities possible (see section 6 of Act 63 of 1966) and this arrangement is now being made with retrospective effect to 1st April, 1964 in clause 10. In addition a similar adjustment&#x2014;actually a consequential adjustment&#x2014;is being made in regard to another paragraph in the principal section of the Transkei Constitution Act which deals with the Transkei Revenue Fund to make it clear that the revenue which derives from Proclamation 180 of 1956 does not accrue to the Transkei Revenue Fund, but does in fact accrue to the Bantu authorities concerned, and does so with retrospective effect as from 1st April, 1964. By this means the need is being eliminated for the Transkei Legislative Assembly to have to pass special legislation to re-appropriate to themselves the revenue which is being collected by the lower authorities themselves. You will note in the explanatory memorandum that the Controller and Auditor-General is also satisfied with this.</p>

<p><i>Clause 8</i></p>

<p>Clause 8 deals with the auditing of the books of the Transkeian authorities. As you will note from the explanatory memorandum, doubt exists as to whether the Controller-General can in fact audit the accounts of the Bantu authorities in terms of section 58 of the Transkei Constitution Act. bearing in mind the fact that the Transkei Legislative Assembly now has an act of their own which controls these authorities. However, the Controller and Auditor-General agreed to audit the accounts of these lesser bodies, provided the relevant section is suitably amended, with retrospective effect, in order to vest him with that power. <span class="col_2091-2092" refersTo="page_1060"/>This is consequently what will be achieved by means of clause 8.</p>

<p><i>Clause 9</i></p>

<p>Clause 9 deals with matters in regard to which the Transkei Legislative Assembly can make its own laws. To this list is now being added the conservation of flora and fauna and the eradication of vermin in the Transkei. This service will therefore now be taken over from the Cape Provincial Administration; this administration and the Administrator has no objections to that. In terms of items 3 and 20 of part B of the Second Schedule to the Transkeian Constitution the Transkeian Legislative Assembly in any case already has legislative power in respect of agriculture in regard to soil and veld conservation, as well as the protection offish and wild life in the Transkei which actually duplicates in a certain respect the powers which are now at issue so that it is not always clear where the line must be drawn between the activities of the administration and those of the Transkeian Government.</p>

<p><i>Clause 10</i></p>

<p>When I was elucidating clause 7, I simultaneously explained clause 10, namely that the amendment contained in that clause should be with retrospective effect to 1st April, 1964.</p>

<p><i>Clause 11</i></p>

<p>Clause 11 deals with the auditing of the books and accounts of Bantu authorities and specifically in respect of those of South West Africa. In terms of this the pattern which will be followed will be the same as in the Republic, namely the Controller and Auditor-General audits the books of the Bantu authorities and submits a copy of his report to the Minister and the Executive Council (which has powers over the Bantu authority). The Legislative Assembly must then deal with this report and submit its comment on it to the Minister. The report and the comment must then be laid upon the Table in Parliament. In addition the accounts of the Bantu authorities which do not yet fall within the legal purview of the Legislative Assembly must be re-audited.</p>

<p><i>Clause 12</i></p>

<p>Clause 12 deals with the transference of certain movable property to the Bantu authorities and is fully elucidated in the explanatory memorandum. I must emphasize that it must not be deduced that it is now the intention to donate movable property belonging to the State to the Bantu authorities in great quantities. The authorization requested in the clause is only necessary to overcome administrative problems. The authorities take over services which the State is at present rendering and in many cases there is State property which goes with these services; there are items of furniture which have up to now been used by officials rendering these services: there is stationery; there are forms which were specially used for particular purposes. These goods cannot be granted to the authorities without special authorization, and it is unpractical to try to determine the value thereof now and to sell it to the authorities concerned. That is why authorization is now being requested, which will be used in such cases and in other suitable cases in order to transfer the goods to these authorities. This donation will of course, as provided in the clause, take place in consultation with the Minister of finance.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I believe that with the explanatory memorandum and the explanations I have just given, I have properly elucidated this Bill and that anything which might still not have been clear has been eliminated. I trust that hon. members will see the Bill for what it is, namely simply one which regulates technical aspects and which is aimed at causing the Administration to function smoothly.</p>

<p>I make so bold as to say that nothing contentious is contained in this Bill here. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move that the Bill be now read a Second Time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hopewell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. HOPEWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, the hon. the Deputy Minister will no doubt be pleased to hear that this is one of the rare occasions when we agree with the Government on a Bantu Bill. I hope the hon. the Deputy Minister is prepared for a close examination of the Bill in the Committee Stage. I hope the hon. the Deputy Minister has read the Bill and understands it because we will want some clarification of clause 5 of the Bill which provides for the insertion <i>inter alia</i> of a new section 8 A (1), which states that:</p>

<block name="quote">The books and accounts of a regional or territorial authority and of a tribal authority determined by the Minister by notice in the <i>Gazette</i> &#x2026;</block>

<p>Is it a case of the books and accounts determined by the Minister or a tribal authority determined by the Minister? That is not clear and we will require some clarification in the Committee Stage. The hon. the Deputy Minister will no doubt have an opportunity to consider the matter before we come to that particular clause. Otherwise this Bill deals in the main with audit matters and financial control and that is the reason why we are supporting this Bill. We think that better financial control in all government departments is necessary. I hone that the Minister is going to ask the controller and Auditor-General to do a continuous audit because a continuous audit has a great many advantages over an audit done at the end of the year. Far too many Government departments have an audit carried out after the end of the year when it is very much a case of locking the stable door after the horse has bolted. Some of the recent reports of the Auditor-General indicate that in some departments, and I do not want to mention any particular departments now, a considerable <span class="col_2093-2094" refersTo="page_1061"/>amount of waste has taken place. I think that if the Auditor-General is going to maintain the control which he ought to have, a continuous audit is essential in the public interest. We support the Second Reading of this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mitchell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. E. MITCHELL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I want to be brief and deal really only with one clause of the Bill, to which I will move an amendment in the Committee Stage. I take it that we will have the Committee Stage to-morrow! This opportunity therefore presents itself to me to give the hon. the Deputy Minister a warning. In clause 9 of the Bill provision is made for the Transkei Constitution to be changed by inserting after item 20 the following new item:</p>

<block name="quote">20A. The preservation of flora and fauna and the destruction of vermin in the Transkei.</block>

<p>The preservation of flora and fauna is one of the powers now being conferred upon the Transkei Government. The amendment I will move later is to omit the word &#x201C;preservation&#x201D; and to substitute the word &#x201C;conservation&#x201D;. &#x201C;Preservation&#x201D; is an old and a narrow term and in practice it has been found by all the provinces to be inadequate because it is so restrictive in its meaning. I do not think that this amendment will offer any difficulty to the hon. the Deputy Minister. The Transkei has some most magnificent forests and I for one am very pleased indeed to see that the control of the forests there is being handed over to the Transkei Government. I think that they have something here in which they can take pride and if it is administered from the point of view of the tourist industry, and not merely from the point of view of cutting down the trees, I think they will find that they have an asset of immense value. With the forests of course go the wild life of the Transkei. There is not a great deal of wild life left in the Transkei but if we accept the word &#x201C;conservation&#x201D;, as I suggest, when the time comes it will permit the Transkei Government to conserve wild life associated with the indigenous fauna which was there in the past. If we keep the word &#x201C;preservation&#x201D; it merely means maintaining what is already there. It is this wider connotation that I would like to see brought into the Bill before us. It is merely to give the hon. the Deputy Minister notice of my intention to move this amendment in the Committee Stage that I speak now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank hon. members opposite sincerely for the support which they are giving the Bill. I had not expected any opposition from their side, because, as I said in my second-reading speech, this Bill deals largely with auditing. I know that especially the hon. member for Pinetown, as we on this side do, insists that there should be proper auditing of books. During the Committee Stage I shall reply to the question which he put in connection with clause 5. In passing, I may just mention that I believe that the Bill is very clear in this respect, namely that the books of territorial and regional authorities are, in fact, audited, but that those of the tribal authorities are excluded until such time as the hon. the Minister includes such tribal authorities as well by way of proclamation. There are small tribal authorities whose books really need not be audited. I shall, however, deal with this aspect during the Committee Stage.</p>

<p>I also want to thank the hon. member for South Coast for the support which he is giving the Bill. We know that the hon. member for South Coast is interested in the preservation of flora and fauna. I am not a philologist and I do not know whether it would make any great difference if the word &#x201C;conservation&#x201D; were substituted for the word &#x201C;preservation&#x201D;. I should, however, like to refer the hon. member to the Afrikaans version, in which reference is made to the &#x201C;behoud&#x201D; of flora. It is especially about flora that the hon. member is concerned. If a Government does not make it its aim to protect flora, it cannot in my opinion be compelled to do so merely by altering or inserting a word. The position here is that confidence is being placed in the Transkeian Government in that, apart from their duties, to which I referred during my second-reading speech and which often overlap with the duties which are now being entrusted to them, the preservation of fauna and flora is now being added as well. I thank hon. members opposite for their support of this Bill.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a Second Time.</p>

<p>(Committee Stage)</p>

<p><i>Clause 5</i></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hopewell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. HOPEWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I raised this matter during the second-reading debate and I again want to bring it to the attention of the hon. the Deputy Minister. I would like to have clarification whether it applies to territorial authorities determined by the Minister or the books and accounts determined by the Minister. Subsection (1) of the new section 8A inserted by clause 5 after section 8 of the Bantu Authorities Act, 1951, reads as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">The books and accounts of a regional or territorial authority and of a tribal authority determined by the Minister &#x2026;</block>

<p>What does the hon. the Minister determine? Does he determine the books and accounts to be audited or the tribal authority? I think the <span class="col_2095-2096" refersTo="page_1062"/>hon. the Deputy Minister should make that clear.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, the position is that according to the clause the books and accounts of a regional or territorial authority are subject to audit by the Controller and Auditor-General. So far the books and accounts of tribal authorities have been excluded. Tribal authorities are, now, however, included by this Bill. They can be included by notice in the <i>Gazette</i> by the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#emdin">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">S. EMDIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I do not think the hon. the Deputy Minister has answered the question. What the hon. member for Pinetown wants to know is whether the proclamation by the hon. the Minister in the <i>Gazette</i> is to establish the authority or is the proclamation in the <i>Gazette</i> to give the Controller and Auditor-General the authority to authorize. These are two different things. What we want to be certain of is that every territorial authority will be subject to the control of the Auditor-General.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, the position is that every regional and every territorial authority is subject to audit by the Controller and Auditor-General. But the books and accounts of tribal authorities are now included by proclamation by the Minister for auditing purposes. I hope I am making myself quite clear on this point. Tribal authorities are established in certain areas and their books and accounts are not audited by the Controller and Auditor-General, but the hon. the Minister may, by proclamation in the <i>Gazette</i>, subject the books and accounts of certain tribal authorities to audit by the Controller and Auditor-General.</p>

<p>Clause put and agreed to.</p>

<p><i>Clause 9</i></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mitchell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. E. MITCHELL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I want to move the amendment to which I referred to the second-reading debate. May I say that in his reply to me the hon. the Deputy Minister seemed to bear out my own contention. If the Afrikaans text covers the meaning of the word I want substituted it is at variance with the English text at the moment. I do not know which copy is going to be signed by the State President, but I would like to point out to the hon. the Deputy Minister in this regard that when he leaves this hon. House for another status, he will find that there is under him a Department of Nature Conservation, not &#x201C;preservation&#x201D;. The word &#x201C;preservation&#x201D; is an old one which was used at the time of the Union. The provinces had many difficulties because of this word, because they found ancillary activities associated with conservation but not necessarily with preservation. The meaning of the word &#x201C;preservation&#x201D; is too narrow. I therefore ask that the hon. the Deputy Minister will accept my amendment. I move&#x2014;-</p>

<block name="quote">In line 46, to omit &#x201C;preservation&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;conservation&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I am prepared to accept, in the English text, the amendment of the hon. member for South Coast. The wording of the Afrikaans text remains unchanged. I do not want to lay down a very strict condition for this matter, but I just want to say that I hope that the Report Stage of the Bill will not be taken only until Sunday.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p><i>Clause</i> 12</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hughes">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. G. HUGHES</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, the hon. the Deputy Minister has explained that the transfer of movable property will not apply generally, but only in regard to minor matters. I want to ask the hon. the Deputy Minister how Parliament will know of this. Is there any provision to have transfers of this nature laid on the Table of the House, or how will Parliament know what is being transferred to the different authorities?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I do not want to refer the hon. member to the explanatory memorandum this time, I want to refer him to the Bill itself. Clause 12 deals with movable property which &#x201C;is connected with the functions of any authority or legislative council established or recognized in terms of the Bantu Authorities Act, 1951.&#x201D; Therefore, this clause only deals with movable property which is concerned with the functioning of the specific authority. I think the Bill itself makes it quite clear.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hughes">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. G. HUGHES</person>:</from>

<p>What about roadmaking machinery which may be connected with the functioning of that authority?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Roadmaking machinery may be transferred to these authorities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hughes">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. G. HUGHES</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, the point is that it may involve quite a lot of money. What I want to know is whether there is any way in which Parliament will be able to find out what is being transferred.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_bantu_development">

<from><span class="col_2097-2098" refersTo="page_1063"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF BANTU DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>There is the right of hon. members to put questions across the floor to the Minister who is responsible for that department. They can ask the hon. the Minister concerned what movable property has been transferred to different authorities. I see no reason why they should not ask such a question. If the Minister thinks that certain movable property is used in the functioning of that authority then it can be transferred to the authority in consultation with the Minister of finance. When the Secretary&#x2019;s report is laid upon the Table, I am sure the hon. member can ask what movable property has been transferred to the specific authorities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hughes">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. G. HUGHES</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. the Minister for his efforts to try to put the hon. the Deputy Minister in the picture. I wonder whether the hon. the Minister could tell us what he was trying to tell the hon. the Deputy Minister. Then we will get a better idea of how Parliament is going to know what movable property is transferred. It is no good saying that we can ask questions. How can we ask questions &#x2026;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Is the hon. member not addressing the Committee for the fourth time?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hughes">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. G. HUGHES</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, seeing that this is your last Committee, I am sure you will not spoil it now! [Laughter.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is not supposed to make four speeches on one clause</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hughes">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. G. HUGHES</person>:</from>

<p>Perhaps the hon. the Minister can just answer that question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I should like to reply to the hon. member. The position is that so far we have had other transfers of movable property without any prior decisions or Acts of Parliament which compelled us in some way or another to report to Parliament by means of a notice or in any other way. I wish to refer the hon. member to the fact that provision is being made in clause 12 for a counter-check on the Minister of Bantu Administration. This counter-check is that the Minister of finance should be consulted before such transfers can be given. However, if it will satisfy the hon. member I am prepared to undertake to ask the Secretary of the Department of Bantu Administration to report in his annual report every such transfer to these authorities.</p>

<p>Clause put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<p><b>House Resumed:</b></p>

<p>Bill reported with an amendment.</p>

<p>Report Stage taken without debate.</p>

<p>Bill read a Third Time.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_speaker_motion_of_appreciation">

<heading>MR. SPEAKER: MOTION OF APPRECIATION</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House places on record its appreciation for the service of the Honourable Henning Johannes Klopper as Speaker of the House of Assembly and for the competent and impartial manner in which he has discharged the traditional duties of his high Office during the Third Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, Speaker Klopper, took the Chair in this House for the first time in 1954, as Deputy Chairman of Committees. In 1957, Sir, you became Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees. You assumed the Office of Speaker on 20th January, 1961. You have carried out your very onerous duties with the necessary strictness and with very great dignity, but also with the necessary sense of humour. For that you receive the appreciation of the members of this House. One realizes that the smooth functioning of this Parliament naturally does not depend upon the Speaker alone; it also depends upon the co-operation of the Secretariat and the officials attached to their staff. It also depends upon the co-operation of the Leader of the House with the Whips on both sides. It also depends upon the co-operation of the Deputy Speaker and the Deputy Chairman of Committees. I do not think it would be out of place on this occasion to express a brief word of thanks to all the gentlemen concerned. In view of the fact that the Deputy Speaker will not be returning to this House, and that the Chief Whip of the Opposition, after serving in that capacity for a record number of years, will not be returning to this House either, a special word of appreciation to these two gentlemen will certainly not be out of place. We as Parliamentarians in this House have not failed to appreciate the services of these two hon. gentlemen.</p>

<p>While you, Mr. Speaker, have had the support of all these gentlemen, it is and remains a fact that the task of carrying out the duties attaching to the Speakership has still been primarily yours. For the way in which you have fulfilled that task in the best traditions of Parliament, and for these services, which have been rendered in so particularly distinguished a manner, this House wishes to convey to you its special thanks and appreciation on the occasion of the rising of this Parliament.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#villiers_graaff">

<from><span class="col_2099-2100" refersTo="page_1064"/>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I second the motion. We on this side of the House are happy to be associated with the words of the hon. the Prime Minister in regard to you in your high Office and in respect of other officials and dignitaries of this Parliament. I am indeed glad that the hon. the Prime Minister has expressed his gratitude towards the Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the House and the Whips on both sides of the House for the measure of co-operation there has been. It is never easy to be a Deputy Speaker in a House such as this because you are neither the one nor the other; you are of the House, you are of the Speaker&#x2019;s Chair and you have to try to function in both capacities. I think our Deputy Speaker has done an extremely good job in this very difficult situation.</p>

<p>I am grateful too that the hon. the Prime Minister has said something about the Leader of the House and the Whips. We learned to know the Leader of the House over the years. We learned to understand him. I think there has been a very high measure of co-operation, which has facilitated the working of this House. The function of the Whips is something that is not always appreciated by the public. I think that we on this side of the House have been singularly fortunate in having, as our Chief Whip for a record period, somebody who has been so, shall I say, distinguished a parliamentarian, someone who has fought so for the rights of Parliament and for the rights of members and has set such a very high example to us all in this House. We shall miss him. I hope the traditions which he has set will always be observed by the Opposition.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I should also like to say a word as to your very difficult position. We see you are in a somewhat different light from what the Government does. We see you as the guardian of the rights of the minority in this House. We appreciate how difficult your task sometimes was. I think we have to express to you our gratitude not only as the guardian of the rights of the minority but also as the jealous guardian of the privileges of Parliament. I think in that capacity you have shown how much you value those privileges, how important you regard them and how jealous of them you are.</p>

<p>There is the third capacity in which the Speaker functions amongst many others and that is as a servant of Parliament. You are, Sir, Parliament&#x2019;s chief servant. As such you have interested yourself in this building and the treasures which have been assembled here. I think that we are all grateful to you in that under your guidance, this Parliament is slowly becoming a real treasury of Africana and historical pictures, statues, documents and collections. I want to congratulate you particularly on your acquisition of the Le Vaillant paintings and the prints of that early traveller. It is one of those things which I think will make Parliament a very exclusive storehouse of our treasures.</p>

<p>It gives me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to second the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the motion before the House and with the well deserved tributes paid to you and the members of your staff, to the hon. the Leader of the House and others by the hon. the Prime Minister and the hon. the Leader of the Opposition. I am sure that it will be appreciated that for me personally, this is indeed a sad occasion in that it symbolizes the end of an association with this House which has endured for well-nigh a quarter of a century. I recall with much gratitude that it has been my privilege to serve in this House under five Prime Ministers, namely General Smuts, Dr. Malan, Mr. Strydom, Dr. Verwoerd, all now of revered memories, and the present incumbent holding this important position, the hon. Mr. John Vorster. I would like to place on record my deep appreciation of the kindness and courtesy which I have received over these long years from all these leaders and indeed from all sides of the House despite the fact that our political outlooks often differed.</p>

<p>At the same time it was my privilege to serve under several Speakers of this hon. House, all of whom extended to me a great measure of help and goodwill. I am deeply conscious of the fact that since I became a representative of the Coloured people in this House. I served almost exclusively under your estimable Speakership. I am very happy indeed to-day to associate myself with the tributes paid to you by the hon. the Prime Minister and the hon. Leader of the Opposition, and to be able to pay public tribute for your great help and encouragement which you gave to me as the leader of this small group who represented cur Coloured citizens in this House. You were completely impartial and unbiased in every aspect concerning our deliberations. You recognized, Sir, our minority representation in this House and did me the personal honour of appointing me for many years as one of your nominees on the senior committee of Parliament. You allocated to our group with the utmost fairness and impartiality our proper quantum of time in every important debate which came before this House. For all these kindnesses, for all the fairness and impartiality, for all the goodwill that I received from you. Sir, I express my sincere thanks to you and to all members of your staff as I say &#x201C;totsiens&#x201D; to you, Sir, and the other members of this hon. House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate myself, in my capacity as Leader of the House, with what has been said by the hon. the Prime Minister, the hon. the Leader of the Opposition and the hon. member who has just resumed his seat, that is to say, the words expressed and the tributes paid to all, except those to myself, of course. I also wish to say that during the time <span class="col_2101-2102" refersTo="page_1065"/>in which I have held this Office I have enjoyed very fine co-operation with you as Speaker. I found you to be a Speaker who performed his task ably, who enjoyed the respect of both sides of the House and who was completely impartial.</p>

<p>I also wish to convey a special word of thanks to the Deputy Speaker, who will not be returning. He too acquitted himself very well of his difficult task.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I also want to pay special tribute to the Secretary of the House for the assistance, the help and the co-operation I received from him over the years in my capacity as Leader of the House. He was of great help to me especially when I first took over this rather arduous position.</p>

<p>Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I should like to pay a special tribute to the hon. member for Von Brandis, who is the father of the House, with an unbroken service of 37 years. He holds the record as a Whip and Chief Whip of a party. I think he became Whip in 1938. Shortly after that he became Chief Whip. He has held that position until now When he is retiring from the House. I came to know him, Sir, as a man that had a very high regard for the traditions and the conventions of Parliament. As we see again to-day, he retains this tradition of Parliament by having his head covered on the last day of the session. I have also received the most sincere co-operation and support from the hon. member and his assistant Whips over the years. Of course, we did not always agree, but that is only natural. However, we have co-operated and I have received their support in regard to the smooth running of the House and in dealing with the business of the House. I want to say that I appreciate it very much indeed. I hope that in his retirement he will be blessed with good health. I know he will miss the House after having been here for so many years. Still, I hope that he will have health and happiness in the years ahead.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Prime Minister, the hon. the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Bloomberg and the Leader of the House, I feel quite embarrassed, but I wish to thank you for your kind words concerning myself. I just want to say that it would be quite impossible to endeavour to discharge all the responsibilities and duties of this onerous position unless you have the closest co-operation of all the members of the House.</p>

<p>*For this one needs not only the co-operation of the hon. members of this House, but also that of your colleagues, such as the Deputy Speaker and the Deputy Chairman of this House, as well as the staff. We are fortunate in that this House has appointed men of such calibre to assist the Chair.</p>

<p>&#x2020;We are also exceptionally fortunate to have a staff such as we have. It is a very small staff, but most efficient. I am grateful both to my colleagues and to the members of the staff for the way in which they have made my position possible.</p>

<p>*I am grateful for the kind words which have been expressed here, but I feel myself unworthy and I am conscious of my many shortcomings. And if I have had any success in my work, I owe it in the first place to Almighty God for his guidance and for his love. He has always sustained me throughout my life, as also in this difficult Office. In this session in particular I frequently sought His guidance and advice. Indeed, there was nowhere else I could turn to. To my regret, very harsh words were spoken in this session. I trust that those words will be forgotten and will not be used in this House again. Be that as it may, I wish to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to you, Mr. Prime Minister, with your Government, for your kindness and your assistance and your support and the trust which you have placed in me. I appreciate it most deeply. I feel that we stand in the service of our people and our fatherland. It behoves us to perform that service to the utmost of our ability.</p>

<p>&#x2020;As far as the Opposition is concerned, I wish to thank the Leader, Sir de Villiers Graaff, the Chief Whip and all other members of the Opposition, Mr. Bloomberg and his group and every other member, to whatever group he may belong, for the respect that I have always enjoyed from them, their kindness, sincerity, assistance, and desire to oblige. All this has made it possible for me to do what I have done. It is for you to say whether or not it has any value. I wish to express my gratitude for the remarks by the hon. the Leader of the Opposition concerning certain duties that really are the duties of the Speaker, namely, to preserve for posterity the great historical events that have taken place in our beloved country, and also to pay tribute in a suitable manner to those who have served this House so ably in the past. In this respect I am grateful for everybody&#x2019;s assistance and support.</p>

<p>*I hope that this work, which I consider to be important work, will be carried on, so that posterity may know what the present generation and previous generations did for our people and our fatherland.</p>

<p>I trust that hon. members will have a pleasant recess, that they will spend it in a restful way, that they will enjoy their holiday thoroughly and will return to the House of Assembly later this year with renewed courage and strength and with new ideas, ideals and plans. I thank you.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#suspension_of_business_and_adjournment_of_house">

<heading><span class="col_2103-2104" refersTo="page_1066"/>SUSPENSION OF BUSINESS AND ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x2014;That business be now suspended until 11.30 a.m., provided that Mr. Speaker may, if he thinks fit, accelerate or postpone the time for the resumption of business.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<p>Business Suspended at 11.10 a.m. and resumed at 11.40 a.m.</p>

<p>Messages received from Senate.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1970-02-27T11:43:00">11.43 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_dropped">

<heading>BUSINESS DROPPED</heading>

<p>At the prorogation of Parliament on 27th February, 1970, the following matters had not been disposed of and consequently dropped:</p>

<p><b>Orders of the Day:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>1. Second Reading,&#x2014;Witchcraft Suppression Amendment Bill [A.B. 5&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>2. Second Reading.&#x2014;Maintenance Amendment Bill [A.B. 6&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice)</li>

<li>3. Second Reading,&#x2014;Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Bill [A.B. 7&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>4. Second Reading.&#x2014;Administration of Estates Amendment Bill [A.B. 8&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>5. Second Reading.&#x2014;Justices of the Peace and Commissioners of Oaths Amendment Bill [A.B. 9&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>6. Second Reading,&#x2014;Limitation of Legal Proceedings (Provincial and Local Authorities) Bill [A.B. 10&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>7. Second Reading.&#x2014;Pre-Union Statute Law Revision Bill [A.B. 11&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>8. Second Reading,&#x2014;Supreme Court Amendment Bill [A.B. 12&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>9. Second Reading,&#x2014;Architects&#x2019; Bill [A.B. 23&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Public Works).</li>

<li>10. Second Reading,&#x2014;Quantity Surveyors&#x2019; Bill [A.B. 24&#x2014;&#x2019;70]&#x2014;(Minister of Public Works).</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions_to_ministers">

<heading>QUESTIONS TO MINISTERS</heading>

<p><i>For oral reply:</i></p>

<oralStatements>

<p><i>Replies standing over from Tuesday, 24thFebruary</i>, 1970</p>

<question by="#marais" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>*17.</num>

<from>Mr. J. A. Marais:</from>

<p>Whether any disputes between staff and the Railways Administration are at present being settled by arbitration; if so, (a) which sections of the staff are affected, (b) how many members of the staff are involved, (c) what is the nature of the disputes and (d) how did they arise?</p>

</question>

<question by="#Marais" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>*18.</num>

<from>Mr. J. A. Marais:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) What work on the Railways normally performed by Whites, was performed by non-Whites during the past 12 months, (b) at which centres did this happen, (c) from what dates and (d) how many Whites were involved in each case;</li>

<li>(2) whether in any of these cases white personnel were warned in regard to their conduct towards the non-Whites in question; if so, what was the tenor of the warning?</li>

</ol>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<p><i>For written reply:</i></p>

<writtenStatements>

<question by="#wiely" to="#minister_of_police">

<num>1.</num>

<from>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley</from>

<p>to ask the Minister of Police:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many crimes of (a) robbery with violence, (to) assault with violence, (c) murder and (d) rape were committed in the Republic in 1958, 1968 and 1969, respectively;</li>

<li>(2) how many of these crimes were committed in Pretoria, Johannesburg, Durban, Bloemfontein, East London, Port Elizabeth. Kimberley and Cape Town, respectively?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>5.</num>

<from>Mr. L. F. Wood</from>

<p>to ask the Minister of finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) How many feet of (i) entertainment and (ii) documentary and educational film were imported in the Republic during 1969, (b) what were the countries of origin and (c) what was the value of the films imported from each country in each case?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister_of_national_education">

<num>7.</num>

<from>Mr. L. F. Wood</from>

<p>to ask the Minister of National Education:</p>

<p>(a) How many feet of film were made by the National Film Board during 1969, (b) what were the titles of the films, (c) for which Government departments were they made, (d) what was the cost and (e) how was the cost met?</p>

</question>

</writtenStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening">

<p><span class="col-0" refersTo="page_1067"/>REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA</p>

<p>INDEX TO THE</p>

<p>DEBATES</p>

<p>OF THE</p>

<p>HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY</p>

<p>(HANSARD)</p>

<p>FIFTH SESSION&#x2014;THIRD PARLIAMENT</p>

<p>30th January to 27th February, 1970</p>

<p>(Vol. 28)</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#index_to_subjects*">

<heading><span class="col_I1" refersTo="page_1068"/>INDEX TO SUBJECTS*</heading>

<debateSection name="#A">

<heading>A</heading>

<p><b>African States:</b> Relations with, 312, 323; Lesotho, 454.</p>

<p><b>Agriculture</b>, 221-33, 246-61, 482, 1251-9.</p>

<ul>

<li>Farmers: Loans granted to&#x2014;by Land Bank, 223, 228, 249, 449, 1255; by Department of Agricultural Credit and Land Tenure, 229, 249.</li>

<li>Veterinary Services, 1203.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Airways</b>, 498, 681, 697, 780, 846, 1002, 1029.</p>

<ul>

<li>Hijacking, 682, 784, 848.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations Bill, 1724, 1842.</b></p>

<p><b>Apostolic Faith Mission Amendment</b> (Private) <b>Bill</b>, 1464.</p>

<p><b>Appropriation Bills&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Central Government, 965, 1071, 1198, 1301, 1405.

<ul>

<li>Additional, 1318.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Post Office, <i>see</i> <b>Post Office.</b></li>

<li>Railways, <i>see</i> <b>Railways.</b></li>

</ul>

<p><b>Artisans</b>: In building industry, 51, 58.</p>

<ul>

<li>Apprentices, 51 [<i>See also</i> <b>Industrial Conciliation Amendment Bill.]</b></li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#B">

<heading>B</heading>

<p><b>Bantu&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Beer, profits from, 1569.</li>

<li>Bills: Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, 906, 1047, 1464, 1565, 1653.

<ul>

<li>Second Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, 2087.</li>

<li>Homelands Citizenship Bill, 1780, 1856.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Call-in Card System, 1632.</li>

<li>Death of, in police van, 37, 1145, 1150, 1173.</li>

<li>Employment of, restrictions on, 1582, 1655 <i>et seq.</i></li>

<li>Homelands: Development in, 121, 267, 289, 469; contribution of municipalities towards, 289.

<ul>

<li>Citizenship of, <i>see</i> <b>&#x201C;Bills&#x201D;</b> <i>above.</i></li>

</ul></li>

<li>In industries, <i>see</i> <b>Industries.</b></li>

<li>Land, excision of certain scheduled and inclusion of other, 1551.</li>

<li>Urban areas: Bantu in, 20, 115, 121.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Bible Society of S.A. Bill</b>, 1651.</p>

<p><b>Birth Rate</b>, 1110.</p>

<p><b>Boland Disaster Fund</b>, Contribution to, 1346.</p>

<p><b>Border Industries</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Industries.</b></p>

<p><b>Building Societies</b>, 1090.</p>

<p><b>Bureau for State Security</b>, <i>see</i> <b>State.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#C">

<heading>C</heading>

<p><b>Coloureds,</b> 38, 46, 140, 321, 460, 474.</p>

<ul>

<li>Municipal franchise, 461.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Credit Control</b>, 972, 975, 1086, 1310.</p>

<p><b>Customs Union Agreement</b> with neighbouring territories, 1772.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#D">

<heading>D</heading>

<p><b>Defence,</b> 1265.</p>

<ul>

<li>Simonstown Agreement, 1270.</li>

<li>Stores, 1267.</li>

<li>Training, 648, 1266, 1272.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Devaluation</b>, 1072, 1078.</p>

<p><span class="col_I2" refersTo="page_1069"/><b>E</b></p>

<p><b>Earthquake in Boland</b>, Financial assistance, 1346.</p>

<p><b>Economic Affairs</b>: Growth rate, 170, 1140.</p>

<p><b>Education,</b> 1211-24, 1125, 1251.</p>

<p><b>Electoral Matters</b>&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Electoral Laws Amendment Bill, 1279, 1356, 2057.</li>

<li>Delimitation of constituencies, 317, 346, 1148.</li>

<li>Municipal franchise, 461.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Estimates</b> (Part and Additional): Central Government, <i>see</i> <b>Appropriation Bills;</b> Post Office, <i>see</i> <b>Post Office; Railways</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Railways.</b></p>

<p><b>Exchange Control</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Stock Exchange</b>.</p>

<p><b>Explosives</b>, Agreement with African Explosives and Chemical Industries, 734.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#F">

<heading>F</heading>

<p><b>Finance Bill</b>, 1765.</p>

<p><b>Financial Institutions Amendment Bill</b>, 1760.</p>

<p><b>Financial Relations Amendment Bill</b>, 1274.</p>

<p><b>Fuel Research Institute and Coal Amendment Bill, 905.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#G">

<heading>G</heading>

<p><b>General Law Amendment Bill,</b> 1718.</p>

<p><b>Girl Guides</b>, Holding of mixed parade by, 127, 298, 1164.</p>

<p><b>Gold</b>, 972, 1085, 1100, 1113, 1118, 1303.</p>

<p><b>Group Areas&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Resettlement under, 85, 174, 1161.</li>

<li>Sale of land, 177, 1162.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Growth Funds</b>, 1309.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#H">

<heading>H</heading>

<p><b>Harbours</b>, 493, 711, 772, 790.</p>

<ul>

<li>Services to ships in Cape Town by helicopter, 1010.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Health-</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Medical aid schemes, 159, 198.</li>

<li>Nursing homes, tariffs of, 160.</li>

<li>Transplants, <i>see</i> <b>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations Bill.</b></li>

</ul>

<p><b>Hotel</b>s, 1720.</p>

<p><b>Housing</b>, 58, 81, 157, 481.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#I">

<heading>I</heading>

<p><b>Industrial Conciliation Amendment Bill</b>, 929, 1645, 1697, 1839.</p>

<p><b>Industrial Development Corporation</b>, 1090.</p>

<ul>

<li>Assistance to small industries, 1140.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Industries</b>&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Bantu workers in, 53, 121.

<ul>

<li>Application of Physical Planning Act, 119.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Border, 120, 166, 266, 1115.

<ul>

<li>Bantu workers in, 53, 120.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#J">

<heading>J</heading>

<p><b>Job Reservation</b>, 190, 341, 476.</p>

<p><b>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions Amendment Bill</b>, 1714.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#L">

<heading>L</heading>

<p><b>Labour</b>, 50, 186.</p>

<ul>

<li>Training of, <i>see</i> <b>Industrial Conciliation Amendment Bill.</b></li>

</ul>

<p><b>Land Bank</b>, Loans granted by, 223, 228, 249, 449, 1255.</p>

<p><b>Level Crossings</b>, Elimination of, 211, 668, 687, 694, 706, 732, 763, 840, 866, 983.</p>

<p><b>Liquor</b>: Sale of, in restaurants, 1719.</p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See also</i> <b>Wine and Spirits Control Amendment Bill.</b>]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Livestock</b>, Conveyance of by rail, <i>see</i> <b>&#x201C;Traffic&#x201D;</b> <i>under</i> <b>Railways.</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Theft of, 1117.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#M">

<heading>M</heading>

<p><b>Maize</b>, 1330, 1334.</p>

<p><b>Manpower</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Labour.</b></p>

<p><b>Marais Commission</b> (on co-ordination of transport), 501, 640, 710.</p>

<p><b>Medical Aid Schemes</b>, 159, 198.</p>

<p><span class="col_I3" refersTo="page_1070"/><b>Mining</b>: Pneumoconiosis Compensation Amendment Bill, 881, 1039.</p>

<p><b>Monuments (National) Amendment Bill</b>, 1739.</p>

<p><b>Municipal Franchise</b>, 461.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#N">

<heading>N</heading>

<p><b>Nursing Homes</b>, Tariffs of, 160.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#O">

<heading>O</heading>

<p><b>Oil</b>, 1071.</p>

<ul>

<li>Pipelines, <i>see</i> <b>Pipelines.</b></li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#P">

<heading>P</heading>

<p><b>Parliament&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>House of Assembly:

<ul>

<li>Hours of sitting of, 1542.</li>

<li>Members, death of (Mr. H. R. H. du Plessis and Maj. J. E. Lindsay), 12-15.</li>

<li>Speaker: Motion of Appreciation, 2098.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Opening of, Speech at, 3.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Pensions</b>, 29, 158, 480.</p>

<ul>

<li>Concessions, 967.</li>

<li>Pension Laws Amendment Bill, 1754.</li>

<li>Select Committee on, recommendations of, 721, 1008, 1030.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources Act</b>, Application of, 119.</p>

<p><b>Pipelines</b>, 498, 642, 982, 1026.</p>

<p><b>Pneumoconiosis Compensation Amendment Bill</b>, 881, 1039.</p>

<p><b>Police</b>: On borders. 1143.</p>

<ul>

<li>Death of prisoners in Police van, 37, 1145, 1150, 1173.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Post Office&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills:

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation Bill, 503, 637, 816, 857.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation, 1034.</li>

<li>Post Office Re-adjustment Bill, 902.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Savings in, 1765.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Provinces,</b> Subsidy to, 1318.</p>

<p><b>Public Service</b>, 26.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#R">

<heading>R</heading>

<p><b>Radio Licences</b>, 587, 817.</p>

<p><b>Railways&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Appropriation Bills: Part Appropriation Bill, 493, 638, 735, 837, 977; Additional Appropriation Bill, 863.</li>

<li>Derailments, 997.</li>

<li>Staff, 495, 499 [For further references <i>see</i> debate on Part Appropriation Bill, 638, 735, 837.]</li>

<li>Traffic:

<ul>

<li>Goods, 493.</li>

<li>Livestock, 651, 663, 739, 750, 769, 845</li>

<li>Passenger, 493.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Non-whites, 753, 995.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Roads</b>: Accidents, 171, 211.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#S">

<heading>S</heading>

<p><b>S.A.B.C.</b>, 539, 578, 823, 834.</p>

<p><b>Sales Tax</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Taxation.</b></p>

<p><b>Sewerage</b>, Regional schemes, <i>see</i> <b>Financial Relations Amendment Bill.</b></p>

<p><b>Simonstown Agreement</b>, 1270.</p>

<p><b>Smuts</b>, Gen. J. C., Issue of commemorative stamp, 858.</p>

<p><b>Sobukwe</b>, 1234.</p>

<p><b>South-West Africa Constitution Amendment Bill</b>, 2073.</p>

<p><b>Speaker</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Parliament.</b></p>

<p><b>Sport</b>, International, 128, 133, 196, 238, 302, 309, 324, 466, 1242, 1424.</p>

<p><b>State</b>, Security of, Bureau for, 34, 435, 485, 1141, 1152, 1174, 1178, 1198, 1225, 1237, 1243.</p>

<ul>

<li>[See <i>also</i> <b>Telephones</b>&#x2014;Tapping of ]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Stock Exchange</b>, 488, 970, 1077, 1089, 1092, 1097, 1119, 1312, 1411, 1438, 1460.</p>

<ul>

<li><b>Stock Theft,</b> 1117.</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I4" refersTo="page_1071"/><b>T</b></p>

<p><b>Taxation</b>, 1072, 1080, 1311.</p>

<ul>

<li>Income tax: Married women, 968.</li>

<li>Sales tax, 33, 966, 1074, 1080, 1120.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Telephones&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Alleged tapping of, 299, 305, 344, 467, 509, 556-61, 565, 594, 824, 828, 835, 858, 1426, 1449.</li>

<li>Shortage of and standard of service&#x2014;see debate on Part Appropriation Bill, 504-602, 637.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Television,</b> 544, 550, 561, 588, 818, 826, 828-33, 861.</p>

<p><b>Terrorism,</b> 1143.</p>

<p><b>Transplants</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Anatomical Donations and Post Mortem Examinations Bill.</b></p>

<p><b>Transport&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Co-ordination of (Commission), 501, 640, 710.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#U">

<heading>U</heading>

<p><b>U.N.O., S.A.</b>&#x2019;s contribution to budget of, 1333.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#V">

<heading>V</heading>

<p><b>Voters</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Electoral Matters.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#W">

<heading>W</heading>

<p><b>Water</b>, 1126.</p>

<ul>

<li>Metering, 1126.</li>

<li>Pollution, 1127, 1135.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Wine and Spirits Control Amendment Bill, 1746.</b></p>

<p><b>Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Amendment Bill, 867.</b></p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="index_to_questions">

<heading>INDEX TO QUESTIONS*</heading>

<debateSection name="#A">

<heading><span class="col_I5" refersTo="page_1072"/>A</heading>

<p><b>Agricultural Credit and Land Tenure:</b> Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12. &#x2019;69 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 390.</p>

<p><b>Agricultural Economics and Marketing:</b> Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 389.</p>

<p><b>Agricultural Technical Services:</b> Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12. &#x2019;69 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 389; appointments and resignations of professional staff in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg)</i>, 1190.</p>

<p><b>Airports,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Airways.</b></p>

<p><b>Airways</b>: Through service between Durban and Cape Town (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 94; building of airport on West Rand (<i>Mr. S. J. M. Steyn)</i>, 361; representations regarding playing of music on Sundays on aircraft (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 373; inaugural flights (<i>Mr. L.G. Murray)</i>, 415; work shifts of flight Officers (<i>Mr. W. T. Webber</i>), 609; aircraft operated by the S.A., and conversion training provided for crews (<i>Mr. W. T. Webber)</i>, 610; overtime worked by crews (<i>Mr. W. T. Webber)</i>, 611; selection of music played on aircraft (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 949; report on noise and safety at airports (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 1192; Whites and non-Whites employed during certain years (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 1583.</p>

<p><b>Albert Hertzog</b> tower, Naming of (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 92.</p>

<p><b>American Field Service:</b> Postponement of national service granted to persons proceeding to America under the (<i>Dr. A. Hertzog)</i>, 2076.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#B">

<heading>B</heading>

<p><b>Bakeries</b> registered in Cape Town and Western Province towns (<i>Mr. H. M. Timoney</i>), 1521.</p>

<p><b>Bantu</b>&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Agricultural labour: Appointment of inspectors of (<i>Mr. T. G. Hughes)</i>, 1186.</li>

<li>Bantu Administration and Development, Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 397; fund made available for housing <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 431; candidature of former official of the, to provincial council <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 620; full-time university training for B. Juris degree offered to candidates with a view to a career in the <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1533.</li>

<li>Bantu Education, Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 399.</li>

<li>Bantu Investment Corporation: Establishment of wholesale depots by the <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1818.</li>

<li>Bantu Trust: Funds made available for housing <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 431.</li>

<li>Births, <i>see</i> <b>Births.</b></li>

<li>B. Juris degree: Full-time university training for, offered to candidates with a view to a career in the Department of Bantu Administration and Development <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1533.</li>

<li>Black Spots: Elimination of <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1181; land purchased in division of Brits for elimination of <i>(Mr. D. M. Stretcher),</i> 1828.</li>

<li>Border Industrial Areas: Whites and non-Whites employed in <i>(Mr. W. T. Webber),</i> 421.</li>

<li>Border Industries: Division of Brits declared as growth point for developing <i>(Mr. D. M. Stretcher),</i> 1811.</li>

<li>Brits: Division of Brits declared as growth point for developing border industries <i>(Mr. D. M. Streicher),</i> 1811; land purchased in the division of, for elimination of black spots <i>(Mr. D. M. Streicher),</i> 1828.</li>

<li><span class="col_I6" refersTo="page_1073"/>Commissioners-General <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 1801; expenditure i.r.o. residence for the (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 1820.</li>

<li>Compensation to Europeans in Transkei: Amounts spent i.r.o. (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1836.</li>

<li>Doctors, <i>see under</i> <b>Health</b>.</li>

<li>Education: Using of bail-point pens in schools <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 101; pupils and teachers in primary, secondary and high schools <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1196; unit costs i.r.o. pupils in Bantu schools <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1529; expenditure i.r.o. primary, secondary and university level <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1539; double sessions system in 1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1821; amounts spent on educational services outside Bantu homelands <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1836.</li>

<li>Ethnic national groups; Contributions made by State Departments towards development of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1821.</li>

<li>Fixed property owned by Bantu persons in rural and urban areas, etc. <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 412.</li>

<li>Homelands: Amount spent on development of, during 1968-&#x2019;69 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 348; agencies for White-controlled industries in <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 432; expenditure i.c.w. development of, during certain years <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1836.</li>

<li>Hotel: Erection costs of Bantu hotel at Umtata <i>(Mr. T. G. Hughes),</i> 1192.</li>

<li>Housing <i>see</i> <b>Housing.</b></li>

<li>Industrial areas: Development of, near Transkei, Ciskei and district of Stutterheim <i>(Mr. T. G. Hughes),</i> 1525.</li>

<li>Industries: Capital expenditure, income/loss i.r.o., at Umtata, Lusikisiki, Butter-worth and in Transkei <i>(Mr. T. G. Hughes),</i> 1835.</li>

<li>Labour tenants and squatters: Resettlement of <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 618.</li>

<li>Labour: Workseekers registered at labour bureaux <i>(Mr. W. T. Webber),</i> 618; establishment of aid centres in terms of Bantu Labour Act <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 626; labour bureaux <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 626; call-in cards <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 626; amendment of Bantu Labour Regulations, 1965 <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 627; appointment of labour liaison Officers <i>(Mr. T. G. Hughes),</i> 1186; Bantu males and females registered as unemployed <i>(Mr. T. G. Hughes),</i> 1196; Bantu employed in specified industries in the Transkei <i>(Mr. T. G. Hughes)</i>, 1523; amended regulations for furnishing contracts of employment <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1829.</li>

<li>Liquor: Income derived from sale of, to Bantu in urban residential areas <i>(Mr. D. M. Steicher),</i> 1812.</li>

<li>Madikwe township (Morsgat) <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 616; <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1541.</li>

<li>Maintenance grants for Bantu married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mr. J. W.E. Wiley)</i>, 426.</li>

<li>Natal Bantu areas: Development of Bantu towns in <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1822.</li>

<li>Pensions, <i>see</i> <b>Pensions and Pensioners.</b></li>

<li>Proclamation R.264 of 1968: Permits issued in terms of, enabling persons to enter Bantu areas for trading purposes <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1834.</li>

<li>Pulmonary tuberculosis: Regulations regarding, applicable to Bantu workseekers in prescribed areas <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 621; incidence of, among Bantu persons <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 961.</li>

<li>Reclamation: Amounts spent on, i.r.o. Bantu outside homelands <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1836.</li>

<li>Released areas: Elimination of <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1181.</li>

<li>Rural areas: Bantu in, outside homelands <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1539.</li>

<li>Scheduled areas: Elimination of isolated <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1181.</li>

<li>Services Levy: Moneys derived from, paid to Durban Corporation, Public Utility Transport Company, etc. providing transport services to Bantu homelands and townships <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1532.</li>

<li>Social services: Amounts spent on, for Bantu outside homelands <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1836.</li>

<li>Soweto: Registered medical practitioners <i>(Dr. E. L. Fisher),</i> 614; registered medical <span class="col_I7" refersTo="page_1074"/>practitioners refused permission to practise in <i>(Dr. E. L. Fisher),</i> 615.</li>

<li>Tax: General tax and additional general tax collected, 1967-68 and 1968-69 <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 951.</li>

<li>Transkei and Transkeian Government: Administrative Offices of the Transkeian Government in Matatiele <i>(Mr. H. J. Botha),</i> 1190; Bantu persons employed in specified industries in the Transkei <i>(Mr. T. G. Hughes)</i>, 1523; amounts spent i.r.o. compensation to Europeans in the Transkei <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1836; relief measures taken i.c.w. drought in the Transkei <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 2085.</li>

<li>Transport: Moneys derived from Bantu Services Levy paid to bodies providing transport to Bantu homelands and townships <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1532; annual profit/loss i.r.o. transport of Bantu persons <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 1833.</li>

<li>University Colleges (Fort Hare, the North and Zululand): Subsidies paid i.r.o. students at the <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 628; contact between White students and students at the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1515.</li>

<li>Urban areas: Bantu in, outside homelands <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1539.</li>

<li>Wholesale depots established by the Bantu Investment Corporation <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1818.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Biafra</b>: Emergency relief fund for <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 355.</p>

<p><b>Births</b>: Illegitimate births during certain years <i>(Mr. G. N. Oldfield),</i> 607.</p>

<p><b>Black Spots</b>, <i>see</i> under <b>Bantu.</b></p>

<p><b>Border Industrial Areas,</b> <i>see</i> under <b>Bantu.</b></p>

<p><b>Building Industry:</b> Commission of Inquiry into remuneration for professional services in the <i>(Mr. L. G. Murray),</i> 941.</p>

<p><b>Bureau of State Security:</b> Reports regarding security leakages from the <i>(Mr. W. V. Raw),</i> 946.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#C">

<heading>C</heading>

<p><b>Cape Town Board of Aid:</b> Closing down of <i>(Mr. H. M. Timoney),</i> 1523.</p>

<p><b>Chinese:</b> Group area for Chinese in Cape Peninsula <i>(Mrs. C. D. Taylor),</i> 940; property rights of Chinese residents in Cape Peninsula <i>(Mrs. C. D. Taylor),</i> 940.</p>

<p><b>Civil Service,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Public Service.</b></p>

<p><b>Coloured Affairs</b>&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Bantu persons removed from Coloured areas <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog),</i> 2077.</li>

<li>Births, <i>see</i> <b>Births</b>.</li>

<li>Cadets <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 952; placing into employment of Coloured <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1799.</li>

<li>Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the <i>(Mr. L.F. Wood),</i> 396.</li>

<li>Doctors, <i>see under</i> <b>Health</b>.</li>

<li>Education: Coloured pupils successful in high school examinations since 1963 <i>(Mr, L. F. Wood),</i> 370; school attendance and entries for senior certificate examinations <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog),</i> 947; pupils and teachers in schools <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1197; unit costs i.r.o. pupils in Coloured schools <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1530; double session system in 1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1822.</li>

<li>Fixed property owned by Coloured persons in rural and urban areas <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 412.</li>

<li>Group Areas, <i>see</i> <b>Group Areas Act.</b></li>

<li>Housing, <i>see</i> <b>Housing.</b></li>

<li>Indian persons removed from Coloured areas <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog),</i> 2077.</li>

<li>Maintenance grants for Coloured married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 424.</li>

<li>Pensions, <i>see</i> <b>Pensions and Pensioners</b>.</li>

<li>Representative Council, Coloured Persons&#x2019;: Proposals regarding liaison between Parliament and <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 103.</li>

<li>Rural areas: Expenditure i.r.o. betterment and development schemes in Coloured <i>(Mrs. C. D. Taylor),</i> 1184.</li>

<li>University College of the Western Cape: Subsidies paid i.r.o. students at the <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 628; contact between White students and students at the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1514.</li>

<li><span class="col_I8" refersTo="page_1075"/>Vitamin tablets: Distribution of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1534.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Commerce</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Dept, of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 630.</p>

<p><b>Commissioners-General</b> <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1801; expenditure i.r.o. residences for the (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 1820.</p>

<p><b>Commissions/Committees of Enquiry into&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Building Industry: Remuneration for professional services in the (<i>Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 941.</li>

<li>Fishing industry <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 352.</li>

<li>Hearing aids: Injudicious use of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 605.</li>

<li>Insecticides and other Poisons: Use of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 349.</li>

<li>Security of the State: Matters relating to (<i>Mr. M. L. Mitchell),</i> 351.</li>

<li>Television (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 381.</li>

<li>Transport: Co-ordination of (<i>Mr. H. M. Timoney),</i> 96.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Community Development Board</b>: Amounts paid and received i.r.o. depreciation and appreciation contributions and goodwill (<i>Mr. L. G. Murray),</i> 1195.</p>

<p><b>Community Development, Department of:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bantu persons removed from Coloured areas (<i>Dr. A. Hertzog),</i> 2077.</li>

<li>Barnard, F. H.: Property in Durban sold to (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester),</i> 1823.</li>

<li>Durban: Indian shopowner, Alli Limalia, of Bluff Rd. (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 1805; expropriation of properties owned by Whites in Lower Bridge Road (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 1805; expropriation of Indian-owned banana farms in Queensborough area of (<i>Mr. 6. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 1806; road buil: at High Ridge Road (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester),</i> 1823; development of land in vicinity of Brickfield Hoosen (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 1824; occupation of houses by Whites in Rossborough, Seaview and Belaire districts (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 1824.</li>

<li>Flats: Vacation of, as a result of share transactions by landlords (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield)</i>, 361.</li>

<li>Hotels: Erection of hotel in Pretoria to accommodate Whites and non-Whites (<i>Mr. J. A. Marais)</i>, 357.</li>

<li>Housing <i>see</i> <b>Housing.</b></li>

<li>Indian persons removed from Coloured areas (<i>Dr. A. Hertzog)</i>, 2077.</li>

<li>Indian shopowner Alli Limalia of Bluff Road, Durban (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester</i>), 1805.</li>

<li>Natal: Contracts for construction of houses in (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 949.</li>

<li>Non-Whites: Statement regarding staying of non-White visitors in hotels for Whites (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg)</i>, 355; non-White crews of foreign ships using public facilities (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg</i>), 356.</li>

<li>Paarl: Land acquired in Paarl area (<i>Mr. H. M. Timoney)</i>, 2081.</li>

<li>Plettenberg Bay: Exhibition held by Coloured artist in hotel for Whites (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg)</i>, 422.</li>

<li>Staff: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 404.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Criminal Procedure Act</b>: Death of persons detained in terms of sect. 215W? of the (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 98; persons arrested and detained in terms of sect. 215<i>bis</i> of the (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 98.</p>

<p><b>Cultural Affairs</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 382.</p>

<p><b>Customs and Excise</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 387.</p>

<p><b>Cyclamates</b>: Ingestion of (<i>Dr. A. Radford),</i> 1518.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#D">

<heading>D</heading>

<p><b>Dagga</b>: Weight and value confiscated (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 94; Whites and non-Whites arrested and convicted for offences involving (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood</i>), 362.</p>

<p><b>Defence:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Citizen Force: Members cf, killed and injured whilst undergoing training (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield)</i>, 1519; pensions payable i.r.o. members killed or injured whilst undergoing training (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield)</i>, 1520; ballotees killed and injured in railway crossing between <span class="col_I9" refersTo="page_1076"/>Bloemfontein and Petrusburg, May, 1969 (<i>Mr. D. M. Streicher)</i>, 1810.</li>

<li>Hospital beds: Daily cost of (<i>Dr. E. L. Fisher</i>), 1817.</li>

<li>Military Intelligence: Reports made to Police regarding security leakages from (<i>Mr. W. V. Raw)</i>, 946.</li>

<li>Military training: Persons exempted from <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 1182; postponement of, granted to American Field Service students <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog</i>), 2076.</li>

<li>Permanent Force: Vacancies and staff losses i.r.o. Army, Air Force and Navy <i>(Brig. H. J. Bronkhorst),</i> 426.</li>

<li>Rifle range, Pietermaritzburg (<i>Capt. W. J. B. Smith)</i>, 354.</li>

<li>Secret instructions or documents: Precautions taken regarding (<i>Mr. W. V. Raw</i>), 946.</li>

<li>Staff: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 391.</li>

<li>Stores Accounting: Steps taken by S.A. Defence Force as a result of Controller and Auditor-General&#x2019;s report on (<i>Dr. G. de V. Morrison)</i>, 1525.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Disability Grants,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Pensions and Pensioners</b>.</p>

<p><b>District Six:</b> Planning of (<i>Mr. H. M. Timoney</i>), 350; properties purchased and sold by Group Areas Development Board. (<i>Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 414.</p>

<p><b>Docks</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Harbours.</b></p>

<p><b>Doctors</b>, <i>see under</i> <b>Health</b>.</p>

<p><b>Drugs,</b> <i>see under</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#E">

<heading>E</heading>

<p><b>Economic Affairs</b>: 1969 Economic Mission to Australia (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 105; authorized establishment and staff position on 31.12.1969 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 395; Whites and non-Whites employed in border industrial areas (<i>Mr. W. T. Webber</i>), 421; legislation regarding contracts of sale of land (<i>Mr. R. G. L. Hourquebie</i>), 1181; comments offered by persons and organizations on Bill relating to contracts of sale of land (<i>Mr. R. G. L. Hourquebie)</i>, 1827.</p>

<p><b>Economically Active</b> Whites and non-Whites, 1969 (<i>Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 1185.</p>

<p><b>Education&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bantu, <i>see under</i> <b>Bantu.</b></li>

<li>Coloureds, <i>see under</i> <b>Coloured Affairs.</b></li>

<li>Indians, <i>see under</i> <b>Indian Affairs.</b></li>

<li>Department of Higher: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 385.</li>

<li>Non-Whites receiving tuition in White private schools (<i>Mr. W. T. Marais)</i>, 360.</li>

<li>State schools: Pupils enrolled and teachers employed in (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1197; unit costs per primary and secondary pupils in (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1528.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Eggs</b> (<i>Mr. W. T. Webber)</i>, 632.</p>

<p><b>Emigrants</b>: White and non-White persons emigrated from S.A. during 1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 367.</p>

<p><b>Engineers</b>: Estimate regarding new engineers required, availability and training (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 106.</p>

<p><b>Excise Duty</b> levied and collected on wine and cane spirit (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg)</i>, 942.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#F">

<heading>F</heading>

<p><b>Family Allowances</b> payable to White persons (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield)</i>, 1829.</p>

<p><b>Farmers</b>: Mortgage liabilities and debts with financial institutions (<i>Dr. J. H. Mool-man),</i> 1804.</p>

<p><b>Films</b>: Commercial films made by production companies in S.A. (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood</i>), 2083.</p>

<p><b>Finance</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the Department of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 385;. liquidation of certain companies and financial institutions (<i>Mr. W. T. Marais</i>), 946; quantity of liquor allowed to be brought into Republic by tourists or returning travellers (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 957.</p>

<p><b>Fishing</b>: Commission of inquiry into the fishing industry (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 352; net fishing in False Bay (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 607.</p>

<p><b>Food Mixture Supplement</b>: Using of, in combating malnutrition (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield)</i>, 1818.</p>

<p><span class="col_I10" refersTo="page_1077"/><b>Foreign Affairs</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 395; application made to the Dept, of, for visa for correspondent of the &#x201C;New York Times&#x201D; (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1807; application made to the Dept, of, for visa for correspondent of the &#x201C;Los Angeles Times&#x201D; (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 2084.</p>

<p><b>Forestry</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 407.</p>

<p><b>Fort Hare</b>, <i>see</i> &#x201C;University Colleges&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bantu.</b></p>

<p><b>Funeral Services</b>: Exploitation of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 1516.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#G">

<heading>G</heading>

<p><b>General Election, 1970</b>: Nomination dates i.r.o. members of House of Assembly and Provincial Councils (<i>Mr. J. A. Marais)</i>, 427; overtime worked by employees of the Dept, of the Interior i.c.w. voters&#x2019; rolls, supplementary rolls, etc. (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 1517.</p>

<p><b>Gold Mines</b>: Revenue derived from taxation of (<i>Mr. L. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 1825.</p>

<p><b>Group Areas Act</b>: Moving of lawyers&#x2019; Offices in compliance with the (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 953; Whites and non-Whites moved and resettled under the (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1181.</p>

<p><b>Group Areas Development Board</b>: Properties purchased and sold in District Six (<i>Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 414.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#H">

<heading>H</heading>

<p><b>Harbours</b>: Permanent and temporary staff employed at certain S.A. (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 379; customs officials employed at certain S.A. (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 380; naming of harbour tugs or other craft after former general managers of Railways (<i>Mr. W. V. Raw)</i>, 612; pay increases for harbour pilots and junior superintendents (<i>Mr. W. V. Raw)</i>, 624; Whites and non-Whites employed during certain years (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 1538; East London harbour: extension of berth and removal of rock (<i>Dr. J. H. Moolman)</i>, 1804; pollution of Durban Bay (<i>Mr. M. L. Mitchell)</i>, 2079.</p>

<p><b>Haron, Imam</b>: Death of, while in detention (<i>Mrs. C. D. Taylor</i>), 944.</p>

<p><b>Health:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bilharzia (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 939.</li>

<li>Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 403.</li>

<li>Doctors: White and non-White doctors practising in South Africa (<i>Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 353; White and non-White registered medical practitioners in Soweto (<i>Dr. E. L. Fisher)</i>, 614; registered medical practitioners refused permission to practise in Soweto (<i>Dr. E. L. Fisher)</i>, 615.</li>

<li>Drugs: Arrests and convictions i.r.o. Habit-forming and potentially harmful (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 362; applications received for registration of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 365; appointment of analysts, pharmacologists and pathologists in terms of Drugs Control Act <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 411; authorized establishment and staff position i.r.o. inspectors appointed in terms of Drugs Control Act <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 411; inspections carried out regarding sale or supply of potentially harmful <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 621; pay increases for members of the Drugs Control Council <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 953.</li>

<li>Food mixture supplement: Use of, in combating malnutrition <i>(Mr. G. N. Oldfield),</i> 1818.</li>

<li>Malnutrition and kwashiorkor <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 939.</li>

<li>Medicine: Legislation to give recognition to professions ancillary to <i>(Dr. A. Radford),</i> 1518.</li>

<li>Old-age pensioners: Medical services and medicines for <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1800.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Hearing Aids</b>: Committee of Inquiry into injudicious use of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood), 605.</i></p>

<p><b>Hijacking of aircraft</b>: Amsterdam conference on the <i>(Mr. W. T. Webber),</i> 375; attendance of S.A. Airways pilots of special conference in London on the <i>(Mr. W. T. Webber),</i> 377.</p>

<p><b>Hotels</b>: Statement regarding staying of non-Whites in hotels for Whites <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 355; erection of hotel in Pretoria to accommodate White and non-White persons <i>(Mr. J. A. Marais)</i>, 357; hotels classified under Liquor Act (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 371; classification of hotels (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 956.</p>

<p><span class="col_I11" refersTo="page_1078"/><b>Housing</b>: Provision of houses for White persons since 1964/65 <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 101; provision of houses for non-White persons <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 102; White and non-White housing units in Durban complex <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 106; shortage and provision of White and non-White housing at 31.12.1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 368; amounts paid to Cape local authorities by National Housing Commission, and White and non-White housing provided <i>(Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 417; funds made available i.r.o. Bantu housing <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 431.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#I">

<heading>I</heading>

<p><b>Immigrants</b>: Persons immigrated to S.A. during 1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 367; immigrants expelled from S.A. <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 1183; immigrants convicted for contraventions of Immorality Act <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog),</i> 1183.</p>

<p><b>Immigration</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the Dept, of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 410.</p>

<p><b>Immorality Act</b>: Convictions i.r.o. offences under the, since 1966 <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg)</i>, 423; immigrants convicted for contraventions of the <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog)</i>, 1183.</p>

<p><b>Income Tax</b>: Income tax assessments, 1967-&#x2019;68 and 1968-&#x2019;69 <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 951; income and other direct taxes paid by Whites and non-Whites during certain years <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1537.</p>

<p><b>Indian Affairs:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Births <i>see</i> <b>Births.</b></li>

<li>Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 394.</li>

<li>Education: Natal Indian pupils successful in high school examinations since 1964 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 371; pupils and teachers in schools <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1197; unit costs i.r.o. pupils in Indian schools <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1530; double session system in 1969 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1821.</li>

<li>Fixed property owned by Indians in rural and urban areas <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 412.</li>

<li>Group Areas, <i>see</i> <b>Group Areas Act.</b></li>

<li>Housing, <i>see</i> <b>Housing.</b></li>

<li>Indian Council: Representations received from the (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 349.</li>

<li>Maintenance grants for Indian married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 425.</li>

<li>Pensions, <i>see</i> <b>Pensions and Pensioners.</b></li>

<li>University College: Contact between White students and students at the Indian <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1515.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Industrial Development Corporation:</b> Loans granted to Malawi <i>(Mr. W. T. Marais),</i> 360; Government&#x2019;s participation in mutual funds through the <i>(Dr. G. F. Jacobs),</i> 1186.</p>

<p><b>Information</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Department of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 409.</p>

<p><b>Insecticides</b>: Report of Committee of Enquiry into use of, and other poisons <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 349.</p>

<p><b>Interior</b>:</p>

<ul>

<li>Department of the: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 405; overtime worked by employees of the, i.c.w. voters&#x2019; rolls, supplementary rolls, etc., for April 1970 general election <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1517.</li>

<li>Japanese jockey Seuo Masazawa: Application for visa <i>(Dr. E. L. Fisher),</i> 2075.</li>

<li>Life, Book of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1533.</li>

<li>&#x201C;Los Angeles Times&#x201D;: Application for visa for correspondent of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1189.</li>

<li>&#x201C;New York Times&#x201D;: Application for visa for correspondent of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1807.</li>

<li>Passports, <i>see</i> <b>Passports.</b></li>

<li>Population register: Computerization of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1533.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Ionizing Radiation</b>: Legislation to control <i>(Dr. A. Radford),</i> 1518.</p>

<p><b>Irrigation</b>, <i>see</i> <b>Water Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Israel</b>: Collection in S.A. for aid to, after 1967 war <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 605.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#J">

<heading>J</heading>

<p><b>Japanese Jockey</b> Seuo Masazawa: Application for visa <i>(Dr. E. L. Fisher),</i> 2075.</p>

<p><span class="col_I12" refersTo="page_1079"/><b>J. G. Strijdom Tower, Hillbrow</b>: Restaurant facilities for non-Whites in the (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1522.</p>

<p><b>Job Reservation</b>, <i>see under</i> <b>Labour.</b></p>

<p><b>Justice:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bakubeng tribe: Members of the, arrested and detained in terms of the Terrorism Act <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 959.</li>

<li>Bakwena tribe: Members of the, arrested and detained in terms of the Terrorism Act <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 957.</li>

<li>Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood)</i>, 400.</li>

<li>Legal Aid Board (Mr. M. <i>L. Mitchell)</i>, 950.</li>

<li>Liquor Act: Circular No. 1 of 1969 regarding prosecutions i.c.w. the <i>(Mrs. J. A. Marais)</i>, 357.</li>

<li>S.A. Associated Newspapers, Gandar and Pogrund: Costs incurred i.c.w. case of State versus <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman</i>), 348.</li>

<li>Sabbath or Sunday Act of the Transvaal, 1896: Circular No. 2 of 1968 regarding prosecutions i.c.w. <i>(Mrs. J. A. Marais</i>), 356.</li>

<li>Soekor: Prosecution of employee of <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 92.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#K">

<heading>K</heading>

<p><b>Kruger National Park</b>: Processing of game carcasses in the <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan)</i>, 371; game culled in the <i>(Mrs. C. J. S. Wainwright)</i>, 608; speed limit in the <i>(Mrs. C. J. S. Wainwright)</i>, 609; spotting of albino elephant in the <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 619; game wardens <i>(Mrs. C. J. S. Wainwright)</i>, 622.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#L">

<heading>L</heading>

<p><b>Labour:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bank-note factory, Pretoria: Dismissal of White employees at <i>(Mrs. W. T. Marais)</i>, 943.</li>

<li>Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood)</i>, 396.</li>

<li>Industrial agreements: Period required for publication of <i>(Mrs. S. J. M. Steyn)</i>, 2077.</li>

<li>Industrial councils: Period required for registration of <i>(Mrs. S. J. M. Steyn</i>) 2077.</li>

<li>Job reservation <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan)</i>, 427.</li>

<li>Replacement of White female employees by Coloured employees (Or. <i>A. Hertzog</i>), 358; replacement of White workers by non-White workers (Or. <i>A. Hertzog)</i>, 1183.</li>

<li>Trade Union Constitutions: Period required for registration of amendments to <i>(Mrs. S. J. M. Steyn)</i>, 2077.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Land Bank</b>: Mortgage loans granted since 1966 <i>(Mrs. J. A. Marais</i>), 1191; applications for mortgage loans received and granted in 1969 <i>(Mrs. J. A. Marais</i>), 1191.</p>

<p><b>Land</b>: Legislation regarding contracts of sale of land <i>(Mrs. R. G. L. Hourquebie),</i> 1181; comments offerred by persons and organizations on Bill relating to contracts of sale of land <i>(Mrs. R. G. L. Hourquebie)</i>, 1827.</p>

<p><b>Legal Aid Board</b> (<i>Mr. M. L. Mitchell),</i> 950.</p>

<p><b>Life, Book of</b> (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1533.</p>

<p><b>Liquor</b>: Circular No. 1 of 1969 of the Dept, of Justice regarding prosecutions i.c.w. the Liquor Act (<i>Mr. J. A. Marais</i>), 357; quantity of liquor allowed to be brought into Republic by tourists or returning travellers <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan</i>), 957; income derived from sale of liquor to Bantu in urban residential areas <i>(Mrs. D. M. Streicher)</i>, 1812.</p>

<p><b>&#x201C;Los Angeles Times&#x201D;</b>: Application for visa for correspondent of the, submitted to the Dept, of the Interior (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1189, application for visa for correspondent of the, submitted to Dept, of foreign Affairs (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 2084.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#M">

<heading>M</heading>

<p><b>Maintenance Grants</b>: For White married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 423; for Coloured married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 424; for Indian married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 425; for Bantu married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley)</i>, 426.</p>

<p><b>Malawi</b>: Loan of R8 million to <i>(Mrs. W. T. Marais)</i>, 359; loans granted by Industrial Development Corporation to <i>(Mrs. W. T. Marais)</i>, 360.</p>

<p><span class="col_I13" refersTo="page_1080"/><b>Maoris</b>: Treatment of Maori visitors during 1970 All Black rugby tour <i>(Mrs. L. F. Stofberg</i>), 606.</p>

<p><b>Masazawa, Seuo</b>: Application for visa for Japanese jockey (<i>Dr. E. L. Fisher</i>), 2075.</p>

<p><b>Medicine</b>: Legislation to give recognition to professions auxiliary to (<i>Dr. A. Radford</i>), 1518.</p>

<p><b>Mercury, The</b>, King William&#x2019;s Town: Advertisement in, providing Railway telephone number for contacting political party (<i>Mr. C. J. S. Wainwright)</i>, 614.</p>

<p><b>Metrication</b>: Handbook for (<i>Mr. W. G. Kingwill</i>), 939.</p>

<p><b>Mineral Ore</b>: Conveyance of, from Northern Cape to Saldanha Bay (<i>Mr. H. M. Timoney</i>), 351.</p>

<p><b>Mines</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Dept, of (Mr. L. F. Wood), 402; candidature of former official of the Department of, to House of Assembly or Provincial Council (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan</i>), 619.</p>

<p><b>Mutual Funds</b>: Government&#x2019;s participation in, through Industrial Development Corporation (Dr. G. F. Jacobs), 1186; delays i.r.o. mutual funds repurchases (<i>Dr. G. F. Jacobs</i>), 1817.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#N">

<heading>N</heading>

<p><b>National Debt</b> during certain years (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley</i>), 1524.</p>

<p><b>&#x201C;New York Times&#x201D;</b>: Application made to Dept. of foreign Affairs for visa for correspondent of the (Mrs. H. Suzman), 1807; application made to Dept, of the Interior for visa for correspondent of the (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman</i>), 1807.</p>

<p><b>N.F.I</b>. (<i>Mr. A. Hopewell</i>), 1816.</p>

<p><b>Non-Whites</b>: Statement regarding stay of non-White visitors in hotels for Whites (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg</i>), 355; non-White crews of foreign ships using public facilities, and fight between Chinese and Japanese sailors at Cape Town night club (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg</i>), 356; non-Whites receiving tuition in White private schools (<i>Mr. W. T. Marais</i>), 360; exhibition held by non-White artist at Plettenberg Bay hotel for Whites (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg</i>), 422.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#O">

<heading>O</heading>

<p><b>Old-Age Pensioners</b>: Medical services and medicines for (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood</i>), 1800.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#P">

<heading>P</heading>

<p><b>Parliament</b>: Proposals regarding liaison between Coloured Persons&#x2019; Representative Council and (<i>Mr. E. G. Malan</i>), 103.</p>

<p><b>Passports</b>: Taking out of foreign passports by S.A. sportsmen (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman</i>), 94.</p>

<p><b>Pensions and Pensioners</b>: Social pensions paid to Coloured persons in certain magisterial districts (<i>Mr. L. F. Stofberg</i>), 948; pensions payable to widows of judges of the Supreme Court (Mr. M. L. Mitchell), 950; old age pensions paid to Whites and non-Whites during certain years (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley</i>), 1524; medicinal services and medicines for old-age pensioners (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood</i>), 1800; concessionary rail fare tickets for social pensioners (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1829; pensions, disability grants and family allowances payable to White persons (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1829; increased pensions for Coloured social pensioners (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1830; amendment of means plus pension limitation applicable to Coloureds (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1831; Coloured persons in receipt of pensions and disability grants (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1831; increased pensions and disability grants for Indians (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1832; amendment of means plus pension limitation applicable to Indians (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1832; Indians in receipt of pensions and disability grants (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 1832; old age pensions paid to Coloured persons (Mr. J. W. E. Wiley), 2082; old age pensions paid to Indians (Mr. J. W. E. Wiley), 2083; old age pensions paid to Bantu persons (<i>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley</i>), 2083; pension increase for Bantu social pensioners (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 2086; amendment of means plus pension limitation i.r.o. Bantu persons (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 2086; Bantu persons in receipt of pensions and disability grants (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield</i>), 2086.</p>

<p><b>Pesticide Residue Hazards</b> (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood</i>), 412.</p>

<p><b>Planning</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Dept, of (<i>Mr. L. F. Wood</i>), 401; applications for establishment and extension of factories in Witwatersrand area and rest of Republic submitted to the Dept, of (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman</i>), 604.</p>

<p><span class="col_I14" refersTo="page_1081"/><b>Plettenberg Bay</b>: Exhibition held by non-White artist at hotel for Whites at <i>(Mrs. L. F. Stofberg)</i>, 422.</p>

<p><b>Police:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bureaux of State Security: Reports regarding security leakages from the <i>(Mrs. W. V. Raw)</i>, 946.</li>

<li>Colleges: Training capacity of Police <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney),</i> 611.</li>

<li>Crimes: Persons prosecuted and convicted in terms of certain <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 374.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure Act: Death of persons detained in terms of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 98; persons arrested and detained in terms of sect. 215<i>bis</i> of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 98.</li>

<li>Drugs: Arrests and convictions i.r.o. habit-forming and potentially harmful <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 362.</li>

<li>Engelbrecht, J. J.: Alleged wrongful arrest and assault of <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 944.</li>

<li>Fordsburg: Premises in Premier Road, Fords-burg, entered by Police on 11.12.1970 (Mr. M. <i>L. Mitchell),</i> 1518.</li>

<li>Imam Haron: Death of, while in detention <i>(Mrs. C. D. Taylor),</i> 944.</li>

<li>Moslem witness: Alleged death of, while under preventive detention <i>(Mrs. C. D. Taylor),</i> 614.</li>

<li>Noorder-Paarl: Shooting of two Coloured men on 24.1.70 in <i>(Mrs. G. S. Eden)</i>, 1189.</li>

<li>Police agent X54 (<i>Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 2084.</li>

<li>Prisoners, <i>see</i> <b>Prisons and Prisoners.</b></li>

<li>Staff: Authorized establishment and vacant posts i.r.o. White and non-White non-commissioned Officers at 31.12.1969 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 105; promotion of Bantu police to rank of lieutenant <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog),</i> 359; resignations since 1965 <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray),</i> 416; authorized strength during certain years <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray),</i> 416; resignations and dismissals during 1969 <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney),</i> 611; compensation for S.A. Police casualties as a result of service on border <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney),</i> 612; White and non-White Officers and non-commissioned Officers at 31.12.&#x2019;69 <i>(Mrs. R. G. L. Hourquebie)</i>, 1186.</li>

<li>Terrorism Act: Persons arrested and detained in terms of sect. 6 of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 97; death of persons detained in terms of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 98; 35 persons arrested and detained between 12.5.1969 and 3.6.1969 in terms of sect. 6 of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 99; arrest and detention of Pati Lulu Betty Tshwa in terms of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 373.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Posts and Telegraphs:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Albert Hertzog Tower, Naming of <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan), 92.</i></li>

<li>Hillbrow Tower, Naming of new <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 92; restaurant facilities for non-Whites in the J. G. Strijdom tower <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 1522.</li>

<li>J. G. Strijdom tower: Restaurant facilities for non-Whites <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 1522.</li>

<li>Mail: Electronic sorting of letters <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 108; Whites and non-Whites employed as postmen in Durban complex <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 379.</li>

<li>Postage stamps: Persons portrayed on S.A., since 1960 <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 1188.</li>

<li>Postmen, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Mail&#x201D; <i>above.</i></li>

<li>Post Offices: Point Road Post Office, Durban <i>(Mrs. W. V. Raw),</i> 1537.</li>

<li>Satellites: Use of, in connection with telephone service between S.A. and South American countries <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 380.</li>

<li>Staff: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 404, employees earning less than R200 per month <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 414; overseas visits by officials since 22nd April, 1969 <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 962; Whites and non-Whites employed during certain years <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1538.</li>

<li>Telephones and Telephone Exchanges: Installation of telephone exchange and direct dialling service at Du Toits-kloof <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 95; waiting list for telephones in Cape Town City, Woodstock and Salt River areas <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney),</i> 96; direct telephone dialling between Cape Town and rest of Republic <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney),</i> 97; outstanding applications for telephone services <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 100; tapping of telephone conversations <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 107; applications for telephones <span class="col_I15" refersTo="page_1082"/>in Durban complex <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 367; direct automatic dialling facilities at Randhoewe and Westonaria <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 374; use of satellites i.c.w. telephone service between S.A. and South American countries <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 380, outstanding applications for telephones in certain major centres <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 622; installation of Du Toitskloof exchange <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 627; outstanding applications for telephones on Witwatersrand <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 954; telephone exchanges closed on Witwatersrand, etc. <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 955; attended call Office erected at Du Toitskloof in 1954 <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1194; charges for local telephone calls <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1195; damaging of public telephone booths <i>(Mr. G. N. Oldfield),</i> 1802; printing of telephone directory for 1970 for Cape Peninsula <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1808; taking over of certain private automatic branch exchanges <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan,</i> 1825.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Prime Minister</b>: Commission of Inquiry into matters relating to security of the State <i>(Mr. M. L. Mitchell),</i> 351.</p>

<p><b>Prisons and Prisoners</b>: Legislation regarding loitering in vicinity of prisons <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 348; electro-therapy machines at Cinderella prison <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 348; authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Dept, of Prisons <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 399; Bellville prison <i>(Mr. G. N. Oldfield),</i> 945; death of Bantu prisoners in Police van in 1969 <i>(Mr. M. L. Mitchell),</i> 950; presentation of medals to staff of prisons service at Pollsmoore on 24.2.1970 <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 2080.</p>

<p><b>Proclamation R.264 of 1968</b>: Permits issued in terms of, enabling persons to enter Bantu area for trading purposes <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1834.</p>

<p><b>Publications Control Board</b>: Fees payable by persons submitting publications or objects to the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 604; legislation to abolish appeals against decisions of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 604; publications prohibited and submitted, and prohibitions lifted during 1969 <i>(Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 1184; full-length films submitted for approval <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1540.</p>

<p><b>Public Service</b>: Pay increases for White and non-White employees <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood)</i>, 366; educational standards required for employment in the <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 603; policy regarding members of the Public Service participating in politics <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 960; scheme applicable in Public Service for full remuneration paid to full-time university students <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1193; posts of editor, sub-editor and journalist <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1194; Whites and non-Whites employed in Public Service, excluding Railways, Harbours, Airways and Post Office, during certain years <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1837.</p>

<p><b>Public Utility Transport Corporation</b>: Moneys derived from Bantu Services Levy paid to the <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1532.</p>

<p><b>Public Works</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Department of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 406; extensions carried out by the Dept, of, to premises of the State President&#x2019;s residence, Stal Plein, Cape Town <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 1819.</p>

<p><b>Purchase Tax</b>: Revenue derived from <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 109.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#R">

<heading>R</heading>

<ul>

<li><b>Race Classifications:</b> Persons reclassified during 1969 <i>(Mr. L. G. Murray),</i> 1185.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Railways:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Accidents: Derailments <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 963; accident on or near railway bridge of Croesus station <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1515; claims i.r.o. Langlaagte train accident <i>(Mrs. FI. Suzman),</i> 1528; collapsing of bridge at Dube station, December, 1969 <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1530.</li>

<li>Bantu policy: Loss or contribution of S.A.R. &amp; H. Administration i.r.o. implementation of Government&#x2019;s <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 603.</li>

<li>Croesus station: Accident on or near railway bridge at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1515; bridge facilities for Whites and non-Whites at <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1531.</li>

<li>Dube station: Collapsing of bridge at, during December, 1969 <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1530.</li>

<li>Durban Bay: Pollution of <i>(Mr. M. L. Mitchell)</i>, 2079.</li>

<li>Goods: Claims for loss of <i>(Mr. W. T. Webber)</i>, 624.</li>



<li><span class="col_I16" refersTo="page_1083"/>Housing: Houses built in Salt River and Maitland areas <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney)</i>, 1816.</li>

<li>Level Crossings: Elimination of, on Southern Suburban Line, Cape Peninsula <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 352; unguarded level crossings <i>(Mrs. W. T. Marais),</i> 635.</li>

<li>Livestock: Death of, through conditions at Johannesburg railway sidings, January, 1970 <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 421; conveyance of livestock and fresh meat from S.W.A. <i>(Capt. W. J. B. Smith),</i> 615.</li>

<li>Marketing and Research Section: Appointment of Marketing Manager <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney),</i> 1815.</li>

<li>&#x201C;Mercury, The&#x201D;, King William&#x2019;s Town: Advertisement providing Railway telephone number for contacting political party <i>(Mrs. C. J. S. Wainwright),</i> 614.</li>

<li>Motor-cars: Conveyance of new, from factories to dealers <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 411.</li>

<li>Pensions: Consolidation of temporary allowance and bonus with basic pension payable to Railway pensioners (<i>Mr. G. N. Oldfield),</i> 1519.</li>

<li>Rolling Stock: New reserved saloons for non-White passengers on certain mainline trains <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 1533; cost of locomotives, passenger and goods vehicles placed in service during 1968-&#x2019;69 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood)</i>, 1534; cost of airconditioned dining saloons placed in service during 1968 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 1535.</li>

<li>Staff: Losses and additions during 1969 i.r.o. White employees <i>(Mrs. G. N. Oldfield)</i>, 361; pay increases for White and non-White employees during 1969 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 365; average annual wages paid to White and non-White employees, 1958 and 1968 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 369; White employees earning less than R200 per month <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 378; graded posts filled by non-Whites <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 379; circular regarding disciplinary action against railway workers <i>(Mrs. J. A. Marais),</i> 608; disputes in Railways and Harbours Administration referred to commissions <i>(Mrs. W. V. Raw),</i> 612; railway servants penalized for offences without hearing <i>(Mrs. W. V. Raw),</i> 613; basic salaries earned by White employees <i>(Mrs. W. V. Raw)</i>, 625; non-Whites performing work previously done by Whites <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 629; firemen <i>(Mrs. W. T. Marais),</i> 943; PAYE deductions i.r.o. certain grades of employees <i>(Mrs. L. E. D. Winchester),</i> 1528; salary scales i.r.o. certain managerial posts <i>(Mrs. W. V. Raw),</i> 1536; Whites and non-Whites employed during certain years <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 1538; railway workers sent to Durban harbour on relieving duties <i>(Mrs. L. E. D. Winchester),</i> 1833.</li>

<li>Trains <i>(including</i> Railway Lines and Train Services): Doubling of line between Bloemfontein and East London <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 104; Cape Peninsula southern suburban railway line: White and non-White passenger, revenue and expenditure <i>(Mrs. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 378.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Rehoboth</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the Dept, of Rehoboth Affairs <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood)</i>, 396; personnel to assist landdros of <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray),</i> 417; purchasing of farms in <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray),</i> 420; Rehoboth Development Corporation <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray),</i> 420; population, schools, boarding establishments, bursaries, etc. <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray)</i>, 631.</p>

<p><b>Rents Act</b>: Properties exempted in terms of sect. 33 (1) <i>(b)</i> of the <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray</i>), 415; landlords circumventing protection granted to tenants under the <i>(Mrs. W. V. Raw)</i>, 1803.</p>

<p><b>Revenue</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the Department of Inland <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood)</i>, 388; revenue derived from taxation of gold mines <i>(Mrs. L. E. D. Winchester)</i>, 1825.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#S">

<heading>S</heading>

<p><b>Sabbath or Sunday Act</b> of the Transvaal, 1896: Circular issued by Department of Justice regarding prosecutions in terms of <i>(Mrs. J. A. Marais),</i> 356.</p>

<p><b>S.A.B.C.</b>: Re-appointment of member of control board of the <i>(Mrs. E. G. Malan),</i> 100.</p>

<p><b>S.A. Games, 1969</b>: Non-White spectators at the non-White <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 623.</p>

<p><b>Saldanha Bay</b>: Conveyance of mineral ore from Northern Cape to <i>(Mrs. H. M. Timoney),</i> 351; disposal of State land at <i>(Mrs. L. G. Murray),</i> 941; negotiations regarding State property at <i>(Mr. W. V. Raw),</i> 945.</p>

<p><span class="col_I17" refersTo="page_1084"/><b>S.A. Newspapers, Gandar and Pogrund</b>: Costs incurred i.c.w. case of State versus <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman</i>), 348.</p>

<p><b>Security of the State</b>: Commission of Inquiry into matters relating to the <i>(Mr. M. L. Mitchell),</i> 351.</p>

<p><b>Social Welfare and Pensions:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.1969 in the <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 409.</li>

<li>Maintenance grants for White married and unmarried mothers <i>(Mr. J. W. E. Wiley),</i> 423.</li>

<li>Pensions, <i>see</i> <b>Pensions and Pensioners.</b></li>

<li>Retreats and rehabilitation centres, departmental and certified <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 1800.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Sobukwe, Robert</b>: Allowances paid to <i>(Dr. A. Hertzog),</i> 358.</p>

<p><b>Soekor</b>: Prosecution of employee <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 92.</p>

<p><b>Soviet spy Yuri Loginov</b> <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 97.</p>

<p><b>Sport and Recreation</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Department of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 393; non-White spectators at the 1969 non-White S.A. games <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 623.</p>

<p><b>Standards, S.A. Bureau of</b>: Appointment of Director-General <i>(Mr. A. Hopewell)</i>, 941.</p>

<p><b>State President</b>: Extensions to the premises of the residence of the, Stal Plein, Cape Town <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 1819.</p>

<p><b>State Security, Bureau of</b>: Reports regarding security leakages from the <i>(Mr. W. V. Raw),</i> 946.</p>

<p><b>S.W.A.</b>: Conveyance of livestock and fresh meat from <i>(Capt. W. J. B. Smith),</i> 615, slaughtering of stock in abattoirs in, for fresh meat market in Republic <i>(Capt. W. J. B. Smith),</i> 616.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#T">

<heading>T</heading>

<p><b>Television</b>: Conversion off.M. towers into towers suitable for <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 100; commission of enquiry into matters relating to <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan)</i>, 381; warnings issued by Dept, of Posts and Telegraphs i.c.w. purchasing or hiring of television sets <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1809; warnings issued by Dept, of Economic Affairs i.c.w. purchasing or hiring of television sets <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1825.</p>

<p><b>Terrorism Act</b>: Persons arrested and detained in terms of sect. 6 of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 97; death of detainees in terms of sect. 6 of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 98; 35 persons arrested and detained between 12.5.1969 and 3.6.1969 in terms of sect. 215te of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 99; arrest and detention of Pati Lulu Betty Tshwa in terms of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 373; members of Bakwena tribe arrested and detained in terms of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 957; members of the Bakubeng tribe arrested and detained in terms of the <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 959.</p>

<p><b>Tourism</b>: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 in the Department of <i>(Mr. L. F. Wood),</i> 392.</p>

<p><b>Transport</b>: Commission of Enquiry into the co-ordination of <i>(Mr. H. M. Timoney),</i> 96.</p>

<p><b>Tshwa, Pati Lulu Betty</b>: Arrest and detention in terms of the Terrorism Act <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 373.</p>

<p><b>Tsumis Teelstasie</b> <i>(Mr. L. G. Murray)</i>, 420.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#U">

<heading>U</heading>

<p><b>Unit Trust Funds, Open End</b>: Registration of companies for administering <i>(Mr. G. N. Oldfield),</i> 1801.</p>

<p><b>Universities</b>: Payment of commission, bonus or gratuity i.r.o. funds collected for University of Port Elizabeth <i>(Mr. L. G. Murray),</i> 353; members of the Council of the University of Port Elizabeth <i>(Mr. L. G. Murray),</i> 416; subsidies paid i.r.o. White students <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 628; contact between White students and students at the University College of the Western Cape <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman)</i>, 1514; contact between White students and students at the University College for Indians <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1515; contact between White students and students at Bantu universities or colleges <i>(Mrs. H. Suzman),</i> 1515; students enrolled at certain White universities and data available regarding home language <i>(Mr. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 1523.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#V">

<heading>V</heading>

<p><b>Voters</b>: Access of members of House of Assembly to certain registered <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 103.</p>

<p><span class="col_I18" refersTo="page_1085"/><b>W</b></p>

<p><b>Water Affairs:</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Breede River Valley: Expenditure i.r.o. irrigation works in the <i>(Mrs. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 956.</li>

<li>Department of: Authorized establishment and staff position at 31.12.&#x2019;69 <i>(Mrs. L. F. Wood),</i> 407.</li>

<li>Durban Bay: Pollution of (Mr. M. <i>L. Mitchell)</i>, 2079.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Western Cape Water Plan Commission</b> <i>(Mrs. L. F. Stofberg),</i> 422.</p>

<p><b>QUESTIONS UNDER NAME OF MEMBER</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Botha, Mr. H. J.&#x2014;1190.</li>

<li>Bronkhorst, Brig. H. J.&#x2014;426.</li>

<li>Eden, Mr. G. S.&#x2014;1189.</li>

<li>Fisher, Dr. E. L.&#x2014;614, 615, 1817, 2075.</li>

<li>Hertzog, Dr. A.&#x2014;358, 359, 947, 948, 1183, 2076, 2077.</li>

<li>Hopewell, Mr. A.&#x2014;941, 1816.</li>

<li>Hourquebie, Mr. R. G. L.&#x2014;1181, 1186, 1827.</li>

<li>Hughes, Mr. T. G&#x2014;1186, 1192, 1196, 1523, 1525, 1835.</li>

<li>Jacobs, Dr. G. F. &#x2014;1186, 1817.</li>

<li>Kingwill, Mr. W. G.&#x2014;639.</li>

<li>Malan, Mr. E. G &#x2014;92, 95, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 371, 373, 374, 380, 381, 427, 431, 432, 619, 620, 627, 628, 949, 954, 955, 956, 957, 960, 962, 963, 1188, 1192, 1193, 1194, 1195, 1515, 1522, 1808, 1809, 1825, 1826.</li>

<li>Marais, Mr. J. A&#x2014;356, 357, 427, 1191.</li>

<li>Marais, Mr. W. T.&#x2014;359, 360, 635, 943, 946.</li>

<li>Mitchell, Mr. M. L.&#x2014;351, 950, 1518, 2079.</li>

<li>Moolman, Dr. J. H.&#x2014;1804.</li>

<li>Morrison, Dr. G. de V.&#x2014;1525.</li>

<li>Murray, Mr. L. G.&#x2014;353, 414, 415, 416, 417, 420, 631, 941, 1184, 1185, 1195.</li>

<li>Oldfield, Mr. G. N &#x2014;361, 607, 945, 1519, 1520, 1801, 1802, 1818, 1829, 1830, 1831, 1832, 2086.</li>

<li>Radford, Dr. A &#x2014;1518.</li>

<li>Raw, Mr. W. V.&#x2014;612, 613, 624, 625, 945, 946, 1536, 1537, 1803.</li>

<li>Smith, Capt. W. J. B.&#x2014;354, 615, 616.</li>

<li>Steyn, Mr. S. J. M.&#x2014;361, 2077.</li>

<li>Stofberg, Mr. L. F &#x2014;355, 356, 422, 423, 605, 606, 608, 942, 948, 956, 1182, 1183, 1190, 1523, 1819.</li>

<li>Streicher, Mr. D. M.&#x2014;1810, 1811, 1812, 1828.</li>

<li>Suzman, Mrs. H.&#x2014;92, 94, 97, 98, 99, 348, 373, 374, 421, 604, 616, 618, 621, 623, 626, 627, 939, 944, 951, 952, 953, 957, 959, 961, 1181, 1189, 1196, 1197, 1514, 1515, 1528, 1529, 1530, 1531, 1540, 1541, 1799, 1807, 1825, 1829, 2084, 2085.</li>

<li>Taylor, Mrs. C. D&#x2014;614, 940, 944, 1184.</li>

<li>Timoney, Mr. H. M.&#x2014;96, 97, 350, 351, 611, 612, 1521, 1523, 1815, 1816, 2081.</li>

<li>Wainwright, Mr. C. J. S.&#x2014;608, 609, 614, 622.</li>

<li>Webber, Mr. W. T.&#x2014;375, 377, 421, 609, 610, 611, 624, 625, 632.</li>

<li>Wiley, Mr. J. W. E&#x2014;352, 378, 414, 423, 424, 425, 426, 607, 1524, 1537, 1538, 1539, 1820, 1836, 1837, 2080, 2082, 2083.</li>

<li>Winchester, Mr. L. E. D.&#x2014;949, 1528, 1805, 1806, 1823, 1824, 1825, 1833.</li>

<li>Wood, Mr. L. F.&#x2014;94, 105, 106, 348, 349, 362, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 379, 380, 382, 385, 387, 388, 389, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 399, 400, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 409, 410, 411, 412, 603, 605, 621, 622, 629, 630, 939, 953, 1516, 1517, 1532, 1533, 1534, 1535, 1800, 1801, 1818, 1821, 1822, 1833, 1834, 2083.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="index_to_subject">

<heading><span class="col_I19" refersTo="page_1086"/>INDEX TO SPEECHES</heading>

<p>(&#x201C;R&#x201D; denotes &#x201C;Reading&#x201D;)</p>

<p><b>AGRICULTURE, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Uys, the Hon. Senator D. C. H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>AGRICULTURE, DEPUTY MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Schoeman, the Hon. H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Botha, the Hon. M. C.J</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANTU EDUCATION, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Botha, the Hon. M. C.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND EDUCATION, DEPUTY MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Koornhof, Dr. the Hon. P. G. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANTU DEVELOPMENT, DEPUTY MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Vosloo, the Hon. A. H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BASSON, Mr. J. A. L</b>. (Sea Point)&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1346, 1354.</li>

<li>National Monuments (amendment) (2R.), 1740.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirits Control (amendment) (2R.), 1748.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BASSON, Mr. J. D. du P. (Bezuidenhout)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1331, 1333, 1335.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 315.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BEZUIDENHOUT</b>, Mr. G. P. C. (Brakpan)&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation (amendment) (2R.,) 873.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BLOOMBERG, Mr. A. (Peninsula)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 140.</li>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Appreciation, 2100.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BODENSTEIN, Dr. P. (Rustenburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 580.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1611.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. H. J. (Aliwal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (3R.), 1003.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. L. J. (Bethlehem)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 806.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. M. C. (Roodepoort)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Bantu Administration and Development and of Bantu Education.]</i></li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1336.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1780, 1993; (Committee), 2020; (3R.), 2051.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 2097.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 114.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I20" refersTo="page_1087"/><b>BIOTHA, the Hon. P. W. (George)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Defence.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1269.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 236.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Manufacture of Explosives and Propellants, 734.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. S. P. (Soutpansberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Water Affairs and Oj Agriculture.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1131.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1343.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BRANDT, Dr. J. W. (Etosha)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pneumoconiosis Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 898.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BRONKHORST, Brig. H. J. (North Rand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (3R.), 1002.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>CHAIRMAN AND DEPUTY CHAIRMAN&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> page 33.]</li></ul>

<p><b>COETSEE, Mr. H. J. (Bloemfontein West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1470, 1495, 1606.</li>

<li>General Law (amendment) (2R.), 1723.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (3R.), 2046.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETZEE, the Hon. B. (Vereeniging)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Community Development and of Public Works.]</i></li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R), 1160.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1338-40, 1352.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 79.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>COLOURED AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Viljoen, the Hon. M.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Coetzee, the Hon. B.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CONNAN, Mr. J. M. (Cape Town Gardens)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Monuments (amendment) (2R.), 1743.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>CRUYWAGEN, Mr. W. A. (Germiston)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1795, 1856.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DEACON, Mr. W. H. D. (Albany)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1202.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1898.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DEFENCE, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Botha, the Hon. P. W.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE JAGER, Mr. P. R. (Mayfair)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1895.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DELPORT, Mr. W. H. (Port Elizabeth Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 293.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DEPUTY MINISTERS&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> under names of.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE WET, Dr. the Hon. C. (Johannesburg West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Mines, of Planning and of Health.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1337.</li>

<li><span class="col_I21" refersTo="page_1088"/>Pneumoconiosis Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 881, 898; (Committee), 1040-7.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (2R.), 1724, 1737; (Committee), 1844, 1847,1851; (3R.), 1855.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 194.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DIEDER1CHS, Dr. the Hon. N. (Losberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of finance</i>.]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 965, 1301; (3R.), 1457.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (2R.), 1318; (Committee), 1324, 1327-8.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. A. H. (Windhoek)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (3R.), 1010.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 271.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Haak, the Hon. J. F. W.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, DEPUTY MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Loots, the Hon. J. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>EMDIN, Mr. S. (Parktown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1097.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1322-3.</li>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (Committee), 2063.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 2095.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>ENGELBRECHT, Mr. J. J. (Algoa)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 549.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (3R.), 2038.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 178.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>ERASMUS, Mr. A. S. D. (Pietersburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1591.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1935.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>FINANCE, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Diederichs, Dr. the Hon. N.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FINANCE, DEPUTY MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Loots, the Hon. J. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FISHER, Dr. E. L. (Rosettenville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1322, 1337.</li>

<li>Pneumoconiosis Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 888; (Committee), 1039-46.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (2R.), 1733; (Committee), 1846, 1849.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 154.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>FOREIGN AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Muller, Dr. the Hon. H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FORESTRY, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Botha, the Hon. S. P.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GRAAFF, Sir de V. (Rondebosch)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1405.</li>

<li>Bible Society of South Africa (2R.), 1652.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Condolence:

<ul>

<li>Du Plessis, the late Mr. H. R. H., 13.</li>

<li>Lindsay, the late Maj. J. E., 14.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>No Confidence, 17, 465.</li>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Appreciation, 2099.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I22" refersTo="page_1089"/><b>GREYLING, Mr. J. C. (Carletonville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1889.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>GROBLER, Mr. W. S. J. (Springs)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Industrial Conciliation (amendment) (2R.), 1698.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HAAK, the Hon. J. F. W. (Bellville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Economic Affairs.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1334-5.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 162.</li>

<li>Customs Union Agreement, 1772, 1779.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HAVEMANN, Mr. W. W. B. (Odendaalsrus)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1923.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HEALTH, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> De Wet, Dr. the Hon. C.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HENNING, Mr. J. M. (Vanderbijlpark)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Industrial Conciliation (amendment) (2R.), 936, 1645.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HERMAN, Mr. F. (Potgietersrus)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1911.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HERTZOG, Dr. the Hon. A. (Ermelo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (3R.), 828.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1224.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Condolence:

<ul>

<li>Du Plessis, the late Mr. H. R. H., 13.</li>

<li>Lindsay, the late Maj. J. E., 15.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>No confidence, 124.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HEYSTEK, Mr. J. (Waterberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1206.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HIGGERTY, Mr. J. W. (Von Brandis)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Hours of Sitting of the House, 1543.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Manufacture of Explosives and Propellants, 735.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOPEWELL, Mr. A. (Pinetown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1084.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1326.</li>

<li>Financial Institutions (amendment) (2R.) 1763.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 1765; (Committee), 1767.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (amendment) (2R.), 2092; (Committee), 2094.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Customs Union Agreement, 1775.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HORN, Mr. J. W. L. (Prieska)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 769.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOURQUEBIE, Mr. R. G. L. (Musgrave)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1064, 1068, 1468, 1593, 1599.</li>

<li>Industrial Conciliation (amendment) (2R.), 931.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1169.</li>

<li>Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 875.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1954.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HUGHES, Mr. T. G. (Transkei)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 585.</li>

<li><span class="col_I23" refersTo="page_1090"/>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1047, 1051, 1061, 1474, 1479, 1485, 1489, 1499, 1506, 1509, 1573, 1579, 1582, 1622, 1630; (3R.), 1654.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1790; (Committee), 2015; (3R.), 2025.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 2096-7.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 260.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 907.</li>

<li>Report of Select Committee on Bantu Affairs, 1551.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>IMMIGRATION, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[See Mulder, Dr. the Hon. C. P.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>IMMIGRATION, DEPUTY MINISTER OF &#x2014; </b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Koornhof, Dr. the Hon. P. G. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>INFORMATION, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Mulder, Dr. the Hon. C. P.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>INTERIOR, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Muller, the Hon. S. L.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JACOBS, Dr. G. F. (Hillbrow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Industrial Conciliation (amendment) (2R.), 1700; (3R.), 1839.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 186.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>JANSON, Mr. T. N. H. (Witbank)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 65.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>JURGENS, Dr. J. C. (Geduld)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (2R.), 1736.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>JUSTICE, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Pelser, the Hon. P. C.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KINGWILL, Mr. W. G. (Walmer)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1565.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1979.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOORNHOF, Dr. the Hon. P. G. J. (Primrose)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Bantu Administration and Education and of Immigration.]</i></li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1049, 1055-63, 1066, 1471, 1475, 1478, 1482, 1485, 1487, 1491, 1495, 1498, 1502, 1506, 1508, 1513, 1565-8, 1571, 1578, 1581, 1584, 1612, 1623, 1628-9, 1631, 1637, 1643; (3R.), 1688.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 283.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 906, 924.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOTZ&#x00C9;, Mr. S. F. (Parow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 671.</li>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1384.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>KRUGER, Mr. J. T. (Prinshof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1176, 1198.</li>

<li>Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (private) (amendment) (2R.), 1464.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (2R.), 1732; (Committee), 1846, 1851.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 324.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>LABOUR, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Viljoen, the Hon. M.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LANGLEY, Mr. T. (Waterkloof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1359.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 910.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I24" refersTo="page_1091"/><b>LE GRANGE, Mr. L. (Potchefstroom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1058, 1465, 1500, 1574, 1595.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1972; (Committee), 2019.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 920.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>LEWIS, Mr. H. M. (Umlazi)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 709.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>LOOTS, the Hon. J. J. (Queenstown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of finance and Oj Economic Affairs.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fuel Research Institute and Coal (amendment) (2R.), 905.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1118.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1322-6.</li>

<li>Financial Institutions (amendment) (2R.), 1760-5.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 1765; (Committee), 1767-71.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. E. G. (Orange Grove)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 507; (3R.), 816.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (3R.), 995.</li>

<li>Post Office Additional Appropriation (2R.), 1034-8.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1320, 1322, 1325-7, 1333, 1336-8, 1343-4.</li>

<li>Finance (Committee), 1766.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 87, 110.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. W. C. (Paarl)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1091.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirits Control (amendment) (2R.), 1752.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARAIS, Mr. D. J. (Johannesburg North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1892.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARAIS, Mr. J. A. (Innesdal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1298, 1356; (Committee), 2057-9.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1355.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1422.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 297.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARAIS, Mr. W. T. (Wonderboom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 762.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1138.</li>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1378.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MAREE, Mr. G. de K. (Namakwaland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (3R.), 1680.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARTINS, the Hon. H. E. (Wakkerstroom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Transport</i>.]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 686.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 209.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MEYER, Mr. P. H. (Vasco)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 791.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MINES, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> De Wet, Dr. the Hon. C.]</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I25" refersTo="page_1092"/><b>MINISTERS&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> under names of.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MITCHELL, Mr. D. E. (South Coast)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 534.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1053-5.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1125.</li>

<li>Financial Relations (amendment) (2R.), 1277.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1329, 1343.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1984; (Committee), 2017.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (amendment) (2R.), 2093; (Committee), 2095.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MITCHELL, Mr. M. L. (Durban North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1149.</li>

<li>Judges Remuneration and Pensions (amendment) (2R.), 1716.</li>

<li>General Law (amendment) (2R.), 1722.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (Committee), 1849.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MOOLMAN, Dr. J. H. (East London City)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1059-60, 1486.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1329.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1884; (3R.), 2048.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 244.</li>

<li>Customs Union Agreement, 1778.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MOORE, Mr. P. A. (Kensington)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1210.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1346.</li>

<li>National Monuments (amendment) (2R.) 1741.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULDER, Dr. the Hon. C. P. (Randfontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Information, of Social Welfare and Pensions and of Immigration.]</i></li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1343, 1345-6, 1350, 1355.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1754, 1758.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 304.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, Dr. the Hon. H. (Beaufort West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of foreign Affairs.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1331-3.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, The Hon. S. L. (Ceres)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Police and of the Interior.]</i></li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1141.</li>

<li>Financial Relations (amendment) (2R.), 1274, 1279.</li>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1279, 1397; (Committee), 2058, 2061, 2065, 2069, 2072.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1340, 1342.</li>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (amendment) (2R.), 2073.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MURRAY, Mr. L. G., M.C. (Green Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 716; (3R.), 1006.</li>

<li>Financial Relations (amendment) (2R.), 1276.</li>

<li>National Monuments (amendment) (2R.), 1743.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1337, 1340, 1342.</li>

<li><span class="col_I26" refersTo="page_1093"/>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1363; (Committee), 2059, 2067, 2071.</li>

<li>Finance (Committee), 1766, 1768, 1770.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (Committee), 1850, 1852.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1906.</li>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (amendment) (2R.), 2074.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 57.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>NATIONAL EDUCATION, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Van der Spuy, the Hon. Senator J. P.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>OLDFIELD, Mr. G. N. (Umbilo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 555.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 796.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1328, 1345.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1756.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>OTTO, Dr. J. C. (Koedoespoort)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 540.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 757.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (3R.), 1659.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>PELSER, the Hon. P. C. (Klerksdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Justice and of Prisons.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1337.</li>

<li>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions (amendment) (2R.), 1714, 1718.</li>

<li>General Law (amendment) (2R.), 1718,1724.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>PIENAAR, Mr. B. (Zululand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Report of Select Committee on Bantu Affairs, 1558.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>PLANNING, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> De Wet, Dr. the Hon. C.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>POLICE, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Muller, the Hon. S. L.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Van Rensburg, the Hon. M.C.G. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PRIME MINISTER&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Vorster, the Hon. B. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PRISONS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Pelser, the Hon. P. C.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PUBLIC WORKS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Coetzee, the Hon. B.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RADFORD, Dr. A., M.C. (Durban Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pneumoconiosis Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 896.</li>

<li>Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 877; (Committee), 1040, 1046.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (2R.), 1728; (Committee), 1842-6; (3R.), 1853.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>RALL, Mr. J. J. (Harrismith)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 516; (3R.), 825.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (3R.), 1672.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>Rail, Mr. J. W. (Middelburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 778.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAUBENHEIMER, Mr. A. J. (Nelspruit)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (3R.), 998.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1960.</li>

</ul></li>

<li><span class="col_I27" refersTo="page_1094"/>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 914.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAUBENHEIMER, Mr. A. L. (Langlaagte)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 724.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAW, Mr. W. V. (Durban Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 565.</li>

<li>Post Office Re-adjustment (amendment) (2R.), 903.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 808; (3R.), 1013.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1265.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1328.</li>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1291; (Committee), 2066, 2070.</li>

<li>Finance (Committee), 1769-71.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R), 1964.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 71.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 922.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>REHOBOTH AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Viljoen, the Hon. M.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>REINECKE, Mr. C. J. (Pretoria District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1878.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>ROSSOUW, Mr. W. J. C. (Stilfontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pneumoconiosis Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 894.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>ROUX, Mr. P. C. (Mariental)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (amendment) (2R.), 2074.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHLEBUSCH, Mr. A. L. (Kroonstad)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 701.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHLEBUSCH, Mr. J. A. (Bloemfontein District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 742.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, the Hon. B. J. (Maraisburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Transport.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 493, 837; (3R.) 1021.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 863; (Committee), 865-7.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business of the House, 11, 347.</li>

<li>No Confidence, 130.</li>

<li>Hours of Sitting of the House, 1542, 1547.</li>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Appreciation, 2100.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, the Hon. H. (Standerton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Agriculture</i>.]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1329-31.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirits Control (amendment) (2R.), 1746, 1753.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 225.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, Mr. J. C. B. (Randburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 653.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SMIT, Mr. H. H. (Stellenbosch)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 583.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1414.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I28" refersTo="page_1095"/><b>SMITH, Dr. J. D. (Turffontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 560.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SMITH, Capt. W. J. B. (Pietermaritzburg City)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 705.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SOCIAL WELFARE AND PENSIONS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Mulder, Dr. the Hon. C. P.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SPEAKER AND DEPUTY SPEAKER&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> page 33.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>STEYN, Mr. S. J. M. (Yeoville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 502, 638; (3R.), 977.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 865; (Committee), 865-6.</li>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1389.</li>

<li>Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 872.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1437.</li>

<li>Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (private) (amendment) (2R.), 1465.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 333.</li>

<li>Hours of Sitting of the House, 1546.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>STOFBERG, Mr. L. F. (Worcester)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 233.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>STREICHER, Mr. D. M. (Newton Park)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 735.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1249.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 218.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SUTTON, Mr. W. M. (Mooi River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1112.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1619.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1859; (Committee), 2018; (3R.), 2042.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SUZMAN, Mrs. H. (Houghton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 749.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1053, 1057-8, 1063, 1476, 1490, 1493, 1497, 1510, 1569, 1576, 1584, 1602, 1617, 1629, 1632; (3R.), 1663.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1454.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1872; (Committee), 2017; (3R.), 2034.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 202.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 911.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>THOMPSON, Mr. J. O. N., D.F.C. (Pinelands)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1047, 1070, 1478, 1484, 1492, 1501, 1588; (3R.), 1676.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1915.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 276.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>TIMONEY, Mr. H. M. (Salt River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 693; (3R.), 985.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (Committee), 867.</li>

<li>Industrial Conciliation (amendment) (2R.), 1648, 1697.</li>

<li>Finance (Committee), 1771.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I29" refersTo="page_1096"/><b>TORLAGE, Mr. P. H. (Klip River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 148.</li>

<li>Report of Select Committee on Bantu Affairs, 1552.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>TRANSPORT, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Schoeman, the Hon. B. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TRANSPORT, DEPUTY MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Martins, the Hon. H. E.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>UYS, Senator the Hon. D. C. H.&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Agriculture</i>.]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1334.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 253.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN BREDA, Mr. A. (Tygervallei)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 802.</li>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1371.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DEN BERG, Mr. G. P. (Wolmaransstad)&#x2014; </b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1866.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DEN BERG, Mr. M. J. (Krugersdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1982.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. C. V. (Fauresmith)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1257.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Mr. H. D. K. (Rissik)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1901.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. P. S. (Middelland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1949.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Hours of Sitting of the House, 1545.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Mr. W. L. (Heidelberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (3R.), 983.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER SPUY, Senator the Hon. J. P.&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of National Education.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1217.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1321.</li>

<li>National Monuments (amendment) (2R.), 1739, 1743.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN RENSBURG, the Hon. M. C. G. J. (Bloemfontein East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Posts and Telegraphs.]</i></li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 503, 587, 637; (3R.), 823, 857.</li>

<li>Post Office Re-adjustment (amendment) (2R.), 902.</li>

<li>Post Office Additional Appropriation (2R.), 1034-9.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN STADEN, Mr. J. W. (Malmesbury)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Electoral Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1295; (Committee), 2068.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN TONDER, Mr. J. A. (Germiston District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 572.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN VUUREN, Mr. P. Z. J. (Benoni)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1431.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1586.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN ZYL, Mr. J. J. B. (Sunnyside)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 526.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1105.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I30" refersTo="page_1097"/><b>VENTER, Mr. M. J. de la R. (Colesberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 661.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VILJOEN, the Hon. M. (Alberton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Labour, of Coloured Affairs and of Rehoboth Affairs</i>.]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1335.</li>

<li>Industrial Conciliation (amendment) (2R.), 929, 1708; (3R.), 1842.</li>

<li>Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation (amendment) (2R.), 867, 879.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 41.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VILJOEN, Dr. P. J. van B. (Newcastle)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (3R.), 992.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VISSER, Dr. A. J. (Florida)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1076.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Customs Union Agreement, 1777.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VOLKER, Mr. V. A. (Umhlatuzana)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (3R.), 2029.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VORSTER, the Hon. B. J. (Nigel)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Prime Minister.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1230; (3R.), 1446.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1320.</li>

<li>Bible Society of South Africa (2R.), 1651.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Condolence:

<ul>

<li>Du Plessis, the late Mr. H. R. H., 12.</li>

<li>Lindsay, the late Maj. J. E., 14.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>No Confidence, 342, 433.</li>

<li>Appreciation, 2098.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VOSLOO, the Hon. A. H. (Somerset East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Bantu Development.</i>]</li>

</ul>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (amendment) (2R.), 2087, 2093; (Committee), 2095-7.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Report of Select Committee on Bantu Affairs, 1551, 1562.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WAINWRIGHT, Mr. C. J. S. (East London North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 576.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1930.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WATER AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF &#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>see</i> Botha, the Hon. S. P.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WATERSON, the Hon. S. F. (Constantia)&#x2014; </b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 668.</li>

<li>Fuel Research Institute and Coal (amendment) (2R.), 906.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 975, 1071.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (2R.), 1319; (Committee), 1320-1.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WEBBER, Mr. W. T. (Pietermaritzburg District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 678.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (Committee), 1330, 1334-6.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1480, 1483, 1504, 1506, 1511, 1566, 1579, 1608, 1627, 1630, 1635, 1641-4; (3R.), 1685.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands Citizenship (2R.), 1939.</li>

</ul></li>

<li><span class="col_I31" refersTo="page_1098"/>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws Amendment Bill, resumption of proceedings, 915.</li>

<li>Report of Select Committee on Bantu Affairs, 1555.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WILEY, Mr. J. W. E. (Simonstad)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 520.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 729.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WINCHESTER, Mr. L. E. D. (Port Natal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 786.</li>

<li>National Monuments (amendment) (2R.), 1741.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 171.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WOOD, Mr. L. F. (Berea)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Part Appropriation (2R.), 545.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation (2R.), 772.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="rulings_statements_etc_by_presiding_officers">

<heading><span class="col_I33" refersTo="page_1099"/>RULINGS, STATEMENTS, ETC., BY PRESIDING OFFICERS</heading>

<p>Acts, members may not reflect upon, except when moving repeal, 1225-8, 1240.</p>

<p>Adjournment of House on definite matter of urgent public importance, 837, 1837.</p>

<p>Appreciation, motion of, reply by Speaker, 2101-2.</p>

<p>Appropriation Bill(s)&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Additional, Scope of debate on, 865, 1036, 1038, 1355.

<ul>

<li>No member, except Minister in charge, may address committee of the Whole House, more than three times on any vote or head, 1328-9.</li>

<li>For difficulties arising when more than one Vote or head put simultaneously, see 1340-1343.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p>Bills&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Amending&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Debate and amendments confined to contents of (and to amendments contained in), 1046, 1055, 1841.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Clauses of &#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Details of (and not principles) to be discussed in Committee, 1599, 1607, 2068.</li>

<li>Member, other than member in charge, may not speak more than three times on a clause (including amendments), 1487-88, 2097.</li>

<li>Second reading speeches may not be made on, in Committee, 1049, 1599, 1605, 1610, 1622.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Hybrid, reference of, to Examiners, 16.</li>

<li>Proceedings on; motion that, be resumed, scope of debate on, 907, 910, 911, 917, 918, 919, 922, 927.</li>

</ul>

<p>Chair&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Member must obey (abide by, etc.) rulings of, 215, 918, 919, 920, 1226-7, etc.</li>

<li>Members must address, 1058,1253, 1608,1642.</li>

<li>Maintains order, 1642.</li>

</ul>

<p>Interjections not permissible, 241, 590, 787, etc.</p>

<p>Member(s)&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Ordered to resume seat, 920, 1488.</li>

<li>Order to withdraw for remainder of day&#x2019;s sitting, 215, 1602.</li>

<li>May not be frivolous, 832.</li>

<li>Must be referred to in proper manner, 1435.</li>

<li>Not to clap hands, 2013.</li>

<li>May not stand in passages, etc., and converse, 2071.</li>

</ul>

<p>Motion, notice of private member&#x2019;s, may only be given on opening day by Leader of Opposition, 12.</p>

<p>Opening day, notice of private member&#x2019;s motion may only be given by Leader of Opposition, 12.</p>

<p>Painting of first State President of the Republic of South Africa, presentation of, to Parliament, 837.</p>

<p>Questions&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Member may not be accused of being afraid to answer, 216.</li>

</ul>

<p>Relevancy, 653, 904, 921-22, 932, 935-6, 1026, etc.</p>

<p>Repetition, 919, 1508, 1644, 1911.</p>

<p>State President, see &#x201C;Painting&#x201D;</p>

<p><i>Sub judice</i> matters may not be referred to, 1359.</p>

<p>Unparliamentary language&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Expressions challenged&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>&#x201C;verneuk&#x201D;, 57.</li>

<li>shut up, 131-2.</li>

<li>scandalous, 179.</li>

<li>misleading the House, 311.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Expressions ruled to be unparliamentary&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>&#x2026; there must be a carrot hanging somewhere, 155.</li>

<li>&#x2026; that its policy amounts to treason against the White man of South Africa, 180-1.</li>

<li><span class="col_I34" refersTo="page_1100"/>&#x2026; who was too afraid to give evidence in court after he (an hon. member) had told lies, 214.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>lie, lying, 215, 485, 508, 529, 1230.</li>

<li>cowardly, 304.</li>

<li>threat, 1153-4, 1224.</li>

<li>&#x2026; the hon. member &#x2026; had made himself guilty of nothing less than the theft of a State document, 1264.</li>

<li>snollygoster, 1430.</li>

<li>&#x2026; members &#x2026; have been talking with their tongues in their cheeks &#x2026; 1502-3.</li>

<li>that rather rude remark, 1506-7.</li>

<li>hypocrisy, 1560.</li>

<li>It is quite obvious that the persons who have been getting exemptions from this Government in the past will get them again. They are the Nationalist supporters and persons who are prepared to pay money to this Government, 1601.</li>

<li>&#x2026; the persons who will be granted the exemptions will be those persons who claim to be supporters of the Nationalist Party, 1602.</li>

<li>&#x201C;liederlik&#x201D;, 1611.</li>

<li>You know that that is not true, 1675.</li>

<li>the dishonesty of this Government, 1941.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateBody>

</debate>

</akomaNtoso>
