---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol29 - FRIDAY 17 JULY 1970'
layout: debate
year: 1970
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading><span class="col_1-2" refersTo="page_0015"/>FRIDAY, 17TH JULY, 1970</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Pursuant to Proclamation No. 132 of the State President, dated 29th April, 1970, members assembled in the Assembly Chamber, Houses of Parliament, at 9 a.m.</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 29th April, 1970, summoning Parliament to meet to-day:</p>

<p>No. 132, 1970.]</p>

<block name="quote">Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by subsection (1) of section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby declare that the First Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on Friday, the Seventeenth day of July, 1970, for the despatch of business.</block>

<p>Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Pretoria on this Twenty-ninth day of April, One thousand Nine hundred and Seventy.</p>

<p>J. J. FOUCHE,</p>

<p>State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council.</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>The Secretary announced:</p>

<ol>

<li><p>(1)That the following letters had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a)Letter, dated 1st May, 1970, stating that the State President would open Parliament at 11 o&#x2019;clock a.m. today in the Senate Chamber;</li>

<li>(b)Letters, dated 30th April and 19th June, 1970, respectively, notifying the names of persons declared duly elected as members of the House of Assembly at the general election and a by-election;</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2)that the Honourable Mr. Justice L. C. Steyn, Chief Justice of South Africa, had been authorized by a Commission from the State President to administer the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>The Serjeant-at-Arms announced the Hon. Mr. Justice Steyn, who was received by members standing, and having taken his seat at the Table, administered the oath to the members present and thereupon withdrew.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_speaker">

<heading><span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0016"/>ELECTION OF SPEAKER</heading>

<p>The Secretary intimated that the House would proceed to the election of a Speaker.</p>

<speech by="#potgieter">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. E. POTGIETER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Henning Johannes Klopper do take the Chair of this House as Speaker.</block>

<p>This is the fourth time that it is my privilege to propose Mr. Klopper for the office of Speaker of this House. For the benefit of the newcomers to this House, I want to point out briefly what excellent services Mr. Klopper has already rendered during his period of service as a member of this House. If I remember correctly, he came to this House for the first time in July, 1943. Since then he has been a member of this House without interruption.</p>

<p>During his term of office as a member he served on various Select Committees, eventually also as Chairman of the important Select Committee on Railways and Harbours. From 1954 to 1956 he was Deputy Chairman of Committees of this House and from 1957 to 1960 Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees. Since 1960 he has held the office of Speaker of this House. He had the honour of being the last Speaker of the Parliament of the Union of South Africa and the first Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>In my opinion, a Speaker must satisfy certain stringent requirements. In the first place, he must have a thorough knowledge of the Standing Rules and Orders of this House. In the second place, he must be absolutely bilingual. In the third place, he must be fair but at the same time he must be very strict and should have a profound knowledge of human nature, because he must command the respect of his fellow men. Furthermore, he must maintain the right of free speech and at the same time ensure that that right is not abused. He must protect the constitutional minorities in this House, even if such a minority consists of fewer than two members!</p>

<p>Mr. Klopper has rendered excellent services to this House. I should just like to mention a few of them. In the first place, I think of the change-over from the monarchical to a republican form of government in this country. By his tactful and psychologically correct attitude in this House he caused that changeover to proceed very smoothly. Almost inextricably linked with that change-over was what I want to call the modernization of the Standing Rules and Orders of this House with a view to making better use of precious time and bringing about more effective debating. Mr. Klopper made a large contribution towards the streamlining of our Standing Rules and Orders. In this connection, I also want to mention our beautiful mace, of which the people and Parliament can be very proud. This gold mace is the symbol of the authority of this Parliament. Here I also think of the typically South African national symbols which Mr. Klopper had incorporated on this mace.</p>

<p>I do not wish to elaborate further on Mr. Klopper&#x2019;s achievements, except to say that he has succeeded in bringing Parliament closer to the people and the people closer to Parliament. This is indeed a great achievement. Mr. Klopper is a dignified personality and as such he has imparted dignity and lustre to the proceedings in this House.</p>

<p>The Speaker is always right. Here I think I must quote to you what Sir Erskine May said about the Speakership&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Speaker is the representative of the House itself in its powers, proceedings and dignities.</block>

<p>I am convinced that, just as he performed the functions attaching to the Speakership in a wonderful way in the past, Mr. Klopper will bring even more dignity and lustre to the proceedings in this House during the term of office which awaits him. I am convinced that his election as Speaker will meet with the unanimous approval of all sides of this House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hopewell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. HOPEWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It is my privilege on behalf of the official Opposition to second the motion proposed by the Chief Whip on the Government side. In doing so I should like to remind the House of the words in St. Matthew: &#x201C;And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant &#x201D;. So is the Speaker at the same time the chief and the servant of this House. It is his prerogative to admonish any hon. member, from the Prime Minister down to the lowest member. Of course, we hope he shall not have to do either in the forthcoming session. Mr. Klopper has had a long experience in this House. His office depends upon the co-operation he gets from the Whips from both sides of the House, from the Leader of the House and from the ordinary members. As far as we on this side of the House are concerned, I want to say that co-operation between the Whips has been very good indeed in the past under the leadership of the hon. the Minister of Transport and as long as that co-operation exists and there is impartiality in decisions and acknowledgement and protection of the rights of minorities I am sure the Speaker will be able to carry out his functions in the best traditions of the parliaments of the world.</p>

<p>There being no other proposal, Mr. Klopper was called to the Chair by the Secretary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#klopper">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. J. KLOPPER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. McFarlane, it is with a feeling of great humility at the honour which has once again been bestowed upon me that I submit myself to the will of this House and accept nomination as Speaker. The unanimity which has accompanied this nomination gives me great satisfaction.</p>

<p>*Although this is the fourth occasion on which I have been accorded the singular privilege <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0017"/>of being elected to preside over the deliberations of this House, it is, nevertheless, with great trepidation and a deep sense of the responsibilities attaching to this high office that I embark upon my new term of duty. Ever mindful of my many shortcomings, I shall consistently strive to maintain those high standards of ability and impartiality that have been set by my predecessors, and I am convinced that, as in the past, I shall be able to rely upon all hon. members to assist me in maintaining the dignity of this House at all times.</p>

<p>Mr. J. E. Potgieter and Mr. A. Hopewell conducted Mr. Klopper to the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, may I avail myself of this opportunity, a traditional opportunity, to congratulate you very sincerely on having once more been elected Speaker of this House. You have occupied the Chair of this House as Speaker for a whole decade and the fact that you have, after a ten-year period of service in this office, been elected unanimously to-day to hold that high office again, illustrates more than anything else how hon. members of this House feel towards you.</p>

<p>I associate myself wholeheartedly with what was said by the Chief Whip on this side as well as the Chief Whip on the other side of the House. You have once again been elected to hold this office because it is the conviction of all the hon. members of this House that you have, in past years, held this office with exceptional dignity. Not only did you hold the office with dignity; when it was necessary you acted with very great firmness, and all of us who have been in this House for a number of years, know that there are times when it is indeed necessary to act with great firmness. You have shown that you have the dignity as well as the necessary firmness and tact to hold this high office. You have also, when it was necessary, showed that you have the sense of humour required in order best to hold this office. As the servant of this House you have at all times fulfilled your task in a dignified manner. You have been a credit not only to the prestige of Parliament, but also to the image presented by it, both inside and outside this House.</p>

<p>I congratulate you very sincerely on your reappointment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I am never sure whether it is ground for congratulation to be elected to the post of Speaker. I am very conscious of your powers and at the same time also of your responsibilities. These responsibilities would be a burden to any lesser man.</p>

<p>We congratulate you on the fact that we on this side of the House have found it possible once again to support your appointment. You are the keeper of the traditions of this House, you are the keeper of our rights, particularly of the rights of the minorities. We have great confidence that in the years that lie ahead you will observe these duties and have regard to those rights in the best traditions of the South African Parliament.</p>

<p>I congratulate you on your appointment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#suzman">

<from>Mrs. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. SUZMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I think I am possibly in the best position in this House to pay tribute to you as the protector of the rights of minority groups, and I do so with all sincerity. It has been my privilege to serve under you as a member of a minority group for the past 10 years and, if I may say so, no higher tribute could be paid to your impartiality by any member of a minority group than the tribute I want to pay to you. Therefore, I should like to congratulate you on your reappointment and to thank you for the protection you have afforded minority groups in this House in the past.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to thank the hon. the Prime Minister, the hon. the Leader of the Opposition and the leader of the smallest minority group in this House, most sincerely for the expressions of goodwill which they have conveyed to me, on behalf of hon. members on both sides of the House, on my re-election as Speaker. As presiding officer it will be my duty to ensure that, while the will of the majority must prevail, the rights of the minority will be protected.</p>

<p>*I am convinced that I shall receive from all hon. members the same wholehearted cooperation that they have always given me in the past; that, by acting with due decorum, they will assist me in maintaining the dignity of this House at all times; and that, while differences of opinion must of necessity arise, the deliberations thereon will be conducted in an atmosphere of mutual respect and awareness of the right of all members to hold, and voice, divergent opinions.</p>

<p>I should like to extend a very warm welcome indeed to the new members who have been sworn in to-day and to express the conviction that they will perform the tasks entrusted to them sincerely, honourably and with respect for the traditions of Parliament. They have become participators in a free and democratic parliamentary institution, which is one of our most precious heritages. May they guard this heritage jealously and strive continually to build upon it. I thank you.</p>

<p>With the help and guidance of Almighty God I am and remain your servant. I thank you for the honour which you have once again bestowed upon me. From my side you will receive the most cordial co-operation.</p>

<p>Proceedings suspended at 9.58 a.m. and resumed at 10.40 a.m.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_speakers_report">

<heading><span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0018"/>MR. SPEAKER&#x2019;S REPORT</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I have to report that after the House had suspended proceedings this morning, I proceeded to Government House accompanied by Ministers, the Leader of the Opposition and other hon. members, where we were received by the State President, to whom I presented myself pursuant to the Standing Orders of this House. The State President then congratulated me on my election.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_ceremony">

<heading>OPENING CEREMONY</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER and members proceeded to the Senate Chamber to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#commission_to_mr_speaker_from_the_state_president_to_administer_oath_or_affirmation">

<heading>COMMISSION TO MR. SPEAKER FROM THE STATE PRESIDENT TO ADMINISTER OATH OR AFFIRMATION</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table:</p>

<block name="quote">Commission from the State President, dated 17 th July, 1970, authorizing Henning Johannes Klopper to administer, as long as he holds the office of Speaker of the House of Assembly during the continuance of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_address">

<heading>OPENING ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, Which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I am glad to welcome you to this the First Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>The international situation remains a cause for concern and has, in certain respects, even deteriorated during past months. In South-East Asia the conflict has, as a result of communist infiltration, spread to Cambodia. In the Middle East the extent to which Russia has become involved in the conflict is becoming more disquieting. Coupled with this we find that terrorist activities and other attempts to undermine established order are being experienced over an ever-widening area.</p>

<p>It is heartening to note that signs of resistance to this lawlessness are beginning to appear. In this regard the declared policy of the United States of America of condemning and discouraging attempts to solve Africa&#x2019;s problems by violent means, is welcomed.</p>

<p>Communist intrusion and infiltration into the Indian Ocean and certain African States are a constant reminder of how close this danger has come to our own continent and how necessary it has become that those who oppose Communism should, also in their own interest, realize the seriousness of this situation. It is gratifying to note in this regard that South Africa&#x2019;s standpoint concerning the importance of the Cape sea route is being appreciated more and more by powers of the Free World.</p>

<p>The Government continues its endeavours to extend the scope of its friendly relations with other countries. Several initiatives have been taken in this regard.</p>

<p>In Africa and elsewhere there has been further encouraging progress in our relations with a number of states, and co-operation in matters of common concern has been advanced by a number of official visitors and delegations from these countries to South Africa, as well as by visits and missions from the Republic to other states.</p>

<p>With a view to combating the infiltration of terrorists and other subversive elements, the South African Police are still guarding the borders in the far north over a distance of approximately four thousand miles. In encounters with terrorists there were, fortunately, no fatal casualties on our side, but several of our policemen were wounded whilst a number of terrorists were killed.</p>

<p>The world-wide tendency of increasing incidence of crime is also experienced in the Republic to a limited degree, but the South African Police are coping satisfactorily with the position. The assistance which the Police are receiving in this regard from the law-abiding section of the population, is appreciated.</p>

<p>In the war of words we dare not, and will not remain silent or relax in our efforts. Fortunately it can be stated that the message of South Africa is being proclaimed far and wide, in written, spoken, and visual form, not only in the most important languages of the Western world, but also in the Bantu languages of South Africa.</p>

<p>In spite of world-wide difficulties which give rise to concern, sound economic conditions prevail in South Africa. Circumstances necessitated the continued maintenance of restrictions on credit, but these restrictions are being adjusted in the light of prevailing conditions and, where possible, relaxation is being granted.</p>

<p>Imports have risen in recent months while the value of exports and gold production has declined slightly. The resulting deficit in the balance of payments on current account has been offset to some extent by an inflow of capital, so that our reserves of gold and foreign exchange have not declined <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0019"/>to the extent of this adverse balance. These reserves are still healthy and the balance of payments causes no fiscal concern; nevertheless, the unfavourable balance on current account cannot be ignored.</p>

<p>The new arrangement for the marketing of South African gold has thus far worked smoothly. During the first few months of 1970, when the price on the private market fell below the official gold price, substantial quantities of gold were sold at the official price to the International Monetary Fund. Since then the price on the private market has risen and our gold has been sold in this market at a premium.</p>

<p>Share prices lately declined again after a period of relative stability, mainly as a result of the recession on certain overseas stock exchanges. Since the South African economy is basically strong and company profits remain at a high level, there is actually little reason for South African share prices to follow slavishly the trends on overseas exchanges.</p>

<p>The Government hopes to table during this Session White Papers containing its decisions on the reports of the Commission of Inquiry into the Financial Relations between the Government and the Provinces and of the Committee of Inquiry into the Financial Relations between the Government, the Provinces and Local Authorities.</p>

<p>During the past year the high level of consumer expenditure, which provides evidence of the high standard of living of all our population groups, has made a strong contribution towards the growth of our economy.</p>

<p>The Government has decided to make a contribution of R120,000, spread over the next three years, to the Potchefstroom University for Higher Christian Education for its proposed National Institute for the Distributive Trade which will give advice to smaller commercial undertakings.</p>

<p>In order to promote a sustained increase in exports, the Government has improved its export promotional services considerably, and is concentrating upon manufactured goods.</p>

<p>As a result of the sustained favourable trends in the balance of payments, the Government experienced considerable pressure in recent years under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to discontinue the application of import control for balance-of-payments reasons. The Government was accordingly obliged not to proceed with the use of import control for this purpose. However, since import control had afforded a measure of incidental protection to local producers and manufacturers, the Government announced that import control would not be further relaxed until it was able to assist such entrepreneurs by granting a reasonable measure of tariff protection.</p>

<p>In order to obtain this right, the Government has already commenced negotiations with the member states of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade on its tariff commitments.</p>

<p>The work of the Commission of Inquiry into the Companies Act has now progressed so far that it is hoped that its general report will be tabled during the current session. Thereafter the Commission&#x2019;s supplementary report and draft legislation must still follow.</p>

<p>Rapid economic development can only provide lasting benefits if the rate of development is compatible with our physical ability to achieve and maintain such a rate of growth. It is therefore important that our people should alleviate, by means of the more productive application of all their energies and resources, the problems which continue to restrict the Republic&#x2019;s growth potential. In the long run we cannot afford to consume more than we produce without strengthening the forces of inflation.</p>

<p>The country&#x2019;s industrial output increased remarkably during the past year, despite the fact that new investment in the manufacturing sector revealed a measure of tardiness.</p>

<p>In the Republic&#x2019;s further industrial development the socio-economic targets must constantly be kept in view. The objective of ensuring that all parts of the country benefit thereby and of accelerating the provision of employment opportunities in and around the Bantu homelands, is being pursued still more intensely. The establishment of industries in border industrial areas is increasing so rapidly that the creation of the necessary infra-structure is being accelerated at selected growth points. At the same time, however, the future of the already developed areas must be ensured.</p>

<p>In the field of mining the consistency of production, combined with an increase in the refining of different minerals, remains one of the most pleasing aspects of our economy.</p>

<p>A comprehensive five-year plan has been devised for the geological mapping of the Republic and South West Africa and for collecting other basic data essential to the search and evaluation of our mineral reserves.</p>

<p>Essential geological and geophysical investigations in the search for natural oil in the Republic&#x2019;s territorial waters and on the continental shelf have already to a great extent been completed. Depending upon the availability of suitable sea drills, a start will be made in the foreseeable future with drilling in various new areas on the seabed.</p>

<p>The further development of our country will be determined to a great extent by the proper use of its water resources. The Government regards the water situation in the country in such a serious light that it is endeavouring <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0020"/>by means of the Water Year Programmes to make every member of the public more water-conscious.</p>

<p>Larger and larger amounts are being spent annually on water works. Capital expenditure has increased fivefold since 1964, while the number of completed major dams has doubled during the period 1960 to 1970.</p>

<p>The report of the Commission of Inquiry into Water Affairs will be tabled during the present Session of Parliament.</p>

<p>Endeavours are being made to find new sources of water. Water is already being reused to a limited extent, and research is being continued uninterruptedly to solve the problem of desalting sea water cheaply.</p>

<p>It has been decided to establish a further branch in the Department of Water Affairs, namely the Scientific Services Branch, to assist in ensuring that the latest appropriate scientific knowledge is utilized for the development of water resources.</p>

<p>From a small start the forest industry in the country has developed into an economic giant, which at present represents capital assets in excess of R600 million. The State&#x2019;s share in these assets amounts to approximately one-third. A Forestry Advisory Council has been established to advise the Minister of Forestry, particularly on matters affecting the interests of the private sector.</p>

<p>The drought of the past season, which in extent and severity is almost unequalled in living memory, has once again proved how dependent we in South Africa are on our natural veld. For this reason the Government has also, apart from the financial assistance rendered to farmers for drought-relief and the protection of pasture land, given high priority to the efficient utilization of the veld.</p>

<p>A Soil Protection Advisory Board was established on the 1st April, 1970, to advise the Minister of Agriculture. This step should make a valuable contribution to the creation of a positive attitude towards the problem of soil erosion and the more effective protection and utilization of the agricultural resources of the Republic.</p>

<p>The campaigns for the extermination of the tsetse fly, conducted jointly by the Governments of Mozambique, Rhodesia and the Republic in the two neighbouring States, have yielded good results and have decreased the danger of the re-appearance of the tsetse fly in the Republic.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding the drought, reasonably favourable conditions were experienced in field and horticultural crop production, although the reverse is true for pastoral products.</p>

<p>In the case of wheat, a record crop was harvested and, owing to an early season, good summer grain crops were obtained in the acknowledged field crop production areas. In the southern and western sections of the maize production area, summer grain crops were, however, poor. Nevertheless, relatively large quantities of maize and kaffir corn will become available for export.</p>

<p>The drought in the Western Province had an adverse effect on the deciduous fruit crop. Exports of deciduous fruit were none the less of a fair size and relatively good prices were obtained. Although extremely adverse conditions are being experienced in some of the citrus producing areas, it is expected that the 1970 citrus crop will not differ appreciably from that of the previous year.</p>

<p>Unfavourable weather conditions had a harmful effect on the quality and quantity of the wool clip and, in addition, developments on the wool market were extremely disappointing, with a decrease in prices of almost 10 per cent over the season. Fresh and industrial milk production decreased sharply even before the start of the winter, and consequently a special premium was paid in the case of fresh milk, while winter premiums in respect of industrial milk were increased in an attempt to maintain production as far as possible. As far as the meat market is concerned, meat supplies increased considerably. As a result of the introduction of quota restrictions in almost all the controlled areas in order to avoid the overloading of slaughter facilities, pressure was experienced in the uncontrolled areas where prices declined more sharply than in controlled areas.</p>

<p>In order to relieve the state of emergency in the livestock industry owing to continued drought, the existing emergency assistance schemes were extended and additional measures taken to assist producers to overcome the present unusually difficult winter.</p>

<p>Farmers are being assisted by the State on an extensive scale with loans by the Agricultural Credit Board for the acquisition of fodder, grazing and water for the preservation of their livestock. I hope and pray that rain will speedily bring relief.</p>

<p>*The establishment of forms of government for the various Bantu peoples has virtually been finalized and is merely being rounded off at present. Urgent attention is being given to the establishment of separate districts for the Bantu homelands, after which the various Bantu peoples will administratively have been placed on a fixed course.</p>

<p>In respect of the development of the Bantu homelands purposeful steps are being taken to give added impetus to industrial development within the homelands by admitting Whites on an agency basis.</p>

<p>With this end in view the establishment of the necessary infra-structure, transport services, balanced physical development and the building of township complexes in the homelands are being proceeded with all the time. For this purpose a sound regional development <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0021"/>pattern is being applied and an agricultural organization that can be handled by the Bantu is being developed.</p>

<p>The Coloured Persons&#x2019; Representative Council met and elected its Executive and office bearers in November last year, and will meet for its first full-fledged session later this year. A large number of functions have already been transferred to this Council, and the administrative machinery in this regard is functioning well. Talks are being envisaged to establish the necessary liaison between Parliament and this Council.</p>

<p>The Government is constantly engaged in helping the Indians in the Republic to develop systematically in matters of government. Their participation in their own local government is being promoted and the South African Indian Council is increasingly fulfilling its role as a link between the Government and the Indian community.</p>

<p>A state of full employment still obtains in the Republic. At present the number of registered unemployed persons amounts to only 0.5 per cent of the number of persons employed, which is the lowest unemployment rate over the past 20 years.</p>

<p>The phenomenal growth South Africa has been experiencing over the years has brought about a manpower shortage, and this matter, as well as the raising of productivity, is receiving the Government&#x2019;s constant attention.</p>

<p>Over the past year there have been no instances of industrial unrest or disputes worth mentioning. It is trusted that this spirit of co-operation and goodwill in the industrial sphere will be fostered to the benefit of the whole of South Africa.</p>

<p>Although certain African territories yielded a strong flow of immigrants for a number of years, it was to be foreseen that these territories would only be a temporary source of immigrants. Those countries which have over the years been South Africa&#x2019;s traditional sources of immigrants are still making their contribution in this regard.</p>

<p>Over the past two decades the country&#x2019;s telecommunications system has been more than quadrupled in virtually every respect and has been automated to a large extent.</p>

<p>The national telex and gentex system has also been fully automated and it is possible for both private telex subscribers and post offices making use of teleprinters for the transmission of telegrams, to dial one another directly on a national basis. The international telex service will also have been automated within a few years.</p>

<p>Good progress has also been made with the automation of the entire telephone system and with the system of national trunk-line subscriber dialling.</p>

<p>All over the world the development of new techniques and the provision of facilities have the effect of stimulating the demand for more and better facilities. These problems are being experienced by South Africa as well.</p>

<p>Nevertheless, every effort is being made, not only to meet the increasing demand for telecommunications services and to make up the backlog&#x2014;especially in the capacity of the system&#x2014;but also in this process to keep abreast of technological development so that South Africa may render the best service in the sphere of telecommunications.</p>

<p>South Africa&#x2019;s eleventh population census, the first since the establishment of the Republic, was taken on 6th May, 1970.</p>

<p>The census took place at the end of a decade characterized not only by remarkable industrial development and a high growth rate of the economy as a Whole, but also by a sustained increase in immigration, which has had a considerable effect on the growth rate of the white population.</p>

<p>Population statistics collected during the census will furnish a factual reflection of every facet of the national economy that is of importance to those entrusted with the planning, administrative and executive functions in the public and private sectors. The picture presented by the census will indicate the population&#x2019;s potential for further development and reflect changes in the economically active population and the capacity of the country as far as its manpower is concerned.</p>

<p>The work in connection with the proposed reorganization, modernization and development of the population register, with which the central fire-arms register and the central traffic register will be incorporated, has already reached an advanced stage. It is also the intention to introduce a consolidated identity document for members of the population groups of South West Africa.</p>

<p>One of the most important benefits of the proposed system to both the public and the State is that it will eventually be possible to abolish the general registration of voters.</p>

<p>The provision of housing for the lower income groups of the population was such and the development of proclaimed residential areas for the separate population groups took place at such a rate that the intended development may be completed within seven years. When all communities will have been settled in satisfactory circumstances in their own residential areas.</p>

<p>The Government has for a considerable time been concerned about the ever-increasing selling prices of plots and unplanned land to be utilized for township development. The Commission appointed to investigate this matter has already completed its task, and its report will be made available shortly.</p>

<p>The Government has continued the distress relief services in the Boland disaster area with every possible means at its disposal. <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0022"/>Since similar disasters could befall other areas in the Republic, the Government would like to urge everyone to see to it that their properties are properly covered by insurance against such damage.</p>

<p>In fields such as child care, family life, the care of the aged, alcoholism and the abuse of drugs, valuable contacts with overseas countries have been built up, and these are being followed up. As far as social planning is concerned, contact is being maintained with other countries in Southern Africa by means of discussions, which will afford developing countries in this sub-continent an opportunity of benefiting from the Republic&#x2019;s knowledge and experience in this sphere.</p>

<p>The interests of the aged are receiving sympathetic attention and it is the intention to expand measures in order to give effect to the declared policy that the aged should be enabled to lead independent lives in the everyday community for as long as possible.</p>

<p>With effect from 1st April, 1970, the Government introduced a new dispensation in regard to the provision of health services in the Bantu homelands. The divided control in the sphere of health care has been terminated, so that the Departments of Health and Bantu Administration and Development are responsible for the planning and implementation of health services in the Bantu homelands.</p>

<p>The rapid development and expansion in virtually every sphere of our national economy, together with our task and vocation in our country, are making great demands on all sectors of the community, but particularly on the State and its officials. Competition for the services of our available manpower has constantly become keener, and the State, like many other major employers in the country, finds itself in the position that it does not always have sufficient manpower at its disposal. The result is that considerable efforts on the part of the officials are required to ensure the smooth functioning of the machinery of state. Appreciation is expressed to the officials for the services which they are rendering to our country and to all groups of our community, as well as for the valuable contribution which they are making to the successful administration of the country.</p>

<p>The State President&#x2019;s Sports Award for 1969 was conferred upon the 1969-&#x2019;70 Springbok rugby touring team to Britain in recognition of their excellent conduct and sportsmanlike behaviour.</p>

<p>The second South African Non-Whites Games, organized by the Department of Sport and Recreation, was held with great success in Johannesburg under the auspices of the South African Olympic Games Association, in the same way as the South African Games, which were presented for White participants in Bloemfontein in 1969.</p>

<p>The same Department, in conjunction with the Central Water Year Committee, is also organizing the five major water sport festivals which will take place during October and November in each of the four provinces and in South West Africa.</p>

<p>Our country unquestionably still constitutes a great tourist attraction, as is evident from the fact that the number of tourists in 1969 exceeded the number in 1968 by approximately 10 per cent.</p>

<p>The flow of students to the universities has increased out of proportion to the growth in population. As a result of the Government&#x2019;s realization of the importance of higher education for our youth, it has in the past two years increased its contribution to the finances of the universities more than twofold.</p>

<p>With a view to the provision of the best training and educational facilities on the one hand and the greatest utilization of our human material on the other, duplication among the universities and the institutions for advanced technical and commercial education, as well as the maldistribution of students among the above-mentioned institutions, will have to receive serious attention.</p>

<p>With a view to achieving the desired coordination the Departments of Higher Education and Cultural Affairs are being combined, with effect from 1st November, into one Department, which will be called the Department of National Education.</p>

<p>Our scientists are in many fields making an important contribution to the development of the country, and exceptional progress has been made in the field of research, in regard to which Parliament will be informed in due course.</p>

<p>A number of Bills will be submitted to you for consideration.</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">Estimates of revenue and expenditure for the current financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</p>

<p>I now declare this the First Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>Mr. P. R. de Jager, introduced by Mr. G. P. van den Berg and Mr. G. P. C. Bezuidenhout, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading><span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0023"/>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I should just like to inform the House that the Government intends arranging the business of the House as follows: On 29th July the Railway Budget will be presented, on 10th August the Post Office Budget, and on 12th August the Main Budget of the Minister of Finance.</p>

<p>In addition, I move as an unopposed motion:</p>

<block name="quote">That, notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 30&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(a)private members&#x2019; business shall have precedence on the first Monday of the Session, after Government business has been disposed of; and</li>

<li>(b)that, on and after Tuesday, 28th July, Government business shall have precedence after Questions have been disposed of.</li>

</ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>Late Mr. A. L. Raubenheimer</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 19th March of Mr. Abraham Louw Raubenheimer, who represented the electoral division of Langlaagte in the third Parliament of the Republic, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his parliamentary service, which extended over a period of almost four years.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Mr. Abraham Raubenheimer, who was born in 1913 and was, therefore, a relatively young man, served in the Transvaal Provincial Council for approximately 12 years until he was elected to the House of Assembly in 1966 as the member for the constituency of Langlaagte. He was a very modest and a most friendly and pleasant colleague, a man who was popular among his friends as well as those who differed with him politically. He was a man with a ready smile for everybody, and a man who was particularly dedicated to the interests of his constituents and of his people. The sudden death of this popular member, who had served in this House for only four years, came as a shock to all of us. In the normal course of events one anticipated that he would have rendered many years of service to this House and to the country.</p>

<p>We should like to extend our deepest sympathy to his wife, his three sons and his daughter.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House would like to be associated with the words that have fallen from the lips of the hon. the Prime Minister in respect of the late Mr. Raubenheimer. Mr. Raubenheimer served his fellow men at municipal, provincial and parliamentary level. He was a withdrawn type of man, but a man who gave tremendous attention to the interests particularly of the underdog. Sir, his passing came as a shock and I feel sure that all of us would like to express our very sincere sympathy to the members of his family. His passing is a loss because this was a man whom we felt would in due course have made his mark in this House.</p>

<p>I second.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1970-07-17T11:50:00">11.50 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

