---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol7 - TUESDAY 20 APRIL 1926'
layout: debate
year: 1926
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 20th APRIL, 1926.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1926-04-20T14:19:00">2.19 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

<debateSection name="#decreases_in_customs_duties">

<heading>DECREASES IN CUSTOMS DUTIES.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I lay upon the Table schedule of decreases in customs duty which it is proposed to embody in the Bill to be introduced during the present session of Parliament.</p>

<p>During the budget debate I indicated the proposed increases, but there are a number of decreases which will only come up when the Bill is introduced and, for the information of hon. members, I lay on the Table particulars of these decreases.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>BAIN&#x2019;S KLOOF, ROAD CONSTRUCTION AT.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the road construction on Bain&#x2019;s Kloof is under Union or Provincial control ;</li>

<li>(2) if under Union control, whether the Government is aware of the present miserable condition of the road on the Worcester side;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government will take the necessary steps to have the worst places repaired until actual construction takes place ;</li>

<li>(4) whether the Government will take the necessary steps to accellerate construction ; and</li>

<li>(5) if under Provincial control, whether the Government will bring pressure to bear to have the work accelerated ?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE</from>

<p>replied:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) The road construction on Bain&#x2019;s Kloof is under Provincial control.</li>

<li>(2), (3) and (4) fall away.</li>

<li>(5) The representations made are being brought to the notice of the Provincial authorities.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>CUSTOMS TARIFF AMENDMENTS.</heading>

<question by="#hattingh" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>II.</num>

<from>The Rev. Mr. HATTINGH (for Mr. Munnik)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether in view of the fact that the Government&#x2019;s adoption of the Report of the Board of Trade and Industries on Customs Tariff Amendments indicates an entire change of policy, the Government will cause the report to be published and circulated amongst members for their enlightenment ?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hattingh">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The answer is in the affirmative.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>KALAHARI RECONNAISSANCE.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) When the report of the Commission on the Kalahari reconnaissance will be placed before the House ; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will recommend the printing of the report in view of the great public interest in the question ?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#giovanetti">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I would invite the hon. member&#x2019;s reference to the reply given to question XVIII. on the 2nd March last.</li>

<li>(2) The report will be printed for the information of the public.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RHODESIA WHOLESALE, LIMITED.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether, in view of the statement reported in the public press that the magistrate of Cape Town said he strongly suspected the company registered as &#x201C;Rhodesia Wholesale, Limited&#x201D; to be a huge swindle, and seeing that members thereof are now being sold up to satisfy calls on shares, the Government will institute a searching enquiry into the action of the promoters and directors of the company?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I beg to refer the hon. member to the reply which was given by me to question No. XIII. on the 2nd of last month.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>IMPERIAL COLD STORAGE AND BUILDINGS AT WALVIS BAY.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance.</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was approximately the total cost of foundations, etc., for cold storage buildings at Walvis Bay handed over to the Imperial Cold Storage and Supply Co. by the late Government; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the amount is recoverable or was a free gift to the company?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#hay">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I would refer the hon. member to the reply given by my <span class="col_2557-2558" refersTo="page_0231"/>predecessor on 18th March, 1924, on this matter, and also to the agreement between the Administration of South-West Africa and the Imperial Cold Storage and Supply Company, Limited, in connection with the erection and construction of cold storage and refrigerating works at Walfish Bay which was laid upon the Table of the House on the 12th February, 1924.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>TRADE RETURNS.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether, if trade returns for October, 1925, cannot be issued before the end of March, as in the last issue of the publication, he will arrange for the issue of a quarterly or half-yearly return only, and so save the almost useless expense of the monthly publication ?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>It is considered that it would not be in the public interest to agree to the issue of quarterly or half-yearly trade returns, for their usefulness and value lie in the frequency of their publication. As soon as the annual statement for 1925 is issued the monthly publication will appear at regular intervals. Adequate arrangements have been made for effect to be given to this.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>CAPE PROVINCE EDUCATION.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Apart entirely from ordinary subsidies, what amount approximately has been provided from Union funds for Cape province education, including redemption payment of school board or other liabilities, since the date of Union ; and</li>

<li>(2) how much of this sum is recoverable from the province?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The hon. member&#x2019;s question is not understood, but if he will call at the Treasury, at his convenience, he will be furnished with all the information he may desire.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>POSTS: FIXED ESTABLISHED OFFICIALS.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. A. I. E. DE VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many officials are there on the fixed establishment of the Department of Posts and Telegraphs ;</li>

<li>(2) how many of these officials are in the first grade and how many in higher grades ;</li>

<li>(3) what percentage of the last mentioned is bilingual (a) in the executive division and (b) in the administrative division ;</li>

<li>(4) what are the respective functions of the southern, northern and central administrations:</li>

<li>(5) how many posts of the first grade and higher grades are there in each of these administrations ;</li>

<li>(6) whether it is a fact that only the central administration is directly responsible to the Minister; and</li>

<li>(7) whether the Minister is prepared to give the full names of all officials above the grade of senior clerk in the central administration, with their respective grades and qualifications, and also to state how many of them are able to do the office correspondence in English as well as in Afrikaans?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#de_villiers">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>The return will be laid upon the Table.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>AFRIKAANS DICTIONARY.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_education">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Education why the agreement between the Minister and the Nasionale Pers Beperk to publish a dictionary in Afrikaans, at a cost of £14,500, is for a unilingual work and not for one in both official languages as is usual in the case of other Union publications ?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_education" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF EDUCATION:</from>

<p>The purpose of the dictionary is to give as completely as possible the Afrikaans vocabulary and to deal with it according to the most modern and best scientific method. The proposed dictionary is, therefore, not an ordinary Government publication merely for information purposes, in which the substance would be the most important and the form of language a subsidiary consideration, but is to be a scientific production with a view to the study of the Afrikaans language. There are in fact several bilingual Afrikaans-English and English-Afrikaans dictionaries in existence and the need for such a publication is, therefore, not so great as for a scientific collection of Afrikaans words and expressions with reliable information as to their meaning, pronunciation and derivation.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>LABOUR COLONIES FOR EUROPEANS.</heading>

<question by="#o&#x2019;brien" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. O&#x2019;BRIEN (for Mr. Papenfus)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour whether the Government intends introducing legislation this, or dining a later, session for the establishment of labour colonies in respect of Europeans on the lines indicated by his predecessor in the litter&#x2019;s public statements?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#o&#x2019;brien">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>A Bill to provide for the establishment of labour colonies is in the course of preparation, and it is hoped to bring this measure forward at an early date.</p>

<p>XI. Standing over.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: WORCESTER, COTTAGES AT.</heading>

<question by="#heatlie" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. HEATLIE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that there is a serious shortage of railway cottages at Worcester, and that many of the railway employees experience great difficulty in finding housing accommodation for themselves and their families ; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will at an early date have some more cottages erected ?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#heatlie">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Although I am unaware of representations <span class="col_2559-2560" refersTo="page_0232"/>having been made regarding an acute shortage of houses at Worcester, I understand that 51 members of the staff at that centre are in occupation of residences in the town, while one official is waiting for suitable accommodation. It is only possible to provide annually a limited sum of money for the erection of quarters for the Administration&#x2019;? staff. The demands for housing are fairly numerous in various parts of the Union, but the claims of Worcester will be considered on their merits in conjunction with other places where additional housing accommodation is required.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#heatlie" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIII. and XIV.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>NELSPOORT TUBERCULOSIS SANATORIUM, DOCTOR AT.</heading>

<question by="#louw" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. J. P. LOUW</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Why it was considered necessary to appoint the superintendent of an English sanatorium as <i>locum tenens</i> for Dr. Allen, of the Nelspoort Tuberculosis Sanatorium ;</li>

<li>(2) whether the <i>locum tenens</i> is bilingual, and whether he has any knowledge of the conditions of this country ;</li>

<li>(3 whether he is registered in South Africa as a doctor ;</li>

<li>(4) whether there are not equally capable Afrikander doctors who could take the place of Dr. Allen whilst the latter is on leave ; and</li>

<li>(5) whether, in view of the Minister having publicly stated that it is his desire to appoint bilingual doctors, he will undertake that in the future no such appointment as that now referred to will be made overseas ?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#louw">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<p>No suitable medical man with the requisite special knowledge and experience of tuberculosis work and sanatorium administration was at the time available in the Union, so far as could be ascertained. The officer appointed has had South African domicile since 1901, has been registered as a chemist and druggist in the Cape and Orange Free State since that date, and was a member of the Orange Free State Medical and Pharmacy Council from 1904 to 1916. Since when he has been absent from South Africa obtaining a medical degree and doing post-graduate and specialist work. He has a working knowledge of Afrikaans and an intimate knowledge of South African conditions.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#louw" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>XVI.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PLAGUE : IS IT BUBONIC?</heading>

<question by="#louw" to="#minister_of_health">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. J. P. LOUW</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Health:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that experts seriously doubt whether what is known as plague in the Union is really bubonic plague or simply a disease of rodents ;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware that such a rodent disease is known and combatted by the American Government in the Philippine Islands as something which has nothing to do with plague ;</li>

<li>(3) whether cases of this disease have already appeared, and, if so, upon whose authority it was declared that they were cases of bubonic plague ; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the Minister will take into consideration the advisability of sending for an expert from the Dutch East Indies and allowing him a free hand to carry out the necessary research in order to ascertain whether we are actually having bubonic plague in the Union?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#louw">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<p>I am not aware that experts have any such doubts. I would refer the hon. member to my replies to questions by Dr. Stals on 12th February and 13th April last. Dr. Charles Porter, late Medical Officer of Health, Johannesburg, and a member of the Union Council of Public Health, has recently visited the Dutch East Indies and on behalf of this Government has enquired into plague matters there ; his erport was received a few days ago and is at present under consideration.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#louw" to="#minister_of_health">

<num>XVIII. and XIX.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>CUSTOMS: EVASIONS OF DUTY, PROSECUTIONS FOR.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE replied to Question V. by Mr. Hay, standing over from 30th March.</p>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>QUESTION:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many actions were taken against importers for attempted evasion of customs duty in 1925 ;</li>

<li>(2) how many convictions were secured in open court ;</li>

<li>(3) how many cases of evasion were arranged privately without process of law ; and</li>

<li>(4) approximately what was the total amount of fines imposed for evasion in 1925 ?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hay">

<heading>REPLY:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) 27.</li>

<li>(2) 24.</li>

<li>(3) None.</li>

<li>(4) Approximately £650.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#sugar_report">

<heading>SUGAR REPORT.</heading>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister of Defence when he is going to lay on the Table the report of the Board of Trade and Industries on the sugar business.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>My colleague the Minister of Mines and Industries, as the hon. member is aware, has now returned. I cannot give the hon. member an answer to his question, but I will mention the matter to my colleague.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>We have already got the English copy and we are now busy with the translation. As soon as that is finished, the report will be laid on the Table.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_j_rudolph">

<heading>PETITION J. RUDOLPH.</heading>



<speech by="#te_water">

<from><span class="col_2561-2562" refersTo="page_0233"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">TE WATER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from J. Rudolph, of Pretoria, a builder and contractor, who Suffered financial loss owing to the cancellation of his contract for the building of a high school at Lydenburg, praying for the consideration of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 19th April, 1926, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#brink">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BRINK</person></from>

<p>seconded. Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_a_t_mncadi">

<heading>PETITION A. T. MNCADI.</heading>

<speech by="#payn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PAYN</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from A. T. Mncadi, a minister of religion of Marianhill, on behalf of two hundred native families of Umzinto district. Natal, praying that he may be allowed to purchase or lease certain Crown lands situate and lying between Magitlizana and Ridge, in the Province of Natal, presented to this House on the 7th July, 1925, be laid upon the Table.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GILSON</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Petition referred to the Government for consideration.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_s_pearson">

<heading>PETITION S. PEARSON.</heading>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion, and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from S. Pearson, of Scranton. State of Pennsylvania, United States of America, an assistant Quarter-master-General of the Boer forces during the Anglo-Boer war, who suffered loss owing to military operations in 1900, praying for the consideration of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 15th June, 1925, be laid upon the Table.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DU TOIT</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Petition referred to the Government for consideration.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_j_m_rakgogo_and_others">

<heading>PETITION J. M. RAKGOGO AND OTHERS.</heading>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion, and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from J. M. Rakgogo and others, indunas, headmen and members of the Bahoaduba tribe, residing in Hamanskraal, in the district of Pretoria, whose absence from a meeting of the tribe held in September, 1922, to consider the question of of the appointment of a chief resulted in the election of a chief to whom the majority of that tribe was opposed, praying for the consideration of their case and for relief, presented to this House on the 14th April. 1926, be referred to the Select Committee on Native Affairs for consideration and report.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#fordham">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FORDHAM</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petitions_c_e_bouwer_and_others">

<heading>PETITIONS C. E. BOUWER AND OTHERS.</heading>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion, and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petitions from C. E. Bouwer and 36 others, C. de Wet and 80 others, and B. Buffa and 28 others, holders of commonage allotments in the district of Elliot, praying for a reduction of quitrent, or for other relief, presented to this House on the 17th February and the 25th March, 1926, respectively, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#raubenheimer">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RAUBENHEIMER</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#leave_of_absence_mr_robinson">

<heading>LEAVE OF ABSENCE (MR. ROBINSON).</heading>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion, and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That leave of absence be granted to Mr. C. P. Robinson, member for Durban (Central), for the present session.</block>

<p>I beg to move notice of motion No. 10 standing in my name. The hon. member, whose absence we all deplore, has recently undergone a serious operation, and is now recovering from the effects of it. I understand the operation has been quite successful. During his period of convalescence, he will be unable to attend the sittings of this House during the present session.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to second the motion. I have seen the hon. member, and I can assure the House that he is even now in a very precarious state of health, and quite unable to resume his duties in the House. The House will be doing not only the right thing, but a graceful thing, in passing this motion unanimously.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#land_survey_bill">

<heading>LAND SURVEY BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Lands to introduce the Land Survey Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time ; second reading on 28th April.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#factories_act_1918_amendment_bill">

<heading>FACTORIES ACT 1918, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Labour to introduce the Factories Act, 1918, Amendment Bill. Bill brought up and read a first time ; second reading on 28th April.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#stellenbosch-elsenberg_college_of_agriculture_bill">

<heading>STELLENBOSCH-ELSENBERG COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE BILL.</heading>

<p><span class="col_2563-2564" refersTo="page_0234"/>Leave was granted to the Minister of Agriculture to introduce the Stellenbosch-Elsenberg College of Agriculture Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time ; second reading on 29th April.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_j_c_cook">

<heading>PETITION J. C. COOK.</heading>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from J. C. Cook, of Cape Town, who was granted certain concessions by Sigcau, Paramount Chief of Pondoland, in 188y, which were subsequently repudiated by the Colonial Government, praying for an enquiry into the circumstances of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 27th March, 1925, be laid upon the Table.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#rider">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RIDER</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that the Petition [No. 547&#x2014;&#x2019;25] was upon the Table.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition be referred to a select committee for enquiry and report.</block>

<p>The petition of Mr. Cook which is concerned with this motion sets forth very briefly the circumstances under which he asks Parliament to grant him a select committee of enquiry into the circumstances of his case. That is all the notice of motion asks for, and I do hope that one of the judicial functions of Parliament will be given effect to in this matter, because I think that one of the reasons, if I may say so, in certain parts of the world why parliaments are not so popular as they were is that parliaments have not been as ready as they used to be to consider grievances brought to their notice because they are of long standing or take some time to go into. But when Parliament fails to act as the highest judicial tribunal and shuts its door to those who have grievances for enquiry, from that day its unpopularity will begin, and the public are not only concerned with Parliament&#x2019;s deliberative and legislative efforts, but they should know that there is one tribunal which in the last resort should be able to enquire into any grievances that should be attended to. The principal grievance that is referred to in this motion is one of historical interest. What are called concessions in the petition are not concessions in the ordinary course, but matters of solemn contract for which the petitioner paid large sums of money. They are all in the nature of very onerous contracts for which very large sums of money were paid. Various contracts and leases are set out in the petition. Firstly, in 1889 he obtained from Sigcau, then paramount chief of Pondoland, a concession for working and trading in minerals, metals and precious stones&#x2014;a &#x2019;99 years&#x2019; lease at an annual rental of £900, and on the day that the concession was signed £2,100 was paid in cash for that particular right.</p>

<p>The next one was granted on the 24th of October, 1890, and referred to a concession or lease to construct, equip and maintain a railway starting from Port St. John&#x2019;s and to go to the boundary of the colony of the Cape or of Natal. It was also for 99 years, an annua! rental of £900 was to be paid, and £1,720 was paid in cash. The next one was a lease of 3,000 Cape morgen in Eastern Pondoland suitable for Townships. This is also for 99 years, and the annual rental was £6, and £50 was paid in cash, the last one was in June, 1893, for 160 square miles in Eastern Pondoland, for which £2,200 was paid in cash and the annual rental with the right of renewal was £400. The lease also being for 99 years, the rights being to trade, buy, sell or barter and to cut and export timber. After the granting of these concessions by the chief, Pondoland, as we know, was annexed, first by the Imperial Government, and later on became a part of the old Cape Colony. These concessions were not given effect to, with the result that certain litigation took place. The case Cook Brothers v. The Colonial Government will be found reported in Twelve, Supreme Court Reports, page 86. It was held by the courts that there was no provision in the Act of Annexation by which a declaration of rights could be obtained against the Crown. It was a purely technical matter, and these rights have invariably been recognized by international law and when they are properly obtained legal rights and bona fide business agreements, when, a new government annexes a country, it has been the invariable practice for the new Government to assume the liabilities of the old. Owing to a technical flaw in the Act of Annexation, the courts held that legally they could not give Cook Bros, any redress. But I would like to quote from the judgments because although the courts put that point of law, they favourably recommended the case to the consideration of Parliament. On page 95 the late Chief Justice said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">It is a principle of international law that where sovereignty is acquired by cession the new sovereign assumes the duty and legal obligations of the former sovereign with respect to private property within the ceded territory. In the words of Chief Justice Marshall: &#x201C;The new Government takes the place of that which has passed away.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The judgment further stated that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">While holding that in strict law plaintiffs cannot succeed in this action, they have strong claims to the favourable consideration of the Government and Parliament of this country ; they have expended much time and money in acquiring the concessions and their conduct throughout appears to have been honest and honourable. They had the example before them of the Swazi concessions and the Matabeleland concessions which have been recognized by the Imperial Government, and might fairly have believed that the concessions honestly acquired by them would not <span class="col_2565-2566" refersTo="page_0235"/>be entirely ignored by any civilized Government taking the place of Sigcau. There is no reason why Parliament should not give the plaintiffs some compensation for the repudiation of concessions.</block>

<p>The court stated that the action was not an unreasonable one and it was in the public interest that the question should have been decided, and although judgment went against the plaintiffs, the court ordered each party to pay their own costs. That judgment was endorsed by Justices Buchanan and Upington. The matter eventually went before the Privy Council and Lord Halsbury, in delivering judgment, said that their lordships did not differ from the previous finding in fact; that at the time Sigcau executed the instrument in question, he was the paramount chief, and that he knew quite well that he was giving the rights which the instrument purported to convey. Their lordships considered that the appellants had strong claims for consideration of the Government and Parliament of the country Mr. Cook conducted various negotiations conducted with Lord de Villiers, Sir Robert Solomon and Gen. Botha, and I think he convinced all of them of the justice of his claim. Unfortunately, the outbreak of the war and the sudden death of Gen. Botha prevented further action being taken. I mention these facts because it might be suggested that a long time has elapsed, although I am sure no one is going to say that an injustice ceases to be one because a long time elapses. They spent on this venture £42,250, and I think the House will see that they are entitled to some consideration. When annexation took place, Lord Loch, then High Commissioner, allowed the working of these concessions to go on. They worked the concessions for seven months, and were then in very full anticipation of being allowed to continue, otherwise they would not have continued to spend money in the anticipation that these concessions would be recognized. The jurisdiction was transferred to the Colonial Government on the 25th September, 1894, and the Colonial Government did not recognize these rights, and that is the position in which Mr. Cook finds himself, I would point out to hon.members that only to-day a motion was referred to the Government for consideration, referring to a matter going back to 1900, and I am glad to say that we have recently put right many grievances to the oudstryders of the Transvaal going back to the days of the Boer war, and have also dealt with a number of ancient wrongs. I do not think, therefore, that the argument that some time has elapsed is a valid one against the granting of this motion. Some misapprehension has arisen as to whether Cooks still own these concessions, but the arrangements for another company in London to put in money was cancelled. I say this to remove any misconception that might arise. In other years there have been, in regard to Pondoland, investigations in the Cape Parliament, but not in regard to these concessions, apparently because they amounted to so very much more in substance than others. I cannot explain why no attempt has been made to do anything for Cook Brothers. A select committee of 1906, on Pondoland grants, recognized several petitions, and in 1907 another committee was appointed which endorsed the previous committee&#x2019;s recommendations ; but apparently they did not deal with the case of Cook Brothers. They only dealt with the smaller claims. Of course, it may be said that you cannot deal with this matter adequately now, but that is a matter for the select committee, and it may be that some other form of recommendation might be made instead of a money grant, such as the right of cultivation of this land, of which they have proved the capacity for growing cotton, silk, fibre, etc., and there might be the possibility of establishing oil and soap works. It would solve some of our labour difficulties if the natives of that country could be taught by engaging in some industry in their own country how to raise themselves in the scale of civilization. But that is a matter for the select committee. This country owes a deep debt of gratitude to Cook Brothers, because it was they who arranged for the acceptance, by Sigcau and his officers, of the peaceful settlement of annexation. Cook obtained the documents for annexation from Sigcau, and Lord Loch, the then Governor, expressed his thanks for this, and it is as a result, largely of the work of Cook Brothers, that instead of there being anything in the nature of bloodshed or trouble the annexation was entirely peaceful, because of their influence with the chief, and for that they obtained absolutely nothing, and are now in the position that concessions honourably obtained for which they paid considerable sums, have not been recognized. When Cook Brothers went to Pondoland the country was entirely independent, and they went on their own and spent a large sum of money, no doubt in the spirit of the old pioneers. They obtained the concessions and I see no reason why they should be treated differently from other persons who have obtained concessions. At the end of 1893 they had guaranteed to them in London the sum of no less than £1,250,000 with which to exploit the concessions. I would like to quote the news papers to show how this matter was viewed a the time legal proceedings were taken. The &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; remarked that the court gave them a certificate of good faith and honesty, and added that Cook Brothers held a distinguished position in the company of adventurers by reason of their conspicuous fairness. Having pointed out that the British South Africa Company was built on similar concessions, the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; added&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">What does surprise us is that the Government should have suffered the matter to go to trial without at least attempting to make an equitable compromise. We cannot but feel that the Pondoland concessionaires have been very inconsiderately treated.</block>

<p>After the Privy Council judgment the London &#x201C;Times&#x201D; stated that the judgment left a substantial piece of injustice unrectified. It is clear that the Cook concessions were interpreted, explained and witnessed, and they all purported to be for Sigcau and his successors in office and the Government were the legal successors. <span class="col_2567-2568" refersTo="page_0236"/>The Swaziland concessionaires were treated very differently, and whenever a concession had been properly obtained recognition was given by the specially appointed court in nearly every case. One can see no reason why there should be differential treatment in the case of Cook Brothers. The only reason they failed in their action was because the law made no provision for compensation. They had no right to sue the Government&#x2014;for that reason they failed, and for that reason they come to Parliament and ask for an enquiry. Should the recommendation of the select committee involve expenditure, the Government would not thereby be bound, so the Government need not fear being compelled to take any particular action by agreeing to the appointment of a select committee. It is only fair that Cook Brothers should have a chance of having their case thoroughly enquired into. I hope that the motion will be agreed to, and that this case, which should have been enquired into long ago, will now be enquired into, so that some justice may be done to those who, at any rate, have made out a prima facie claim.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rider">

<from>&#x2020;The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RIDER</person>:</from>

<p>I second. I have read the documents available in connection with this petition, and although, in a sense, it is a voice out of the past, I feel perfectly sure that the sense of rightness of this Assembly will accede to the request for an enquiry into this case. What if the case is 37 years old, reasons have been assigned for the delay. I cannot and will not believe that the House will do otherwise than acquiesce in the petition put forward by J. C. Cook.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The mover is correct in saying that even if a select committee reported in favour of the views of the applicant, the Government would still be in a position to refrain from obtaining the necessary authority to introduce legislation in the matter, but, in spite of that, I think it is necessary for the Government, in a case of this kind, to take up a clear attitude, and their clear attitude is that they are not prepared to consider a claim which is made after this length of time, and it would, therefore, be futile for the Government to agree to the appointment of a select committee. The annexation of Pondoland took place in September. 1894, whilst the concession was granted in 1889. Shortly after the cession of Pondoland to the Colonial Government took place, this action was brought by Cook brothers, and in that action Cook brothers failed, because the rights to the cession were not retained as far as the cession of the territory was concerned, and the Cape Government at no time recognized those rights. After all, the Cape Government was the government that should have dealt with the matter in 1894, and it did deal with it, as I shall show. I am not going on the point of the matter being so old, although that is a point which the House could usefully consider, and it might be said that we are not here as knights-errant to rectify an injustice that occurred 37 years ago. No steps were taken by Cook brothers to test the question in the House. Judgments were given, the judgments went to appeal, and the appeal was dismissed, and after the appeal had been dismissed steps were taken to bring the matter before the Cape Government. Before that, certain petitions were sent to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, and referred to the Governor of the Cape Colony in 1800, upon which the reports were obtained of Sir Walter Stanford and others. As far as Sigcau was concerned, he had on previous occasions revoked grants that he had given. The points made in the report given by Sir Walter Stanford are these, that Cook brothers knew perfectly well how slight and how slender their concession was, because they had themselves obtained a revocation of previous concessions granted to others. The matter did not cease there. In 1903 Cook brothers again addressed the Secretary of State for the Colonies, the communication being forwarded to the Cape Government. These representations were considered by the Cape Government in 1904, and that Government informed the Governor that they were of opinion that no good purpose would be served by discussing the merits or soundness of the Cook case. The Cape Government decided in 1901, and again in 1904, to reject any claim for a compassionate allowance by Messrs. Cook, as far as this matter was concerned, after considering the extra-legal position in regard to the case. My submission is very strong that where the Cape Government at that stage arrived at a conclusion 6 or 7 years after the matter had happened, it was in exactly the same position, one can say, as a judgment of the court taking place at that stage, and that it is not right that the matter should be reopened. Up to the time of Union, and, in fact, up to the last couple of years, no endeavour was made at any time by Cook brothers to come to this House. They dealt in the first place with the Secretary of State and Imperial Ministers, and later on with the Cape Government. Never at any stage did they present a petition to this House. In 1914 they approached Sir David Graaff in London, who was acting as High Commissioner. In 1921 they approached Sir Edgar Walton, and were informed that any representation would have to be transmitted to the Union Government. In 1921, Captain Yardley, who described himself as the agent of Cook brothers, approached H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, and the petition was again referred to the Union Government, and the same reply given. There it is stated&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">It is clear that so far as judicial pressure and Government consideration are in question, finality has been reached.</block>

<p>We had decisions arrived at by the Cape Government, and here is a decision arrived at by the Union Government in 1921. Then we find the Anglo-Ultramarine Trading Company, of London, entering into the matter in 1922. That company said that it had a cession from Cook brothers. The mover of this motion says that that cession has been cancelled, that the company no longer has any rights, and that <span class="col_2569-2570" refersTo="page_0237"/>those rights have re-vested in Cook brothers. This same company is threatening an action against the Government. I certainly would await their action with very great pleasure, because I do not think, even if they have a cession, that they have much chance of succeeding with this petition of right which they are going to bring against the Government, in 1922 Mr. Cook saw the Secretary for Native Affairs in Cape Town, and informed him that a petition to Parliament would, he feared, be a forlorn hope. It seems that the company contemplated a settlement in Pondoland at one time. It is not a question of this matter not having been decided. In the first place, I venture to submit to this House that there is no question whatever of any legal rights so far as Cook brothers are concerned. They were finally disposed of by the Privy Council in 1899. As far as Pondo recognition is concerned, that was decided by the Cape Government in 1900 and 1904. As far as the Union Government were concerned, they gave notice in 1921, through the Secretary for Native Affairs, that they are not going to do anything. The matter has been decided in the first place on the legal aspect, and it has been decided on the moral aspect by at least two governments, the Cape Government and the Union Government. Under the circumstances. I think the present Government would be stultifying itself if it entirely departed from the conclusions that have been adopted in the past, and reopened a matter which is as stale as this is, after it has been disposed of on various occasions. I say there can be no question now of reopening it. We cannot take up the position that the Governments which enquired into the matter on these occasions did not enquire into the whole of the case, and I submit that after this length of time it would be impossible and futile to reopen the matter. On the merits of the case, it seems to me where the position is taken no by the present applicant, that he procured cancellation of the previous concession, he is not basing his claim very strictly on moral grounds. That is Sir William Stanford, who went into the matter very fully, and who speaks about concurring with the views of Sir Henry Elliot and Mr. Scott. We know what these concessions have been in the past, and the way in which they have been obtained, and I do not think this House is going to mix itself up very much with concessions granted in this way in the past. What can we do supposing a select committee is appointed ? We come down to a question of money in the end. You cannot recognize any concessions in Pondoland ; but what might happen is, the select committee might say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Let us give a certain amount of money to the applicant.</block>

<p>That would be an entirely futile course to adopt, because even if it were adopted, the Government cannot recommend that money should be paid. From every aspect of the case, it seems to me an inquiry into this matter would be futile, and would not lead to anything. I therefore think it is the right attitude for the Government to take up to set out clearly what the position is, and to make it clear that whether a select committee is appointed or not, the result will be futile. In these circumstances, I very greatly regret the Government is unable to accept the motion. I practically confined my argument to the moral aspect, and to the fact that on the moral aspect previous governments have dealt with the whole matter, and we are not prepared to say that previous governments were wrong in the attitude they took up.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I sincerely hope the Minister has not definitely decided against this appeal for a select committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Not I, but the Government has decided very definitely.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I am perfectly sure that if the House was in possession of all the many details it would consider the question from the aspect of simple justice for a British subject. It must not be forgotten that when Mr. Cook went to the courts for redress, both the Supreme Court in this country and the Privy Council in England gave him the same advice ; they recommended him to go to this Parliament. For the first time he now comes to Parliament. It took 5½ years before the Privy Council heard his case. When these two courts sent this British subject to a British Parliament and told him to lay his case before it they had the belief that justice would be done. What is the justice asked for ? The petitioner asks that his case be heard. If gone into on the question of right this Parliament would realize that this country has taken possession of assets which cost the petitioner a very considerable amount of money. I am putting it as a question of justice. Why the Government should not consent to a select committee going into the whole case I do not quite know. The decision would still rest with Parliament. In 1919 the petitioner saw Gen. Botha in London, who said he had had a conversation with Lord de Villiers, then in London, and had gone thoroughly into the matter and would see that Cook was met as a matter of equity, but he would do nothing until he got back to the Cape. Unfortunately he died within three months of his return and the matter was hung up. I am perfectly certain had Gen. Botha lived, a thorough and full inquiry would have been made. That is one reason why I think Parliament would be more satisfied if there was a select committee report upon it. It is such a simple and costless procedure that I cannot understand why there should be a desire not to adopt it. According to a high legal authority these were not concessions in the accepted sense, but legally constituted leases. As a matter of fact fully £6 000 was paid out in regard to the rentals. The Government have possession of all the assets ; they have taken over the whole thing. It is perfectly certain that had the British Government remained in possession justice <span class="col_2571-2572" refersTo="page_0238"/>would have been done to the petitioner. We are heirs and successors of the British Government in Pondoland and are we now going to say we will not recognize these rights ? I feel sure if the question were left entirely to Parliament, members would say let this case be thoroughly gone into ; let us hear what the petitioner has to say. It is such a simple request to make that I do hope the plea for justice will be heard and acceded to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister should have considered more carefully the advisability of this matter going before a select committee. I want to suggest to the Minister that because any other Government has decided to turn the case down that is no reason why this Government should not go into the matter. I am sorry the Minister has taken up this attitude, because if it goes out to the world that because a previous Government has turned a petition down this Government is going to do so, it will create a very bad impression throughout the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I wonder what the Minister of Justice would have said if when the old Transvaal officials had come to the House they had been told&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">how can you come to this House when the previous Government has turned you down ?</block>

<p>It seems an extraordinary position for the Minister of Justice to come to the House and say because some previous Government turned this down it is final. It is an absurdity. I think it will convince nobody. It is a singularly weak argument. The Minister knows quite well that it was Sigcau&#x2019;s wish at the time of annexation that these rights should be recognized. The Minister has also made a statement, on the basis of something said to him, which is absolutely denied by the Cook brothers, that they had anything to do with the cancellation of previous concessions. In a letter from Mr. Cook, dated June 2nd, 1925, he deals with the allegation that his leases were in existence and had been given to another party, and that he, Mr. Cook, had by means of money caused Sigcau to cancel them, and make them over to them, and he says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In thought, in suggestion, in fact, the statement is absolutely false, and there is not an atom of truth in it.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>He says &#x201C;for money.&#x201D; I never said a word about money. There is no denial of my statement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>He said he would be only too happy to prove it before any committee the House might appoint. I do not propose that the House should decide it upon my ipse dixit any more than I say the House should decide on the Minister&#x2019;s ipse dixit. To make ex parte statements, which are denied, is not a fair way of stating a case. Lord de Villiers, up to the day of his death, took a keen interest in the matter. There is no suggestion that Lord de Villiers altered his opinion one iota, from the day he delivered his judgment to the day he died. There has been no decision after enquiry ; and no opportunity for Cook brothers to be heard by any of the Governments. Does the Minister mean to say that when we write letters and the Government replies, that they cannot do it, that means that there has been a final decision ? On 9th September, 1924, Mr. Cook wrote to the secretary of the Prime Minister that the information supplied to him (the Prime Minister) had been most erroneous, and it was most incorrect to say that two petitions had been presented to the House of Assembly. &#x201C;It is most untrue,&#x201D; he also wrote, &#x201C;that I have sold all my interest in the concessions ; the original documents are and always have been in my exclusive possession.&#x201D; Should it not go before the committee to see whether anybody but Cook brothers have any interest in it? Mr. Cook explained what financial arrangement was made in London, and why that was cancelled. There is no question of anybody else being interested in the slightest degree. Remove all these extraneous matters&#x2014;what might be called red herrings drawn across the trail. Here is a man who has been singled out for non-recognition. Swaziland and Matabeleland concessions could be treated in one way, and not Mr. Cook. It is unheard of for a civilized Government to take over assets lawfully acquired by somebody else, and by a legal technicality to take them and say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The other man has no right to an enquiry or anything else.</block>

<p>The only ground in the previous letter of the Minister of Justice was that it should have been decided before Union. There is one other point, with regard to the delay, with which the Minister has dealt again, and I thought the matter had been explained. They had to wait some years before the Privy Council gave their judgment: then came the war; then the enquiry in the Cape Parliament, in which Mr. Cook had no opportunity of taking part. With regard to the gentleman whose name was given by the Minister, viz., Sir William Stanford, he gave evidence against Mr. Cook before the Pondoland concessions committee, although Mr. Cook was not allowed to give evidence. I do not think the Minister is entitled to read out extracts from statements made by persons who, for some reason or another, took a hostile view, and are not dealing impartially in the matter. The statements of the Minister will not bear investigation, and to refuse an enquiry on this very inadequate ground is setting up a very bad precedent.</p>

<p>Motion put and Mr. Alexander called for a division.</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided.</p>

</speech>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;19.</p>

<p>Anderson. H. E. K.</p>

<p>Brown, D. M.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Gilson. L. D.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M</p>

<p><span class="col_2573-2574" refersTo="page_0239"/>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Miller, A. M.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Alexander, M. ; Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;48.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie. J. H.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Moll. H. H.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pirow, O.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Vau Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Vermooten, 0. S.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B</p>

<p>Wessels, J. H. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R. ; Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_e_f_b_schierhout">

<heading>PETITION E. F. B. SCHIERHOUT.</heading>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from E. F. B. Schierhout, of Pretoria, formerly a chief clerk, Department of Justice, who was retired in 1922, praying, for a continuation of the enquiry ordered in 1924 into the circumstances of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 25th January, 1926, be referred to a select committee for enquiry and report, the committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

<p>I would like to point out, in connection with this case, that the House agreed twice that there should be a select committee to deal with the matters raised by Schierhout. In 1920 a select committee was appointed, but it transpired that the subject-matter of the committee&#x2019;s enquiry was at that time sub judice. The matters referred to then have since been decided and, although there are other matters pending, they are not matters that need be brought before the committee ; because the particular matter that was dealt with then, that of his retirement, was dealt with by the Supreme Court, Appellate Division, in 1922. On the 26th of August, 1924, the House ordered that the petition of Schierhout be referred to a select committee for enquiry and report, but the session had advanced too far for the enquiry to be proceeded with that session and the committee recommended that the matter be brought up early in the following session. I did not bring up the matter last session because the Government made an offer to compensate Mr. Schierhout as far as monetary compensation could rectify his grievance ; but, contrary to my advice, he declined to accept on the ground that it was not a question of monetary compensation, but that he wanted to fix responsibility for what had been wrongly done to him when he was removed and when that publication appeared to the effect that he had been removed because of misconduct&#x2014;although his name was not specifically mentioned&#x2014;which was wrong. He had been given another post because a magistrate found that he was temperamentally unfitted for his duties, but in no case involving a finding of misconduct. At any rate, he asks in this petition that the select committee of 1924, which could not continue its work, should now be allowed to resume, that is that a select committee should be appointed to go into the circumstances of his case. Schierhout was assistant magistrate at Somerset West on 5th December, 1913, when he was charged with misconduct of a serious character ; in that he had conducted himself in an unbecoming manner in the discharge of his duties and had shown gross discourtesy to members of the public. An enquiry was held by Mr. Blackstone Williams, who gave his finding on the 16th February, 1914, and the commission informed the Secretary for Justice that Mr. Schierhout was temperamentally unfit for the magisterial branch, and should be removed therefrom. As he had applied for leave, however, they recommended that the order of suspension should be withdrawn and suggested that this application for leave should be granted to him. He received his emoluments as before, and got his annual increments in the ordinary way. There was, therefore, no suggestion made to him that he had been found guilty of misconduct. It was only by reference to the Blue Book published in 1916, that he found out that, although no names were mentioned, his transfer was shown as one due to misconduct. This he considers to be an absolute inaccuracy and a reflection on him, in a Blue Book, presented to Parliament, and has caused the trouble in connection with his case. I take it that the House, having agreed to the enquiry in 1924, and that committee having only been prevented from going into the matter through lack of time, the House will now agree to allowing Schierhout to have the preceedings continued, in order that the circumstances of his case may be enquired into. Nothing that is in any way sub judice will be brought before this committee. I move the motion standing in my name.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brand_wessels">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. BRAND WESSELS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I may say that this is an inheritance we are troubled with year by year, and a considerable amount of new reading matter has been manufactured since the case was dealt with in 1924 ; so much so that I do not propose to accede to the request that this case should go to a select committee. <span class="col_2575-2576" refersTo="page_0240"/>I do not think anybody who knows Schierhout has any doubt that he is unfitted, not through misconduct, to sit on any judicial bench. From the first time I inherited this matter, I did my best to see whether I could not arrive at some settlement. There was a case pending at the time we took office, which went to appeal. The court decided on appeal that Schierhout was entitled to damages owing to having been wrongly removed from his office. When he was declared entitled to damages, I took up the attitude that we should tender an amount which would probably be in excess of the damage he could prove, and we tendered £750 with the idea that that would cover his full salary up to his retiring age&#x2014;he was then on pension&#x2014;and, after that he would continue with his pension ; and, with his pension, that would practically make full salary up to his retiring age. This £750, for some reason, seemed to irritate him. He was not there for monetary considerations and he wanted to vindicate the lower judicial branch of the service. He was not satisfied with the question of damages and went back to court for an order, which was changed to one of reinstatement. The Appellate Court agreed to that. We thought now Mr. Schierhout was satisfied, but we had reckoned without our host again. He was then asked to take up a similar position and grade to that which he occupied when he was retired&#x2014;that of professional assistant to the attorney-general at Pietermaritzburg. He had previously been in the same position at Pretoria. He agreed to that, and we asked on what date he would be prepared to take up office. He gave us a date and we accepted it. We thought here, at all events, this matter is finished, but we had again reckoned without our host. He at once took up the position that he was being insulted by being sent to Pietermaritzburg. The first thing he did was, he said he wanted to go to Cape Town&#x2014; he got full salary up to that stage&#x2014;to prosecute someone in Cape Town. We said: &#x201C;We have no objection to your prosecuting people in Cape Town if you want to do so, but we think it might be as well for you first to go to Pietermaritzburg for a certain time and we will then assist you in getting to Cape Town to make these prosecutions.&#x201D; He did not want that. He did not go to Pietermaritzburg and we asked the public service commission to investigate this disobedience. It is very serious misconduct indeed. He then went to the Bar Council in the Transvaal to ask whether we had the right to ask him to do this professional work in Pietermaritzburg. He had been doing this work for years without complaint, but today this work was such an indignity to the whole legal profession in South Africa that he thought he would take the Bar Council&#x2019;s opinion. The question was answered against him, and then he, said he would not go to Pietermaritzburg, and returned to prosecution work. He applied to the Court three times. For months he has been keeping us hanging in the air ; from the Transvaal he took his case to the Appellate Division, and he has just recently lost three appeals, and in between he had an application made in Cape Town against us. Any amount of expense is being involved, and I do not know where we are going to get the costs from. In the interval my hon. friend asked if there was any way in which we could give Mr. Schierhout an allowance. I found we could make him an allowance, and we forwarded him a warrant at the rate of £20 a month. However, I got back the warrant from him with a most insulting letter, saying he was not to be bought off in that way. After that, I am afraid that I am in the same position as my predecessor, and am entirely at a loss to see the best way in which to deal with the matter. I have done the best I can for him, but I cannot put, the clack back, and put him back into the magistrate&#x2019;s court at Somerset West. I do not think any Government would be entitled to place him on the magisterial bench. There have been piles of correspondence with a strong flavour of defamation running through it, and most of that defamation is still being aimed at my predecessor. I say that with a certain amount of smug self satisfaction, but I know I am going to share the same fate as my predecessor. The latest victims were the wives of the Ministers, who, on Christmas Eve, received epistles from him. I am speaking to day in fear and trembling, because the result of this is that I am going to be inundated with correspondence. There is enough correspondence already on this subject to fill a large room. Mr. Schierhout is the unfortunate victim of cacoethes scribendi, which is even worse than cacoethes loquendi, because the loquendi part of it you can get rid of, but the scribendi part you have to treasure most carefully. We are going to have a lot of expense in building new housing accommodation for the Schierhout correspondence. I do not think for a single moment that the matter is susceptible of human settlement. I am certain there will be any number of new snags, but I have offered him every penny to which he is legally and morally entitled. I have endeavoured to help him, even where it is not legally necessary. However, we have been insulted in every possible way, and the position I am going to take up in future is that Mr. Schierhout is going to get his strict legal rights, but nothing more. He has had his chance. He has frittered money away in connection with all these proceedings which probably will have to be borne by the taxpayers in the end, and now he is going to get nothing but his strict legal rights. We are not going to waste more money on a select committee ; no possible object can be achieved by having a select committee. I have never been more certain that I am right when I say that no Government should allow a select committee to go into a case of this kind. I have done all in my power to meet the legal and moral rights of Mr. Schierhout, and I do hope that the House will not accept a motion of this kind.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I have sympathy with the Minister in the mass of correspondence he is getting, but I do not think he is receiving any more from Mr. Schierhout than I am. I agree that the Government offered very generous compensation to Mr. Schierhout, but when men are labouring under a grievance, there are some persons who are so constituted that they will not accept money compensation when <span class="col_2577-2578" refersTo="page_0241"/>a slur rests on their name, and that is the position of Mr. Schierhout. The motion does not ask for compensation. A select committee would have brought the matter to finality. The Minister shakes his head. I do not know how better you could reach finality in this matte than by referring it to select committee.</p>

<p>Motion put, and a division called.</p>

<p>As fewer than ten members (viz., Messrs. Alexander, Rockey and Snow) voted in favour of the motion, Mr. Speaker declared the motion negatived.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_p_e_drake_and_others">

<heading>PETITION P. E. DRAKE AND OTHERS.</heading>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition of P. E. Drake and 16 others, of Pretoria, members of the permanent staff of the public service, praying for the consideration of their case and for relief, presented to this House on the 31st March, 1926, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

<p>I take it there will be no objection to this motion, which simply asks that a petition from certain 17 members of the permanent staff of the public service, who want the matter of the readjustment of their salaries to be gone into, should be referred to the Government for consideration. Four of the petitioners are in the Department of Lands, six in the Department of Defence, five in the Department of Finance, one in the Department of Education, and one in the Department of Labour. It appears that, owing to some delay in their appointment from the temporary staff to the permanent staff, they are getting the lower scale instead of the scale recommended by the commission on the fifth report, and they point out that they have not been fairly dealt with in that way. They were absorbed into the permanent establishment under the Act of 1923 temporarily, and, as far as their pensions are concerned, were given the option to contribute as from their entry as temporary officers ; but, so far as their salaries are concerned, they have been put on the lower scale.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_c_w_h_smit">

<heading>PETITION C. W. H. SMIT.</heading>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from C. W. H. Smit, of Wynberg, Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths for the Province of the Cape of Good Hope, praying for the consideration of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 13th April, 1926, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

<p>This is a similar petition from the present Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths in the Cape Province, in which he points out certain grievances in connection with his grading. This is also a matter which ought to be considered by the Government, seeing that it is a question of grading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#ex_gratia_payment_to_h_j_visser">

<heading>EX GRATIA PAYMENT TO H. J. VISSER.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the papers relating to the proposed ex <i>gratia</i> payment to H. J. Visser, in respect of improvements effected on farm Ultimo No. 877. Rustenburg, laid upon the Table on the 12th April, 1926, be referred to the Select Committee on Crown Lands for consideration and report.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#companies_bill">

<heading>COMPANIES BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Third reading, Companies Bill.</p>

<p>Bill read a third time.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#winterton_irrigation_settlement_(local_board_of_management)_bill">

<heading>WINTERTON IRRIGATION SETTLEMENT (LOCAL BOARD OF MANAGEMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: Second reading, Winterton Irrigation Settlement (Local Board of Management) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>This irrigation settlement is one of the old settlements which were started in Natal shortly after the Anglo-Boer war by the then Natal Government, which passed a special Act for that purpose. Three farms were bought for a settlement of a total extent of almost 18,000 acres at a cost of £25,000. Irrigation works were constructed on the left bank of the Tugela, water being taken out from the Little Tugela. Originally it was thought that 5,000 acres would be put under irrigation, and that 66 irrigable lots would be laid out. It was found afterwards that there was not Sufficient water for the purpose, and the irrigable area was reduced to below 3,000 acres, and the plots reduced to 44. The cost of the irrigation works, together with the purchase price of the farms, amounted to about £60,000. Originally it was thought that these irrigable plots would be sold at £9 per acre, but the Natal Government had representations from the settlers to write off a large amount. A small village was also laid out in the vicinity, and 30 lots were sold. Including the erven sold in the village, it is hoped to recover altogether about £36,800. The price at which the land was sold to the plot-holders is inclusive of the redemption charges in respect of the irrigation works. The settlers only pay a maintenance rate, which works out at an average of 1s. 11d. per acre per year. The Government has the right, under the certificates of allotment, not only to charge a maintenance rate, but also a rate to cover repair of roads, the construction of works of public benefit on the settlement, and the Government can also charge a rate to pay for the current charges of administering the settlement. <span class="col_2579-2580" refersTo="page_0242"/>No provision was made, in the past, when assessing the maintenance rate for the payment of the salary of the superintendent. The superintendent is also inspector of a portion of Northern Natal. When it was represented to the settlers that part of his salary would have to be paid by them, they said that under the circumstances they would lather take over the works themselves. As this settlement is by Act of Parliament vested in the Natal Land Board, legislation will have to be passed to divest the board of this responsibility and place it in the hands of the settlers. It can well be understood, as I have explained on previous occasions, that settlements of long standing should be placed in the hands of the people themselves. It is, therefore, proposed that a board should be elected by the settlers, which will be a local board of management. All the members of the board will be elected by the settlers, except one. As the Government has spent a large amount of money in this settlement, it is considered that it should retain some measure of control. The board will be a body corporate. Under the Natal Acts under which this settlement was established, the Government has the right to impose certain rates. This power will now go over to the board, which will levy such rates as may be necessary for the settlement and irrigation works. The Bill makes provision that this board will have the powers of an irrigation board under the Irrigation and Conservation of Waters Act. There are several portions of vacant Crown land in the settlement. It is proposed for the time being to assign this vacant Crown land to the board of management for the enjoyment and use of the plot-holders. In order to enable the board to properly manage the settlement, apart from the irrigation works, it is proposed to vest in them the powers of a committee of management under the Settlements (Committees of Management) Act which the House passed last year. When the settlement was laid out originally, it was thought that it would be suitable for fruit-growing, but, on account of climatic conditions and the shallow nature of the soil, it has proved unsuitable. The settlers have made representations to me that the holdings are too small, and that the only thing that will save them is that they shall be allowed, some of them, to sell to others in order to increase their holdings. I now make provision in Clause 5 to enable a settler to sell his land to his neighbour, so as to increase the holding of the settler. In many of these smallholding settlements, it is a general complaint that these plots are too small. I have had an investigation made by an expert from the Agricultural Department, and his report is very illuminating. It was very peculiar to see that even in densely populated areas, for instance, in Switzerland, a plot of 25 acres does not pay ; that is in regard to ordinary farming. That has shown me that the complaint of the settlers is well founded. In the old Act of Natal, it was stipulated that they could only get freehold title after fifteen years. The settlers have asked me to bring it under the terms of the Land Settlement Act ; that is, ten years instead of fifteen years, and I make provision in the Bill to do that. I have submitted the Bill to the settlers, and they, have advised me that they have unanimously decided to accept the Hill. I therefore hope there will be no objection to passing this Bill. I move the second reading.</p>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>As representing the Winterton settlers I would like to endorse what the Minister has said, that the Bill, as finally printed, has been submitted to a meeting of settlers and has met with their approval. I welcome the Bill, and I want to express my appreciation to the Minister for meeting the settlers&#x2019; wishes with regard to amendments suggested by them to the Bill as originally drafted. There were two points the settlers raised which they regarded as being of vital importance, the one point being in regard to the condition under which they were prevented from acquiring more than one plot. I am glad to see the Minister has met them in that respect. The condition referred to is to be found in sec. 4 (a) of Act 39 of 1908, which reads as follows: &#x201C;No transfer shall be registered by the Registrar of Deeds in favour of any person other than a European or in favour of any person who is the registered owner of any other irrigation lot. These settlers have been labouring under that disability for a very long time, and there is no question about it that the comparative failure of the settelment is largely due to the fact that the holdings, as laid out originally, were too small, and it was impossible for them to enlarge them. That has now been remedied, and the settlers very much appreciate the fact that the Minister has met them to that extent. Another of their objections in regard to which the Minister has met them is in connection with the grazing rights. The owners and lessees of irrigable lots claim that grazing rights on the commonage belong exclusively to them, and provision has now been made in the Bill to safeguard those rights. I hope it is perfectly clear to the Minister that the unalienated Crown lands within the area of the settlement are forthwith to be assigned to the Board and that when the settlers obtain freehold title to their holdings those unalienated Crown lands will be transferred to the board in trust for the settlers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>That is the idea.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister is quite right when he says this settlement was originally designed for the purposes of intensive farming, in the way of fruit growing particularly, and possibly dairying on a small scale. It was an experiment well worth trying. It has not proved an unqualified success, due mainly to the fact that the holdings were too small, coupled with the fact that the settlers were confronted with labour difficulties, and also they found that the land was not altogether suitable for irrigation purposes. When <span class="col_2581-2582" refersTo="page_0243"/>the Minister introduced the Settlements (Committee of Management Act, 1925), last session, I asked him to apply the principle laid down in that Act to Winterton, and I desire to thank the Minister for having acceded to my request.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know the conditions at Winterton well, but I think that the move for extension is first class, and I should like to ask the Minister whether the Act relating to the extension of the ground will also apply to settlements in the Transvaal, as I am aware there is not sufficient room, e.g. in the proximity of Kinross settlement. The plots are too small, and I hope the provisions will also apply there. I know there are people who possess ground and are willing to sell to a neighbour, but under the old law they have not that right. It will be of value to the people if this Bill also applies to them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I will reply briefly. This Bill is not applicable to other settlements. The hon. member will remember that in the Act with regard to general land settlement which was passed last year, it was provided that if the Land Board and the Minister were convinced that the plots were too small, the Minister on the recommendation of the Land Board could enlarge them by getting some of the settlers to go away and by ceding their ground to neighbouring owners. The general law provides for what the hon. member mentions, but it does not apply to ordinary farms&#x2014;there are exceptions&#x2014;or to ground purchased under section 11. It only applies to closer settlements. There the plots can be enlarged.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time ; House to go into committee now.</p>

<p>House in committee :</p>

<p>On Clause 1,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 14 after &#x201C;Settlement&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;which area shall be defined by the Minister in the said notice &#x201D;, and after &#x201C;and&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;of and in lines 14 and 15 to omit &#x201C;which shall be defined by the Minister in the said notice.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Remaining Clauses and title put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported with an amendment, which was considered and agreed to, and the Bill, as amended, adopted.</p>

<p>Third reading to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#board_of_trade_and_industries_acts_amendment_bill">

<heading>BOARD OF TRADE AND INDUSTRIES ACTS AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Third Order Read: Second reading, Board of Trade and Industries Acts Amendment Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>Acts were passed in 1923 and 1924 with reference to the establishment of the Board of Trade and Industries, and it is proposed in this Bill to amend them. The object of the first amendment is to give the board, or persons indicated by them, the right of inspection and of making extracts from books of any business company or undertaking. Doubt exists about the rights of the board under the existing law, and the proposal is therefore that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The board may also, by written notice under the hand of its chairman or secretary, require the owner, manager or any director of any business or undertaking which is the subject of any enquiry made by it to produce at any place specified in such notice, for inspection and examination by any member or officer of the board, or by any person named in such notice, any books, records, accounts or information relating to such business or undertaking, and to permit any such member, officer or person to take extracts and notes therefrom.</block>

<p>It has happened that the handing over of books required for a proper report by the board was refused and occasioned difficulties and unpleasantness. The object of sub-section (a) is to put the rights of the board beyond doubt. The object of the second amendment, i.e., of sub-section (1) (b) is to secure that no official or member of the board shall have the right 11 publish information and data obtained in his capacity under the Act. Then sub-section (c) says that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Any person who&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(a) obstructs or hinders the board or any member, officer or representative thereof in the exercise of its or his powers under this Act or any amendment thereof ;</li>

<li>(b) fails or refuses to comply in any respect with the terms of a written notice given to him under sub-section

<ol><li>(1) or any amendment thereof ;</li>

</ol></li></ol>

<p>shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty pounds. Section (2) provides&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The board or any member thereof, or officer accompanying the board or any member, shall have the right to enter and inspect any place of business, factory, industrial plant or undertaking.</block>

<p>About this there was also a doubt, and of course it goes without saying that if the Board of Trade and Industries is to carry out its duties properly it should have the powers now proposed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I think this is a far more important Bill than the statement of the Minister would lead the House to believe. The <span class="col_2583-2584" refersTo="page_0244"/>Bill gives important powers to the Board of Trade. I might almost say &#x201C;Star Chamber&#x201D; powers.</p>

<p>On the motion of Mr. Jagger, debate adjourned ; to be resumed on 22nd April.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1926-04-20T17:00:00">5 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

