---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol7 - MONDAY 7 JUNE 1926'
layout: debate
year: 1926
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 7th JUNE, 1926.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1926-06-07T10:36:00">10.36 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_on_public_accounts_(meyer_&amp;_charlton_gold_mining_company)">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (MEYER &amp; CHARLTON GOLD MINING COMPANY).</heading>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. J. PIENAAR</person>,</from>

<p>as Chairman, brought up the seventh report of the Select Committee on Public Accounts (on Meyer and Charlton Gold Mining Agreement), as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Your committee, having considered the proposed notarial agreement amending the mining lease entered into between the Government and the Meyer and Charlton Gold Mining Company, Limited, on the 9th May, 1913. referred to it, begs to recommend that the agreement should be ratified.</block>

<p>Report considered.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House approves of the proposed amendment of the mining lease entered into between the Government and the Meyer and Charlton Gold Mining Company, Limited, on 9th May, 1913, whereby the percentage of profits now payable to the Government by the company under the said lease will be commuted to a lump sum payment, as provided for in the draft notarial agreement laid upon the Table of this House on the 12th day of April, 1926, in terms of sub-section (4) of section 13 of the Transvaal Mining Leases and Mineral Law Amendment Act, 1918 (Act No. 30 of 1918).</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Resolution transmitted by message to the Senate for concurrence.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_on_liquor_bill">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE ON LIQUOR BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to state that the Select Committee on the Liquor Bill requested the views of the Secretary for Justice on certain evidence given by the Secretary for Native Affairs in regard to the delegation to the Department of Justice of the administration of certain provisions under the Bill affecting natives. As, however, the reply from the Secretary for Justice was received by the Clerk of the House after the committee had concluded its labours, I now lay it upon the Table.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Will that be printed with the rest of the evidence ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from><span class="col_4755-4756" refersTo="page_1331"/>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I understand that the evidence given before the select committee is already printed. This report of the Secretary for Justice is merely an annexure which can be referred to the committee next year, if necessary.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oral_question">

<heading>ORAL QUESTION.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONALITY AND FLAG BILL.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRACHAN:</from>

<p>Before the House proceeds with the first Order of the Day, may I ask the Minister of the Interior a question of which I have given him notice? I wish to ask the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<p>(1) Whether his attention has been directed to an article published in the &#x201C;Natal Mercury&#x201D; of the 31st May, 1925, dealing with the South African Nationality and Flag Bill debate in Parliament and headed: &#x201C;We will Crush Natal for This&#x201D;? and, if so,</p>

<p>(2) whether the Minister will cause an inquiry to be made into the truth or otherwise of the statements contained therein with a view to in future preventing the abuse of privileges extended to pressmen by the Internal Arrangements Committee of the House ?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#strachan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I do not think it is the practice of the House to allow discussion or questions to be asked in regard to what has appeared in any papers relating to a debate in the House.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#strachan" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRACHAN:</from>

<p>But the statements contained in this article are of such a nature that I think the circumstances warrant the Minister dealing with it. I contend that the statements are also an abuse of the privileges extended to press men in this House.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#thomas_smartt" to="#strachan">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Is the hon. member entitled to raise a debate on this matter ?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#strachan" to="#hon_members">

<from>Mr. STRACHAN:</from>

<p>It is a very important matter. It is, whether pressmen in this House are to be allowed in the Lobby, overhear statements made by members and publish them in the newspapers of this country as reflecting upon the conduct of the Government, and the conduct of&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_members" to="#strachan">

<from>HON. MEMBERS:</from>

<p>Order!</p>

</answer>

<question by="#speaker" to="#reyburn">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I am not aware what the terms are of the article referred to by the hon. member, but if the article contains matter or criticism of what occurred in debate in this House, I do not think I can allow the question.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#reyburn" to="#speaker">

<from>Mr. REYBURN:</from>

<p>May I point out that the article in question does not deal with what actually happened in the House, but what is alleged to have happened outside the House?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_watt" to="#speaker">

<from>Sir THOMAS WATT:</from>

<p>I have not seen the article&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#thomas_watt">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I think it will be better if the hon. member (Mr. Strachan) puts his question on the paper for to-morrow. Then we can deal with the matter.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#strachan" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRACHAN:</from>

<p>I previously gave notice to the Minister, and I understand he is quite prepared to reply.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#strachan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I think it would be better to put the question on the paper, and then I can look into the matter and see whether the question can be allowed.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_a_j_g_de_la_rey">

<heading>PETITION A. J. G. DE LA REY.</heading>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion, and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from A. J. G. de la Rey, of Schweizer Reneke, praying that he may be paid the amount still owing him by the Government of the former South African Republic for the construction of a road, or for other relief, presented to this House on the 19th May, 1925, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_j_d_swanepoel">

<heading>PETITION J. D. SWANEPOEL.</heading>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person> (for Mr. Boshoff):</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion, and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from J. D. Swanepoel, an alluvial diamond digger, of Swartplaats, district of Ventersdorp, whose digger&#x2019;s certificate has been cancelled, praying for the consideration of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 18th March, 1926, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. DE VILLIERS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#perishable_products_export_control_bill">

<heading>PERISHABLE PRODUCTS EXPORT CONTROL BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Third reading, Perishable Products Export Control Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a third time.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I would even at this late stage of the Bill appeal to the Minister not to force this Bill through the House with the majority behind him ; because I think the Minister has learnt by this that the Fruit Exchange, which has done such good work in the interests of the fruit industry in this country since its establishment a few years ago, as an exchange, is entirely opposed to it, and it departs from the principles that the Minister himself enunciated last year when he introduced the Shipping Board Control Bill which passed through both Houses, and has worked admirably during the time it has been in operation. There is no doubt that, with encouragement, from what we have seen of the work of the fruit exchange, within a very short period of time it will occupy the same position in this country in regard to the development and advancement of our fruit industry, as the Californian fruit exchange occupies in relation to the fruit industry of California. We had <span class="col_4757-4758" refersTo="page_1332"/>thought that when the Minister of Agriculture held a conference in Pretoria, I think some time in December, that the influences outside the exchange which had been rather opposed to the exchange and were extremely opposed to the Shipping Control Bill of last session, had come into line, because, from the reports of the meetings that took place, the outside interests had voluntarily agreed to come into the fruit exchange and whole-heartedly throw in their lot with it. As you may remember one of the principal opponents to the shipping control at that time was the National Fruit Growers&#x2019; Association of South Africa, and I am surprised to find that after their members wholeheartedly, as we suppose joining the fruit exchange that members of the legislature especially in another place should have received a telegram which I will read to the House&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The National Fruit Growers&#x2019; Association of South Africa representing approximately 2,000,000 trees and £3,000,000 of invested capital strongly supports the Perishable Products Export Bill of 1925. It is what is required to put the fruit industry on a sound commercial basis under the joint guidance of growers and competent business men.</block>

<p>We know the attitude the association took up last year. Nobody knows it better than the Minister himself. It certainly does fill me and other people who take a deep interest in the fruit industry of this country with surprise, especially as we were under the impression that the association and the leading members had definitely decided to throw in their lot with the fruit exchange. The Minister during previous discussions gave it to be understood that the opposition to this Bill really came largely from the deciduous growers, and that the Bill met with the approval of the majority of the citrus growers, especially in the northern provinces. I want to point out that when the meeting called by the Minister of Agriculture took place the thing that really definitely caused the meeting to decide and the people present to throw in their lot with the fruit exchange was the unanswerable evidence that it was not alone the citrus growers who at that time had joined the fruit exchange, but that there were hundreds of fruit growers who, while not members of the exchange, had the fullest confidence in that exchange. At that meeting, Mr. George White, who represents the Kat River Fruit Growers&#x2019; Co-operative Association, and Mr. Allen Fitzpatrick, representing the Sunday&#x2019;s River Co-operative Society, put on the Table proxies from over 450 individual citrus growers. The Minister has allowed it to be inferred that I and other people putting up an opposition to this Bill are actuated by motives other than those of a sincere desire to assist the fruit industry of this country and to see the fruit exchange strengthened in every possible way. I would like to ask the Minister, when he seemed to imply that in the northern provinces everyone was satisfied with the Bill, whether he has received a wire from the Rustenburg Growers&#x2019; Co-operative Society disapproving emphatically of the Bill so far as the constitution of the board was concerned. Has he also received wires of protest from the Karino Co-Op. Co., Ltd., the Koster River Valley Co.-Op Citrus Co., Ltd., the Sundays River Citrus Co-Op. Co., Ltd., The Woodbine Ko-Op. Citrus Maatskappy, Bpk., the S.A. Deny-drated Fruits Co., Ltd., the Kat River Co-Op. Citrus Co., Ltd., the Formosa Co-Op. Fruit Co., Ltd., De Kaap Co-Op. Citrus Co., Ltd., the Goede Hoop Co-op. Citrus Co., Ltd., Uitenhage district Citrus Growers&#x2019; Co-op., Ltd., the Natal Co.-op Fruit Export Co., Ltd., the Koonap River Citrus Co-op. Co., Ltd., the Hex River Valley Co-op. Fruit Growers Co., Ltd., The White River Fruit Growers&#x2019; Co-op Co., Ltd ? I have only mentioned these protests that the Ministet has received to show that these growers are entirely in favour of the board being constituted as it is at the present time and that the fruit-growers of this country must have a majority on that board, because the board is going to expend their money which is collected by a levy through the Agricultural Department, I also mentioned the other day that Maj. Anderson, who is at the present time a member of the executive of the citrus subboard of the fruit exchange, has been very strongly opposed to the Bill, and the House may like to hear a translation of a telegram sent by him in Dutch to Mr. du Plessis&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">With reference to the Fruit Control Bill &#x201C;Die Burger&#x201D; has published the following in your name: &#x201C;It is only a few wire pullers and seekers after personal interest who kick up a row &#x201D;, Please authorize me to contradict this. Please also say if you agree that expenses of the board and its representatives should be paid out of growers&#x2019; funds although the Government pay expenses of the three permanent members of the board.</block>

<p>To which Mr. du Plessis replies&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Cannot authorize to write in my name. Do not remember Statements made. As you know Minister accepted our second proposal ; this means all costs of the coard will be paid.</block>

<p>This was entirely what I said the other day.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Will you lay that telegram on the Table ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I will lay it on the Table in Dutch as it originally came. I said I was perfectly certain that when Mr. du Plessis made that statement he understood so far as the administration of the shipping board was concerned that practically all the expenses would be borne by the Government, whereas the only expenses borne by the Government are the payment of the three menmbers nominated by the Government, and everything else in connection with that board has to be paid by levy on the products of the fruit growers of this country ; and irrespective of any mistakes made or of the extent of those charges the growers have no redress whatever. Even at this late stage I want to protest in the strongest manner possible in the interests of fruit farmers and certainly in the interest of co-operation, in which I am backed up by the <span class="col_4759-4760" refersTo="page_1333"/>position taken up in Queensland, in which it is distinctly laid down that it must be kept out of the hands of the Government. Under the circumstances I do hope that the Minister, realizing as he must realize that the majority of fruit growers are entirely opposed to a step which will utilize their funds without their having any say in it and which will strike a death blow at the prosperity of the fruit exchange, which has been doing such good work in the interest of fruit farmers, that even at this last moment he will not use his majority to force this Bill through the House against the views of the vast majority of individual fruit growers in this country. With regard to the telegram from the fruit growers association, that association does represent a few of the large interests, but I say that they are gradually selling those holdings to small holders, and it is the small holders whose voice I want to have. I can hardly understand hon. members opposite, who have been so strongly in favour of protecting individual producers that they should be a party to assisting in the passing of a Bill which is likely to take control out of the hands of the Fruit Exchange and indirectly place it in the hands of strong combinations. Perhaps the Minister will tell me who he proposes to make the members of this board. I understand he is considering appointing Mr. le Roux as chairman and Mr. Dyason as another member. These are things causing the greatest anxiety in the minds of fruit growers. It is not a political opposition ; it is a genuine opposition, and I am certain I am voicing the views of the vast majority of individual fruit growers who are extremely afraid that their interests will be placed in the hands of big combinations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not intend to address the various unsatisfactory phases of this Bill. I may say shortly that as far as the country is concerned this Bill was conceived in darkness ; it was carried through in darkness, and I think this is the only time it has really seen the light of day. I shall not refer to the merciless conduct of the Government in the way they have forced through this measure regardless of the rights of the people represented by this Parliament. That is well known to the country. When we take leave of this Bill we enact a pernicious principle that in future the control, which is properly vested in the producers and practically a very large part of the business of the producers, is taken out of their hands and placed under State control&#x2014;of a board mainly composed of Government nominees. This is a proclamation to the world that the farmers of South Africa are either unable or incompetent to manage their own affairs and business. The Minister has come forward and endeavoured to buy the support of the farming community by, after grave criticism on this side, putting forward an amendment that the Government will pay the salaries of the board. I ask, have the farmers of this country ever refused to pay the salaries as long as they have the control and the responsibility of management? I would say, what right has the Minister, without a proper enquiry and due consideration, to inflict this upon the State, and that without the request of the farmers themselves? When this Bill was in committee I moved, in the small hours of the morning&#x2014;the committee stage was taken at 1 o&#x2019;clock, after we had sat all night on the Senate Bill, and I see now from the newspapers that the very points that we raised&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The Senate Bill is not under discussion now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I am using it only as a matter of argument, Mr. Speaker, and I am not discussing the merits of that Bill. The points which we raised then, which were considered futile, I see the Minister has surrendered in the Upper House. At 1 o&#x2019;clock in the morning we were forced to take the committee stage of this important Fruit Control Bill, and at about 4 o&#x2019;clock I moved that the Bill be sent to a select committee after the second reading, and according to my lights I used arguments to the best of my ability in support of that motion. The Minister then said that my arguments were mere claptrap and fulminations, as he called them. That is the way the majority tramples upon the rights of the minority, and the party standing for liberty, coupled with the cross-benches, passed through this measure in all its stages. To show the Minister when I adduced these arguments, that I had the support of the principal farmers behind me, I will read a telegram I received on Friday afternoon, too late for the report stage. It is from the Elgin Cooperative Fruitgrowers, Limited, and it reads as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">This company would be greatly obliged if you would place before hon. senators its strong oposition to this Bill until farmers have had a reasonable time for considering it or dealing with the principle that controls those who pay is recognized, and unless this principle is recognized, a serious blow will be struck at co-operation itself.</block>

<p>I hear an hon. member over there shouting&#x2014; Molteno Brothers.</p>

<p>If Molteno Brothers have invested one penny in fruit culture they have invested over £30,000 in one farm, and they own 15,000 fruit trees. They have just finished at Elgin station cold storage costing them between £8,000 and £10,000, from which they wish to export direct to the ship&#x2019;s side. The farmers representing this co-operative society&#x2014;I have made a rough estimate&#x2014;own 300,000 fruit trees, some have invested their all&#x2014;and they have invested to the extent of a quarter of a million in the industry. By this Bill they are ruled out, and are given no consideration, and have had no proper hearing before the bar of this House&#x2014;not even before a select committee. Clause 4 gives to that board the most extensive powers, under which the farmers would be liable to an unlimited degree for the costs incurred, contracts made and so forth, and they would have no say when those contracts are entered into. That was all forced through without the least discussion by this Government, who allege that they represent the farmers. In all my parliamentary experience I have never seen the rights of farmers or <span class="col_4761-4762" refersTo="page_1334"/>any other class of the community&#x2014;but in this case we are dealing specially with the farmers &#x2014;trampled underfoot as these rights have been trampled underfoot by this Government, and that without a call by the farmers for such drastic legislation. Is it a wonder that my constituents have no further confidence in this popular Assembly, and have at the last moment made an appeal to the Senate? I have sent this telegram to Senator J. P. Malan, who must have £30,000 spent on his fruit farm there. I shall ask him to do all in his power to protect and to represent the interests of the fruit farmers in Elgin and other parts of my constituency. The people of Villiersdorp have not had an opportunity to meet and discuss this. This is the way this measure has been forced through, and I say, therefore, to my great regret, that I am not surprised that the public is at present looking away from the House of Assembly after the treatment&#x2019; this Bill has received, and the people interested are seeking redress and protection in that chamber which the Minister of the Interior also wished to destroy. I hope, before this Bill becomes law, that the farmers will still have an opportunity of expressing their views, and after that, Parliament will have an opportunity of judging whether this pernicious principle, as embodied in this Bill, should be carried.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I also wish to join in the protests so eloquently voiced by the right hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) and the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige). At the least, what farmers could expect is that when their rights were being taken away they would have been consulted. They were not consulted before, and have not now been given the time to express their opinions. Up to the present we have not heard anything of a clear statement from the Minister why he has brought in this Bill. From his silence one would think that there is some sinister movement behind it. What is the reason for bringing in this measure, repealing the Act of last year, and taking the whole of the control out of the hands of the fruit farmers who are called upon to pay the piper ? It seems as if it is no use appealing to the Minister to stay this measure. We can make one appeal, and that it at the last hour tell us what is behind it ? We know that the farmers, through their co-operative associations, have shown us that they are most strongly against this Bill, and that there is nothing to be said for it. If the Minister cannot tell us why he has brought this Bill in, let him postpone the measure, and give farmers an opportunity of expressing their views after thoroughly digesting a matter which they are so much against.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I am not anxious to be charged with uttering fulminations or claptrap.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I have never made that accusation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I am anxious to avoid it, at all events. I can best avoid that by quoting the Minister&#x2019;s own words and opinions on the matter. In April, 1925, the Minister said that the fruit exchange embraced people of thorough business capacity, and they proposed to give them the right to make shipping contracts. He went out of his way to emphasize that the last thing his Government desired to do was to interfere unduly in these matters. At that time he took up the very reasonable attitude that it was primarily the business of the Government to help on these matters, but not to take control of them, and he said that the Government had definitely decided that the membership of the board should be confined to growers, and that the fruit exchange should have a majority of the board. He went on to say that the fruit belonged to the growers, and not to the Government, and that no outsider would have any control of the board. But I cannot see that is reflected in the Bill. There seems to be a family likeness about most of the legislation the Government has been introducing of late, and that is the determination to have more and more power in the hands of the executive of this country. That legislation may be very well so far as it confirms this power of control ; but the real control of most matters would be left in the hands of the Minister or the department concerned. Last year the Minister said the board should represent the fruit producers, but he brings in a Bill diametrically opposed to that principle. Last year he said the business did not belong to the Government, and that the Bill of last year asked that the fruit producers should be allowed to control their own affairs. I would ask the Minister, when he replies, to explain exactly and precisely the reasons that have induced him to change his mind so completely since last year, and why he should be dragging the Government into a matter in which, in his own words, they have no business at all ? His remarks were fully endorsed at the time by the Minister of Agriculture, and no doubt the country will want to know the reasons that induced this great change to be made. I hope, if the Minister will not postpone the operation of this Bill, he will be able to give satisfactory reasons for his change of front and, above all, that he will disclose the names of the members of the proposed board.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think the Minister has been very wise in the handling of this Bill. In the first place, as has already been stated, it is a complete change of policy, and he has never given us a complete explanation of his reason for introducing this Bill at all. The first explanation was that the hoard was going to be a corporate body that could be sued, but a board composed of representatives of the fruit industry would be in exactly the same position. In committee, the Minister let in some daylight. He referred me to a paragraph in the report of the Egg Commission which advocated a policy similar to that which is contained in this Bill. I believe the origin of the Bill to be this: That he wants to have a board to control, not only the fruit, but also the shipment of eggs, butter, cheese and so forth. If that is so, and I assume it is, why did he not explain this to the House at the start-off.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from><span class="col_4763-4764" refersTo="page_1335"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I did.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>No, no. I want to be fair to ray hon. friend. He should have said at first that it was the Government&#x2019;s intention that there should be one board of control for the lot. The second mistake is this. The Minister has been in this House for ten years, and he ought to know the temper of the House. This Bill is essentially one that ought to have been referred to a select committee. It affects private interests. Let those interests make representations, and then you satisfy them. If this Bill comes into operation, you will have suspicion right along, and it will take a long time to live it down. It would be better for my hon. friend to say that, seeing there is so much opposition, he will leave the Bill over, and bring it in next session and refer it to a select committee. It will give people time to think over it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about next season&#x2019;s fruit ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>The existing board would continue to operate and would deal with it. I think we have had better results this year than ever before. I have exported several thousand boxes this year. There were one or two blunders, but on the whole this board has operated fairly well, especially as it is the first year. I want to give full credit to the chairman who has done remarkably well, much to my surprise.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>I rise to contradict, to a certain extent, the statement made by the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), that an Act of this description is not in operation in Australia. Last year three Acts were passed by the Commonwealth Government on the lines laid down in this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>He never said it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>Not directly, but indirectly. He quoted Queensland, and the impression would go forth that that was the custom in Australia. I would like to impress on the Minister the necessity for his going through with this Bill this session. The Government has been put to a great deal of expense in creating cold storage facilities for fruit, and it should keep control by appointing Government nominees representing each industry.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has mis quoted what I have said. The Queensland board is a board elected by the producers of such commodities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>Not of the Commonwealth of Australia.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not propose to go over the whole ground covered here this morning. I would say to the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), how can he say there has been any misunderstanding about the constitution and operations of this Bill? The terms of the Bill are perfectly clear, that all these products are to be affected by this Bill, so that even if I did not say so&#x2014;and I am perfectly sure I did say so&#x2014;the Bill speaks for itself. I do not see that any good purpose can be served by going over the arguments raised.</p>

<p>Motion put, and the House divided.</p>

</speech>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;45.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N-J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. H. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J. ; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;23.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballanti ne, R.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R. ; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a third time.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#diamond_cutting_act_1919_amendment_bill">

<heading>DIAMOND CUTTING ACT. 1919, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: House to go into Committee on the Diamond Cutting Act, 1919, Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>House in committee :</p>

<p>On Clause 1,</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Surely the Minister is not going on with a very important Bill of this nature at this late stage of the session. The proposal involves some millions, so we are informed by the hon. member for Kimberley (Sir Ernest Oppenheimer). The Bill has been on the paper for months, and yet it has been left in abeyance until the last day or two of the session. The industry will surely not come to an end before next session. Important legislation of this nature should not be passed at the end of the session, and I oppose it on principle, because it is wrong to the people and interests <span class="col_4765-4766" refersTo="page_1336"/>concerned, that a matter of this importance should be debated in a House as thin as it can possibly be.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Have you ever found that a full House makes any difference to the nature of a discussion of a technical matter ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>This is an extremely important measure ; it affects a very important industry, and will affect the revenue of the country to a very large extent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>The Bill has been on the Table for two years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>But we have not had a discussion. The Minister is to blame.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member wishes to persist in opposing the Bill at every stage, let him assume the responsibility. The first part of the Bill is new, and as regards the second part, any contract is subject to confirmation by Parliament in terms of the 1919 Act. The first portion is only to facilitate matters. The only bone of contention really is the last part of the Bill.</p>

<p>Clause put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 2,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 22, to omit &#x201C;whenever it is the custom of the trade&#x201D; ; and in line 24, after &#x201C;series&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or otherwise &#x201D;.</block>

<p>&#x201C; Series&#x201D; is a sub-division of a parcel. Can the Minister now say to a buyer that the owner of a parcel can compel him to take the whole series? If the Minister is bound&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">by the custom of the trade,</block>

<p>he will be mixed up in difficulties delightfully.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not agree to the amendment; it is bad enough that the Bill should be forced through the House as it is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay) has lost sight of the fact that the present Act provides that the diamonds shall be taken in the series whenever it is the custom of the trade. Instead of that the discretion is proposed to be vested in the Minister to say that the diamonds shall not be taken in series in certain cases. The Minister will consider a dispute, should one arise, and will have to come to a just decision. Of course, it is not a very pleasant task for the Minister, but as the present Act is very imperative, it was thought desirable to give discretionary powers to the Minister, and I think that is a very fair and very material departure from the Act. I hope the hon. member will not press his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>To make the Act workable in the interests of the cutters, the Minister should accept the words &#x201C;or otherwise &#x201D;. Supposing a cutter says, &#x201C;I want a particular stone to cut &#x201D;, the owners will say, &#x201C;Rather than have any trouble with the Minister we will let you have what you want &#x201D;, and the latter will not have to take what he does not want, at a price which he cannot afford to pay.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>Does the custom of the trade refer to the diamond-cutting or selling?</p>

<p>Amendments put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 3,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 50, after &#x201C;state,&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;provided, however, that such diamonds are the remnants of diamonds completely cut and polished by such cutter in his factory in the Union,&#x201D;; in line 53, after &#x201C;first&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and second &#x201D;; in line 55, to omit &#x201C;four&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;three&#x201D;; and in line 55, after &#x201C;agreement&#x201D; to add &#x201C;but the export duty thereon shall be increased correspondingly in the event of any increase above the present percentage rate in the export duty on rough diamonds found in the Union and exported therefrom &#x201D;.</block>

<p>One of the objections to Clause 3 which was urged by the hon. member for Kimberley (Sir Ernest Oppenheimer) is met here, and was intended to be met. Some time ago I intimated my intention to propose an amendment of this nature. The hon. member for Kimberley (Sir Ernest Oppenheimer) was not at the time in the House and when he made his speech he was unaware of these amendments. Hon. members will see that there is a provision that diamonds under a carat in weight that are exported are to be remnants of diamonds completely cut and polished by such cutter in the Union. Then we may export the remnants, otherwise he might just scrape the stone and export it. Then further the export duty which we refer to lower down will be increased proportionately, if there is an increase of the ten per cent, export duty. As I pointed out to the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), any contract that is completed pursuant to this will be subject to ratification by Parliament in terms of section 7 of the present Act, which provides that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Every such agreement shall be provisional and shall not be binding upon either party thereto until it has been ratified by resolution of both Houses of Parliament.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to remind the Minister that in ten days&#x2019; time he will have been in administrative authority for two years and promised diamond-cutting in this country is as far off to-day as the day Government started, and this Bill is not going to assist the diamond-cutters to any great extent. Under Section 7 of the present Act the Minister has complete and absolute optional control of the whole business. Therefore, I ask him to take out the words &#x201C;not exceeding one carat in weight,&#x201D; in line 49. Why should we tie these cutters round and round with red tape ? Licensed buyers can send a stone of any weight <span class="col_4767-4768" refersTo="page_1337"/>they like, but we say to the unfortunate cutter&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">We will only allow you to export partly cut stuff under one carat in weight.</block>

<p>What object is there in putting all these restrictions upon the cutter whom we wish to encourage? First of all, he is to be discouraged in every possible way in regard to licences. Now we put on this restriction. I want the Minister to recognize that the big financial interests against him on this Bill do not want diamond-cutters in this country. The Minister seems to fail to recognize that fact entirely. These monopolistic interests could have had 10,000 cutters here any time these last twenty-five years if they had chosen, but unfortunately, the advice which he receives makes the position of cutters almost impossible. Supposing the cutter has splints from his stones and it does not suit him to cut these pieces, why not allow that cutter to send two, three or even four carat remnants? The whole thing, as far as diamond-cutting is concerned, has become a complete farce, and the Government is listening to the big interests, the diamond-cutter not getting a show. I would like to see this restriction removed and I will therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 49, to omit &#x201C;not exceeding one carat in weight &#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot put the amendment without the Governor-General&#x2019;s recommendation, as it would have the effect of increasing taxation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I want to say that it is remarkable that such a representation as the hon. member (Mr. Hay) has made has never been made to me by any cutter. There has never been any objection to the restriction.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by the Minister of Mines and Industries, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause 4 and title having been agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported with amendments.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the amendments be considered now.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I object.</p>

<p>Amendments to be considered to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#reserved_minerals_development_bill">

<heading>RESERVED MINERALS DEVELOPMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: Reserved Minerals Development Bill, as amended in committee of the whole House, to be considered.</p>

<p>Amendments considered.</p>

<p>On Clause 2,</p>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>&#x2020;Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>I want to call the Minister&#x2019;s attention to the amendment which is made to Clause 2. The former part of the clause gives the lessee or licensee of land a right to get a prospecting licence and also a lease, but the amendment which he has made provides that such lease or licence shall be terminated on the expiration of the lease or licence. Assuming a lessee obtains a lease of minerals on his land ; he has not obtained a Crown grant but he applies for a Crown grant and, as soon as his lease is determined and the Crown grant is issued, his mineral lease drops to the ground, according to this amendment. I hope the matter will be looked into closely in another place. It affects my constituents very closely in relation to land held in Northern Natal. It seems to me that this clause ought to go on to provide that, on obtaining a Crown grant, the lease shall be renewed or, at any rate, a new lease shall be granted, but, as it is, it seems to leave the licensee or lessee in the air. I do not know whether it is covered by some other part of the Bill, but I have not been able to find it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I think it is in order. The object of this is to prevent lesssees from getting mineral leases and then dropping the title to the surface. The whole object is that, as I stated.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On amendment in sub-section (1) of Clause 3,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>There seems to be something wanting in this clause. The former part of the clause provides that an owner or lessee shall, on the discovery of minerals, be entitled to all the rights and subject to all the obligations and penalties, but the proviso which has been added reads&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Provided that the operations of this section shall not become operative in the case of a licencee or lessee until he has obtained the Crown grant in respect of the land held by him.</block>

<p>If he has become liable to penalties or obligations, he seems under the proviso, to be able to escape the penalties by failing to take out the Crown grant. I think the Minister should look into that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 4, on page 4, to omit &#x201C;section&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;sub-section&#x201D;; and an amendment in the Dutch version which did not occur in the English.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. J. PIENAAR</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>&#x2020;Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person></from>

<p>I do not know whether the Minister has seen the point I raised. It seems to me to be a difficulty at the present time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>So far I have not been able to follow the point. The clause seems to me to be in order.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from><span class="col_4769-4770" refersTo="page_1338"/>&#x2020;Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>My point is that the licencee or lessee may have incurred obligations, such as to pay a share of the profits, or pay a licence to the Government ; he may even have contravened the law and incurred penalties. This provisio will enable him to escape his obligations simply by failing to take out the Crown grant.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>The point seems to me, can a person be a licencee or lessee who has not yet paid a Crown grant ? The person who has not taken out a Crown grant seems to be in a better position than one who has.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>He cannot be a lessee or licencee unless he has taken it out.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>Sub-clause 2 provides that he can.</p>

<p>Remaining amendments in sub-section (2) put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 4,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>In lines 54 and 55 the amendments occurring are too high and should come after the words &#x201C;title deed&#x201D; in line 57; and in line 54 after the words &#x201C;title deed&#x201D; I should like to insert &#x201C;licence or lease &#x201D;, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 45, after &#x201C;the&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;First &#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. J. PIENAAR</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>On amendment in line 41, Clause 8.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I want in line 41 to restore &#x201C;second&#x201D; instead of &#x201C;first&#x201D; schedule.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>In line 33 should it not be &#x201C;second &#x201D;?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>No. The second schedule has to deal with the conditions of the leases.</p>

<p>Amendment put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause 11,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>&#x2020;Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>I would ask the Minister to go into this proviso which is added. It is rather complicated. The clause refers to the discovery of base minerals in the Cape Province, and not to discoveries by the owner, but general discovery which may be made by anybody. In the proviso, in line 55, it says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">provided that such licence or lease shall be granted only in respect of the particular mineral discovered by the owner, licensee or lessee who shall be entitled to prospect for all other minerals as provided in this Act.</block>

<p>The discovery may be made by some other person, and it seems to me the Minister&#x2019;s hands are tied, and the intention is not carried out by the wording of the proviso.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>Any other person would be a trespasser, and would not be allowed to discover.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>&#x2020;Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>It does not say so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>It is in the principal Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>You cannot make a legal discovery unless you have a right to be on the ground.</p>

<p>Amendments put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Before I put the question that the Bill, as amended, be adopted, I wish to point out that in Clause 1, sub-section (2), line 15, it reads&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Precious Minerals Act, 1898, of the Cape of Good Hope (Act No. 31 of 1898)</block>

<p>and then it says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">And the Mineral Law Amendment Act, 1898, of the Cape of Good Hope (Act No. 16 of 1907).</block>

<p>There is something obviously wrong there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I propose that &#x201C;1898&#x201D; be omitted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Perhaps the hon. Minister may think it best to put it right in the other place.</p>

<p>Remaining amendments put and agreed to, and the Bill, as amended, adopted and read a third time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_senate_bill">

<heading>THE SENATE BILL.</heading>

<p>Message read from the Senate returning the Senate Bill, with amendments.</p>

<p>On the motion of the Minister of the Interior, amendments considered.</p>

<p>On amendment in Clause 1,</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment to this amendment.</p>

<p>In line 26 to omit &#x201C;to that effect&#x201D; and to add at the end of the clause&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">that such change of Government has occurred.</block>

<p>I only want to explain the alteration which has been made in Clause 1, firstly, in the definition of &#x201C;change of Government.&#x201D; In my opinion and that of the lawyer we have consulted, it is quite clear that such a definition is not necessary. There are, however, other lawyers in this House and in the Senate who differ and accordingly think that it is better to remove all doubt and to define the sentence. Then there is another amendment made by the Senate, viz.: not to make the nominated members of the Senate automatically retire upon a change of Government, but only when there is a change of Government notified by the Governor-General in the Government Gazette. If, therefore, the change of Government is not notified in the Gazette by the Governor-General (i.e., the Government) then the nominated senators do not retire. I think that this alteration is an improvement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>What about the second part ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>I explained that. The second part means that the seats of the nominated senators shall not automatically <span class="col_4771-4772" refersTo="page_1339"/>become vacant upon a change of Government Gazette. If, therefore, it is not notinotice of the change of Government in the Government Gazette. If, therefore, it is not notified in the Government Gazette the nominated senators continue. I think that is an improvement. As it is here I think it is a little capable of misunderstanding.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I have a great deal of difficulty in following the latter portion of this amendment. We have defined a change of Government by saying that it occurs whenever you get a new Prime Minister. That is a question of fact. If there has been a change, the intention of this Act is that the nominated senators go out, but apparently the question of fact is to be made dependent on the action of the Government in inserting some notice in the Gazette. In other words, there may have been a change of Government, but it is not to be considered as such unless you put it in the Gazette. It appears that these Senators are to be given a sort of suspended sentence, and that their vacation of office shall depend on two conditions, first, a change of Prime Minister and secondly, a notification in the Gazette. It appears to me to be reducing things to a farce, and putting in something that should not appear in the constitution. I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;Minister&#x201D; in line 24, to the end of the clause.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not agree with my hon. friend behind. I understand the position under this definition to be that the Government defines a change of Government as meaning a change of Prime Minister, and when the Prime Minister, who is the real source of Government, changes there is a change of Government. The definition provides that even then the nominated senators will not eo ipso vacate their office, but only vacate their office if the Government wants a change and makes this notification in the Gazette. That means a formal notification to the senators that their time of office has expired. If this definition is to stand, I think there is something to be said for the amendment moved in another place. I am sorry the Minister has not gone further, and in deference to the very strong opinion expressed in this House, and another place, dropped the last part of sub-section (3), namely, that the nominated senators should vacate office on a change of Government. If he had done so, this Bill would have stood and been accepted by the country too, but I am afraid the Bill as it stands now, and as it will pass-through Parliament, will not be a final settlement of this matter, or be accepted as such. The matter is sure to recur, and this is sure to be looked upon as a makeshift. I am sorry the Minister has not dealt with the matter cleanly and on statesmanlike lines, and that we are likely to have an amendment passed now that will not be looked upon as a final settlement. I ask my hon. friend not to press his amendment, but to leave it open to the Government to make this notice in the Gazette. There may be a change of Government, and they may not wish to eject these nominated senators, and this gives them a second line of thought to fall back on.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to draw the attention of the leader of the Opposition to the position. If the first clause&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has seconded the motion of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) assumes that by mere publication in the &#x201C;Gazette&#x201D; the Government can, in effect, create a change of Government, but that is not so. There must be a change of Government, but before the nominated senators vacate their seats there must, in addition, be a notification in the &#x201C;Gazette.&#x201D; There cannot be a notification in the &#x201C;Gazette&#x201D; unless there has been a change of Government in terms of this provision. The hon. member&#x2019;s argument was that the Government could merely, by notification in the &#x201C;Gazette,&#x201D; create a change in the Government, or declare that such a change had taken place. That is wrong. There must be a change of Government, and, moreover, the Government must by formal notification in the &#x201C;Gazette&#x201D; notify that a change has taken place. With regard to the remarks of the right hon. the member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) that the words should be omitted altogether, I understand my colleague has endeavoured to meet the objection. It was to meet the sort of case which took place when Gen. Botha died and the right hon. member became Prime Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister of the Interior was more reasonable in the Senate than he was here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>They used much better arguments there.</p>

<p>With leave of the House, amendment proposed by Mr. Blackwell withdrawn.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by the Minister of the Interior put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Remaining amendments put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<p>Business suspended at 12.45 p.m., and resumed at 2.20 p.m.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#afternoon_sitting">

<heading>AFTERNOON SITTING.</heading>

<debateSection name="#transvaal_precious_and_base_metals_act_1908_amendment_bill">

<heading>TRANSVAAL PRECIOUS AND BASE METALS ACT, 1908, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Fourth Order read: Transvaal Precious and Base Metals Act, 1908, Amendment Bill, as amended in Committee of the Whole House, to be considered.</p>

<p>Amendments considered.</p>

<p>On amendment in lines 2 and 3 of Clause 5,</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment to this amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote"><span class="col_4773-4774" refersTo="page_1340"/>To omit &#x201C;sub-section&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;section&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#bergh">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BERGH</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I want to move the deletion of the following words in lines 16 and 17&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">the ownership or lease of the land or stand upon which such trade or business is being carried on or.</block>

<p>Unfortunately, I was absent from Committee of the Whole House when this amendment was inserted. It will be seen by those who have followed the clause that this amendment goes very far indeed. The purpose of this section is to forbid mining companies, directly or indirectly, from being interested in trading on mining ground. With that purpose I am in entire sympathy, but this amendment which was introduced in committee goes very much further than that. It makes it a criminal offence for a mining company even to be the owner of land on which somebody else carries on business in which the mining company is not even interested. In other words, if a mining company owns a trading stand on mining ground and a shop is erected on that stand, the company may not even let that stand to some third person. This amendment went in at the committee stage without any discussion at all or without the Minister being asked any question or giving any explanation. The clause says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">or has any interest, direct or indirect, and whether by reason of the ownership or lease of the land or stand upon which such trade or business is being carried on.</block>

<p>What is the reason for that ? It seems to me to be going immoderate lengths, quite unnecessary lengths. I would like to enter a full protest against this. Would not the Minister be satisfied with the clause as far as it goes, without this amendment ? The committee of 1923 were at one in this, that we would stop mining companies being interested in trading on mining ground. To say that a mining company may not own a shop, may not let that shop to an entirely independent trader under pain of the penalties laid down in section 97, is to my mind absurd.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. member (Mr. Black-well) misses the point of this altogether. It says that such person cannot carry on trade. Obviously, no mining company is going to carry on trade, and therefore it cannot be affected by these words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>May I, with leave, point out that the section says that it shall be &#x201C;unlawful for any person in premises situated upon proclaimed land&#x201D; to carry on trade, if any person who carries on the business of mining, etc., is interested in the ownership or lease of the land. In other words, if a mining company happens to own or to lease any particular bit of land, then no other person can carry on trade in a shop on that particular land, and a penalty is assigned both to the mining company and to the person who carries on trade. So that, with all due respect to the Minister, my point is very well taken, because this section as amended penalizes anybody carrying on trade on that particular stand, if a mining company owns the stand. I am certain that was never the intention of the Minister in introducing this amendment, and certainly the select committee who considered this clause at great length and redrafted it did not put in those words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>These words come from the select committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Not the additional words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, that is my whole point. I say that the clause, apart from the additional words, is as drafted by the select committee. The implication of these additional words is to make it impossible for a person to carry on trade on any stand if a mining company owns the land.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot understand the attitude of the hon. gentleman (Mr. Blackwell) at all, because at the committee stage he was so keen to stop the mining companies trading, directly or indirectly, that he even opposed the workers who have their own business in the township, apart from the mines, having any privileges whatever. The intention of the House, when this amendment was passed, was to prevent dummy companies from being set up. If this clause is not adhered to as it stands, it will leave a loophole for the mining houses to carry on trade on mining ground by dummy companies. As far as I am concerned, and I think also as far as 99 per cent, of the workers on the Witwatersrand are concerned, they are against the mining companies trading, directly or indirectly.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid the hon. member for Brakpan (Mr. Waterston) has been rather misled by his antipathy to or fear of the mining companies. I think the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) has taken the point quite correctly, and, reading the clause carefully, I think that he is right and that the Minister is wrong in this instance. I do not see how you are going to affect the principle of a mine trading by deleting these words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know whether I am in order in speaking now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>According to the rules, the Minister has no right to reply, but with the permission of the House he may.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>We have now the question of the Native Recruiting Corporation stores, which have been practically carried on for a long time past through a certain person, and they are still called the N.R.C. stores. As I stated on <span class="col_4775-4776" refersTo="page_1341"/>the second reading, natives are being referred to these stores as being Government stores. It is that sort of abuse that I want to prevent, and I think there is no injustice whatever in preventing a mining company from being interested in trading that is carried on on mine property. Even if they are mere lessors, it is undesirable. Their business is mining. Their business is not that of lessors of trading stands, hut the carrying on of mining. Even if the clause will have the effect that the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) indicates, I say that the principle is sound.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>They have bought stands and they cannot use them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>If they have bought stands, they must have bought them with a view to business or trading, and they have no right to do that. The whole spirit of legislation for years past has been against mining companies trading on mining ground.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>The fact of owning property on which a shop may be put does not show that a mining company is interested in trade. It might have bought the land as part of its mining lease. Surely it will be quite competent to a company to let that land to entirely independent people. My hon. friend is quite at one with the Minister in his policy of not allowing the mines to trade, but this is carrying things too far.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>It is quite a trifle to them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>But it is not fair; that is the point. Why my hon. friend should want to deprive them of property I cannot understand.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Minister of Mines and Industries put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment in lines 16 and 17 put, and Mr. Blackwell called for a division.</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

</speech>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;39</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo. D.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L,</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mosteri, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost. H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Strachau, T. G.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Zyl J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers ; Pienaar, B. J. ; Vermrioten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;19.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brown, D. M.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C.</p>

<p>Heatlie. C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Miller, A. M.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R. ; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly agreed to.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 26 to omit &#x201C;the principal&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;this.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#bergh">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BERGH</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Omission of Clause 6 put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On New Clause 6,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 48 to omit &#x201C;or&#x201D; and to substitute</block>

<p>&#x201C; and &#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>If hon. members will look at sub-sections 1 to 4 they will see that each is in alternative. If the word &#x201C;or&#x201D; is made &#x201C;and&#x201D; it will meet the point I raised in committee stage and it will have the effect of remedying the defect I pointed out, but in order to complete the change, sub-sections 1 and 2 would really have to be put into one subsection. If that is not done it will not read sense.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I move that 2 becomes part of 1, which will cure that, and the others will follow.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>To show that it would not attain the object the hon. member has in view, it will mean that, in the case of a sick benefit society, it can be paid otherwise than in current coin. I do not think it is worth while troubling further. There would be no difficulty about the matter.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Blackwell withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nieuwenhuize">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NIEUWENHUIZE</person></from>

<p>In the Afrikaans text on page 1, line 16, is the word &#x201C;aan &#x201D;. If this remains then it gives a different meaning to the English text. Then only a person who cedes can be punished, but the persons who accept the cession cannot be. The word &#x201C;aan&#x201D; should be replaced by &#x201C;en &#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>That is so.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>In sub-section 4 I want to ask the committee to go into the question of <span class="col_4777-4778" refersTo="page_1342"/>what this amendment really means. The House has already decided that the stop order system shall not be applied, but in this sub-section 4 we now say that a mining company shall be allowed to sell boots through the company. The argument that is put up is that the company shall be able to supply boots to the natives on account of the possibilities of septic poisoning to the natives&#x2019; feet&#x2014;which is a pretext pure and simple&#x2014;or any other trouble that might arise. If we are opposed to the mining companies dealing with the employees, we are bringing in a clause here that is subverting the whole of the objects of this Bill. I move, as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit sub-section (4).</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I second. I think that the hon. member is perfectly right. If we allow a mining company to supply boots, the next thing will be mining clothing, and so it may go on. The Minister would be well-advised to delete this exceptional provision, as rather a blot on the Bill which is to entirely prevent companies from trading in any way whatever.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>I am surprised at this particular sub-section being in the Bill at all. We have had an overwhelming majority of the House deciding that the worker, having his own co-operative society, shall not have the benefit of the stop order, and here we have the least educated worker handed over to the mines. I agree that the supply of boots by the mining companies has been an absolute advantage to the natives, and it saved the natives from being exploited in having to pay higher prices, but the same principle applies in connection with the supply of commodities by workers banded together in their own interests. The Minister agrees to the Chamber of Mines allowing them to trade in that particular commodity. I agree with the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay) that if it is right to allow the mining houses to sell boots to the natives, it is right in principle to sell food and so forth. I cannot see how members can agree to this, and then prevent the stop order system in the supply of other commodities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mcmenamin">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">McMENAMIN</person>:</from>

<p>I would also appeal to the Minister to accept this amendment. If he is logical he ought to accept it. Whilst the Minister was away I introduced a deputation to the acting Minister which produced evidence to the effect that it was more expensive to the natives to purchase their boots through the mine stores than if they had been bought through the private stores. Provision for the first pair of boots might easily be included in the recruiting expenses, like the railway fare, and this would remove the objection that the natives would be handicapped if they went underground without boots and had no money to buy them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I think we should be satisfied with the length we have gone in regard to stop orders. Logically, the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay) and his friends are quite right. But I understand this is a compromise, and that it has been the time-honoured practice of the mining companies to supply their natives with boots.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I wonder whether the Minister does not now see by forcing an important clause through the House in a dying session, what mistakes he may make. It is a very important question from the point of view of the mines, and of people trading on the Rand. If anything goes to prove that this Bill is not getting the proper attention of Parliament, it is the way we are arguing pro and con this afternoon. I certainly am not going to agree to the Minister&#x2019;s taking any further stages of the Bill, because it is clear that we cannot do justice to the measure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>The Chamber of Mines made representations to my colleague who was acting for me in my absence, and he has decided to concede this point. To me personally it does not make much difference, and the House can vote as it likes on this sub-section.</p>

<p>Question put: That sub-section (4), proposed to be omitted, stand part of the clause ; and Mr. Munnik called for a division.</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

</speech>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;35.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L,</p>

<p>Brown, D. M.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>De Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Miller, A. M.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R. ; Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;21.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Yilliers, W. B.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Alexander, M. ; Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Question accordingly affirmed, and the amendment proposed by Mr. Munnik dropped.</p>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to delete the word &#x201C;insurance&#x201D; in sub-section (4).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>We have voted on that sub-section, and the hon. member cannot move an amendment.</p>

<p>New Clause 6, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 7,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from><span class="col_4779-4780" refersTo="page_1343"/>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I was under the impression that in line 31, &#x201C;three months&#x201D; had been substituted for &#x201C;one month I hope the Minister will not object to three months. Many of these people are overseas and could only give their reasons for not working by cable. I believe in the first printed law it was three months.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>The present law is one month.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>Section 7 confiscates the property of these people under certain circumstances. It is a stringent and drastic measure. I wish to give these people a little more time as they may be represented here only through their power of attorney. With leave of the House, I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In lines 31 and 32, to omit &#x201C;one month&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;three months</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>One of the main reasons against the existing section 127 is that it is very cumbersome and means that a considerable period of time must elapse before you can act upon it. I am prepared to meet the hon. gentleman to this extent, that I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 31, after &#x201C;of&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;not less than &#x201D;.</block>

<p>So that the notice can be three months or even longer. I am not prepared to make it imperative that the notice shall be three months, and what is more, I think everybody interested in mining ought to be represented in the Union by some responsible person or representative who can decide such questions. We might be required to go all over the world to give notice and I do not see why we should do that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Col.-Cdt. Collins put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by the Minister of Mines and Industries, put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In lines 45 and 46, to omit &#x201C;nominated by him &#x201D;,</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I think there is a mistake in sub-section (6). The words &#x201C;detrimental to the public interest&#x201D; were deleted in committee and for them were substituted the words &#x201C;without adequate cause &#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 42, after &#x201C;expedient;&#x201D; on page 8, to insert &#x201C;or &#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>With regard to the point raised by the right hon. member for Stander ton (Gen. Smuts), there is an omission in the printing which will be put right when the Bill is reprinted.</p>

<p>On the amendment in Clause 8,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>It is clear from the Minister&#x2019;s amendment that he agrees that it is a very serious thing to stop a man from doing what is declared in sub-sections (1) and (3) to be illegal. A person who employs 500 or more may not cease work or discharge in one month more than 20 per cent, of his employees. Later in the clause the Minister qualifies this, but he does not make provision for all the exigencies that may arise. It is going too far to single out the mining industry for a drastic proposal of this sort. The Minister should be satisfied with the powers conferred on him in section 7, for if a mine is not adequately worked he can take steps accordingly. J move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In lines 17 and 18, to omit &#x201C;or discharge in any one month more than twenty per cent, of the persons so employed by him &#x201D;.</block>

<p>I agree that there is some necessity to prevent a mine being closed down without adequate reasons, but adequate powers in regard to that matter are given in clause 7.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Is there any objection to the amendment ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, I object.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment to this amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In line 31, after &#x201C;by&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;a strike or &#x201D;.</block>

<p>This does not mean that any strike will be allowed to justify the dismissal of men, but only a strike to the satisfaction of the Minister. Mining companies may have no option under certain circumstances of dismissing a certain proportion of their men. If they can prove to the satisfaction of the Minister that the discontinuance of mining operations has been caused by a strike, they will escape the penalties, but otherwise they may be liable to a fine of £250 for every day mining operations are suspended. In addition to that, they would have to suffer the damages caused by the strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not accept any amendment of the kind. If he did, it might pay some companies to work up strikes as an excuse to get rid of men and close down a mine. Frequently, mining companies could avoid strikes if they took up a reasonable attitude.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I support the amendment, which would certainly meet my objections to some extent, although I can conceive of several other cases. For instance, the body of ore might be reduced to such an extent that a company would be compelled to dispense with the services of many members of the staff.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>&#x201C;Discontinuing&#x201D; means discontinuing voluntarily, and the reason sub-section (3) is inserted is because if a company Alleges that it is discontinuing mining operations owing to <span class="col_4781-4782" refersTo="page_1344"/>certain reasons it may be very doubtful whether that is a well-founded excuse, and it would have to satisfy the Minister on that point. But that does not deal with many other conceivable reasons for discontinuing work. It is perfectly clear that discontinuing means discontinuing voluntarily, and not because of an act of God.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Why not put in &#x201C;voluntarily&#x201D; ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Discontinuance implies that it is done voluntarily.</p>

<p>Amendment put and negatived.</p>

<p>Original amendment put and agreed to, and the Bill, as amended, adopted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a third time.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person></from>

<p>objected.</p>

<p>Bill to be read a third time to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1926-06-07T15:30:00">3.30 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

