---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol7 - WEDNESDAY 31 MARCH 1926'
layout: debate
year: 1926
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading><span class="col_2129-2130" refersTo="page_0017"/>WEDNESDAY, 31st MARCH, 1926.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1926-03-31T14:21:00">2.21 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_appointments">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE APPOINTMENTS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that the Committtee on Standing Rules and Orders had appointed the following members to serve on the select committees mentioned, viz</p>

<block name="quote">Subject of Prevention of Disorders Bill.&#x2014;The Minister of Justice, Messrs. Allen, Brink, Close, Col.-Cdt. Collins, Mr. Conroy and Col. D. Reitz.</block>

<block name="quote">University Schools Transfer Bill.&#x2014;The Minister of Education, Mr. J. P. Louw, the Rev. Mr. Mullineux, Mr. Roux and Maj. G. B. van Zyl.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_of_supply">

<heading>COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House go into Committee of Supply on the Estimates of Expenditure to be defrayed during the year ending 31st March, 1927, from the Consolidated Revenue and Railway and Harbour Funds, respectively.</block>

<p>We have been told during the past few weeks that the calm and placid atmosphere which has generally prevailed in the House during the session so far, was soon to disappear. The introduction of the Budget was to be the signal for the bursting of the storm over the Government&#x2019;s financial and economic policy, and large forces have been held in reserve to be released for another grand offensive. I am sure hon. members opposite have been looking forward to this occasion, and that they are straining at the leash and waiting for the word of command to be given by my right hon. friend. Be that as it may, I assure them that it gives me great pleasure to oblige by clearing the decks for action.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#revenue_and_expenditure">

<heading>REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.</heading>

<p>I wish to commence by dealing with the revenue and expenditure position of 1925-&#x2019;26. Some of the figures which I gave to the House about two months ago when I dealt with the additional estimates have in the meantime naturally undergone some modification. The original estimate of revenue, allowing for the adjustments of taxation effected last session, was £26,092,000. The original estimate of expenditure including the supplementary estimates that were tabled was £26,547,000, giving on these figures an anticipated deficit at the time of £455,000. As hon. members will remember the additional estimates totalled £274,000, and when I introduced them I informed the House that that additional expenditure would probably be met by savings on the original estimates, and would not increase the main estimates of expenditure submitted for the year. I am glad to be able to inform the House that this expectation has been more than fulfilled, and the final position in regard to expenditure is considerably better than that which I forecasted about two months ago ; as it is now expected that the expenditure for the year will, ultimately and after audit, not exceed £26,400,000. On the latest available information the revenue for the year will be in the neighbourhood of £26,900,000, so that there will be a surplus of about £500,000. It will not be for some days that we shall know the total collections of revenue for this month, and some weeks will have to elapse before the collections have been completely allocated to the various heads of revenue. The latest available estimate puts the revenue at £26,900,000, or £808,000 above the original estimate. I wish to give to the House the principle variations in the estimates of revenue. Customs duties are £142,000 above the estimate, and I am sure the House will agree that this is a very satisfactory position, seeing that the import trade of the country was during a certain portion of the year affected to a considerable extent by the shipping strike. The customs duties for the month of September fell short of 1/12th of the estimate of receipts for the year by £122,000, but the position was very soon righted, because during the two following months the imports increased to such an extent that by November and December the position was fully restored. These figures in regard to customs duty also disclose a remarkably accurate estimate, having regard to the fact that we had to deal with a totally new and revised tariff of customs duties. Excise duties are £144,000 over the estimate ; increases are recorded under the heads: spirits £40,000&#x2014;hon. members will know that for several years we have had a consistent decrease in the receipts from this head, but this year they show a considerable increase ; beer £20,000, and cigarettes £93,000 over the estimate. I think it can be said that these increases are in the main due to the increased spending power of the community consequent on the increased production which we have had during the past year. Posts, Telegraphs and Telephones are £159,000 over the estimate, postal revenue being £90,000 up ; telegraphs £33,000 and telephones £34,000. These increases are due to a general expansion of postal and telegraph business and to the extensive development of the telephone system throughout the country. The increase in the telegraph revenue is particularly interesting in view of the fact that it has been steadily on the downgrade now for a number of years, and telegraph traffic has always been considered a fairly accurate barometer of the trade position of the country. This figure of £463,000 is still a long way below the record of £530,000 for the year 1920-&#x2019;21, so we can confidently look forward to making up the shortfall under the able administration of my hon. friend. I hope he will not disappoint the Treasury. In referring to the restoration of the penny postage last year I estimated that the cost would be £400,000 per annum, and the results so far <span class="col_2131-2132" refersTo="page_0018"/>confirm the substantial accuracy of that estimate. In regard to mining revenue, the receipts from the Premier Mine under the head Government ownership were £45,000 up, and the diamond export duty yielded £20,000 over the estimate. Here I am indebted to the hon. member for Kimberley (Sir Ernest Oppenheimer) for the very accurate information he gave me last year in preparing my estimates. We are very glad to be able to find that these increases are due mainly to the increased demand and the higher prices ruling for diamonds. Stamp duties have produced £30£00 over the estimate, and I think that can be taken as reflecting an improved trade position and an increase in stock exchange business.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#income_tax">

<heading>INCOME TAX.</heading>

<p>Income tax and super tax together have yielded £6,463,000 or £96,000 over the estimate. Regarding the details of this head of revenue, the income tax from gold mines yielded £1,062,000, or £178,000 less than the estimate. This reduction was due to two causes, firstly, as to £71,000 to an over-estimate, the profits of the gold mines having been less than was anticipated a year ago owing to shortage of native labour, increased charges in respect of miners&#x2019; phthisis and other causes, and, secondly, as to £107,000 of this shortfall, to the fact that under the Income Tax Act of last year, which, as hon. members know, abolished the dividend tax and doubled the normal tax on mining companies, dividend tax already paid in respect of dividends paid out of profits for the tax year &#x2014;(from the 1st July, 1924, to 30th June, 1925)&#x2014;was allowed to be set off against the tax payable for the tax year. In this way £107,000, which was received during 1924-&#x2019;25 was set off against the 1925 tax. But for this adjustment, the companies would have been taxed twice on a portion of their profits. This is merely due to the fact that our tax year does not correspond with the financial year, and dividends received during the year had to be adjusted to the tax year. The same causes brought about a shortfall in the income tax derived from diamond mining companies, which was £75,000 less than the estimate, and here again £62,000 of dividend tax paid in 1924-&#x2019;25 was adjusted against the 1925 tax, and £13,000 was due to an over-estimate. The amount credited to this head of revenue, that is income tax, in respect of gold mining leases was £384,000, or £54,000 in excess of the estimate, the yield from the lease areas having been £1,728,000, of which £1,344,000 is credited to loan account, and £384,000 to revenue account. This was against the estimate I gave last year of £1,625,000. Under the general head of income tax we find it has produced £115,000 more than the estimate, and super tax has yielded £175,000 more than the estimate. Here again my anticipations were realized when I said that the farmers would not leave me in the lurch, and they have been paying me more income tax than before, because the receipts show a marked improvement! When the estimates were framed, complete data as to the 1924 tax were not available. The yield of that tax was under-estimated, particularly in regard to the super tax. This under-estimate had the effect not only of increasing the carry-over into 1925-&#x2019;26 beyond what was anticipated, but also caused the 1925 tax to be under estimated.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#super_tax">

<heading>SUPER TAX.</heading>

<p>Regarding super-tax, the increase in the yield from two years ago has been remarkable. In 1922 and 1923 the taxes yielded £772,000 and £773,000 respectively; the 1924 tax has yielded £1,025,000 and the 1925 tax is estimated to yield £1,125,000. The big increase is due in the main to the disappearance of losses carried forward from previous years in consequence of the improvement in the trade position generally.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#death_duties">

<heading>DEATH DUTIES.</heading>

<p>Death duties have yielded £50,000 more than the estimate. This is due to the more rapid disposal of estates, to the recovery of outstanding duties, and to the fact that several large estates fell in for assessment during the year. The concessions made last session have not been in force long enough to affect the receipts from this tax.</p>

<p>The increases to which I have referred will account for £684,000 of the total increase of £808,000, the remainder of those increases being spread over a number of heads which do not call for any special comment.</p>

<p>The expenditure was dealt with fairly fully by me when the additional estimates for 1925-&#x2019;26 were introduced, and they need not again be discussed.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#pension_funds">

<heading>PENSION FUNDS.</heading>

<p>It remains only to deal with the disposal of the surplus of approximately £500,000, of which I informed the House just now.</p>

<p>Last year I dealt with the working of our pension funds which disclosed rather serious deficits, of which I informed the House, and I provided that, as far as one of the funds was concerned, viz., the Cape Fund, we would pay £128,000 a year for 26 years, and this amount was voted on the estimates last year to put the fund on a sound and solvent basis. The other fund was the Natal Police Fund, and this year we intend to provide rather substantial funds in the neighbourhood of £59,000 for 1926-'27. During the recess I have had under consideration the Transvaal Administrative and Clerical Pension Fund. The actuarial report on the position of the Transvaal Administrative and Clerical Pension Fund at 31st March which was laid on the table on 15th of July, 1925, brought out a deficit of £560,000 on the assumption that 75 per cent, of the members would retire at the earliest retiring age, that is 55 years, and that only 25 per cent, would retire at 60 years, and that the rate of interest earned by the fund would be 4½ per cent. The previous actuarial report on this fund on the position at 31st March. 1919, brought out a deficiency of £250,000 which was made good out of revenue in 1919-&#x2019;20. I may say that this report was drawn up before the new increased scales of civil servants&#x2019; salaries <span class="col_2133-2134" refersTo="page_0019"/>were brought into force in October, 1919, and although it made some allowance for the introduction of higher scales, this allowance was insufficient. It also assumed a higher average retiring age than the later report, and a higher rate of mortality at advanced ages. The retiring age during the last quinquennium has probably been unduly low owing to the process of reorganization and retrenchment which has been going on, and it is hoped that in future the average age of retirement may be substantially increased. The retiring age is a very important factor. It is calculated that if all the members retired at 55 the liability on the fund would be £458,000 more than it would be if they all retired at 60. So that when public servants retire at an earlier age it has a very important bearing on the fund.</p>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Why not keep them on to 60?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Generally now, if a public servant is fit he is kept on. His period is generally extended year by year. It is hoped that in other respects as well the valuation made last year may turn out to be on the conservative side, e.g., that a rather higher rate of interest than that assumed may be earned and that the revision of the scales of pay in 1923 may reduce the quinquennial increase in salaries below that anticipated. The course proposed to be followed is to apply £250,000 of the surplus for 1925-&#x2019;26 to reducing the deficit on this fund, and thereafter to wait and see what the next quinquennial valuation (1929) will bring forth. The full deficiency of £564,500 would be extinguished by monthly payments of £3,475 or £41,676 per annum, running for 24 years from 1st April. 1926. By making this single payment of £250,000 now we should be doing very much more than we should do by making monthly contributions for the next five years.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_surplus">

<heading>THE SURPLUS.</heading>

<p>The remainder of the surplus, expected to be in the neighbourhood of £250,000, will be paid over to the Public Debt Commissioners in redemption of debt in terms of section 5 of the Public Debt Commissioners Act of 1911.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#debt_redemption">

<heading>DEBT REDEMPTION.</heading>

<p>I think the general question of debt redemption may conveniently be discussed here. As hon. members are probably aware, the only statutory provisions regarding redemption of debt are those laid down in the Transvaal Acts relating to the guaranteed loans of £40,000,000, under which an annual contribution of one per cent, on that amount is prescribed, and in the Public Debt Commissioners Act, 1911, under which the surplus revenue over expenditure is applied to the redemption of debt. This latter provision which&#x2014;in the ordinary course of events&#x2014;would be the only one remaining when the Transvaal guaranteed loans have been paid off has not been very effectual. Against surpluses of £5,157,000 applied to debt redemption a deficit of £2,012,000 has in the past been definitely charged to loan account and, but for the adjustment effected last year, whereby the remaining £1,110,000 of the deficit accumulated in 1920-&#x2019;21 to 1922-&#x2019;23 was written off against the surplus on the account of the Custodian of Enemy Property, we should still have been carrying a deficit of over half a million pounds&#x2014;financed from borrowed money&#x2014;after absorbing the surplus which was available for debt redemption during the year now expiring. The result would be, therefore, that while since Union £5,157,000 of surplus revenue has been applied to redemption of debt we should have incurred fresh debt through deficiencies of revenue amounting to over two and a half millions giving a net provision for debt redemption over sixteen years of a little over £2,500,000 or an average of not much more than £150,000 per annum, and but for the contribution of £3,179,000 from the Railway and Harbour Fund during the first three years of Union, the balance would have been well on the wrong side. It may, therefore, be taken that in normal times the application of surplus revenue towards debt redemption is quite ineffective as a means of reducing debt.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#loans_and_sinking_funds">

<heading>LOANS AND SINKING FUNDS.</heading>

<p>Now as regards the sinking funds attached to particular loans, we inherited from the colonies which came into Union, besides the Transvaal guaranteed loans, several other loans repayable by means of sinking funds. All but one of these loans have now been repaid leaving only the sinking funds of the Transvaal loans, the sinking funds established last year and a sinking fund held for a small Natal loan of £39,000 which matures this year. By the operation of these sinking funds £5,300,000 of debt has been paid off since Union without reborrowing and during the same period the sinking funds for the Transvaal loans have been increased by contributions and interest on in, vestments by nearly £12,000,000 to £16,200,000. That is, if the stock held by the Public Debt Commissioners is taken at face value, and in discussing the national debt, it is, of course, necessary to take the sinking funds into consideration, and when their investments consist of Union stocks to take these stocks at face value, for the Union stocks so held naturally figure as part of the debt. As hon. members know in addition to this sinking fund in connection with Transvaal guaranteed loans we have established a sinking fund of one per cent, on a small local loan which I raised last year ; another in respect of the adjustments of the custodians accounts provided for by the Financial Adjustments Act of last year which amounts at the present date to £800,000, and if hon. members will turn to the Public Debt Vote for 1926-&#x2019;27 before them they will see that provision is made during this year of £524,000 towards redemption in the coming year. It is worth noting that in addition to the direct contribution for redemption some half a million of the amount provided for interest on next year&#x2019;s Public Debt Vote is payable into the sinking funds in respect of interest on the Union Government securities which the Public <span class="col_2135-2136" refersTo="page_0020"/>Debt Commissioners hold as investments. Then a sinking fund of one per cent, will be attached to the new local loan for which subscriptions are now being asked in the country for the purpose of converting the existing six per cent, loan which is maturing next year. That provision of one per cent, will not be brought into operation until 1927 when the reduction in the interest charges through conversion of the existing loan will be available for redemption purposes. Another practice which has practically the same effect as a sinking fund is the appropriation of the proceeds of land sales and mining leases to the loan account for capital purposes. By this means capital expenditure is made without borrowing for it, and the debt position is safeguarded. Credits to the loan account of this nature (including £1,200,000 obtained from the excess profits duty) have amounted since Union to over millions. Well, I think enough has been said to show that though the appropriation of surplus revenues to debt redemption has achieved in the past comparatively little. I think we can safely say that a great deal has been achieved since Union and is also being done to-day to protect our debt position. This question of debt redemption has been considered by the Public Accounts Committee during this session, and in their first report they have recommended&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">that a general sinking fund be established of £650,000 annual contribution from revenue towards the dead weight debt, and that the provision of the Public Debt Commissioners Act requiring all surpluses to be handed to the commissioners for redemption of debt be deleted.</block>

<p>This proposal will be seen from the figures I have quoted to constitute a substantial advance on what has been done in the way of debt redemption during the last few years. It substitutes a fixed annual charge of £250,000 more than the annual charge during recent years for the indefinite and problematical charge dependent on an excess of revenue over expenditure and, in view of the very substantial annual contribution to the loan account from mining leases, the provision suggested appears to be adequate.</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>That is a small vote.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I know some hon. members do not agree as to the adequacy of the amount. I propose, therefore, to adopt the proposal and to introduce legislation at a later stage to give effect to it. The contributions to specific sinking funds attached to certain loans will be taken from the general sinking fund, and the balance will be accumulated as a sinking fund for the redemption of debt generally.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>What is the amount of the new local loans ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>£9,000,000 of 6 per cent, loan mature next year. As members of the Select Committee on Public Accounts know, the Auditor-General takes another basis in calculating this dead weight loan, but if we deduct what is recovered and take only that portion raised from taxation, the amount is considerably reduced from the figures the Auditor-General accepts. As a good deal has been said about basing the sinking fund on the amount of the unproductive debt, it is as well that I should say that this annual provision of £650,000 will represent a contribution of considerably more than one per cent, on the unproductive or dead weight debt, as I calculate it&#x2014;that is according to the incidence of the interest charge&#x2014;whether it is recovered from the object of expenditure or falls to be met from general revenue. The unproductive or dead weight debt I estimate to-day at £55,000,000, and the contribution therefore works out at £1 3s. 7½d per cent, of it. It must be remembered that this figure of £55,000,000 includes the whole outlay (at least £10,000,000) on public works and buildings, and the large sum constantly in course of expenditure upon works which in the future will be revenue producing, but in the initial stages are not, e.g., expenditure on afforestation. This expenditure might be put down at £2,000,000. It would not, therefore, be difficult to argue that the figure for £55,000,000 given as representing the unproductive debt is capable of reduction by a very considerable sum.</p>

<p>I now proceed to deal with expenditure from loan funds for 1925-&#x2019;26. The estimated expenditure from loan funds for the year was £14,247,000, including £155,000 on additional estimates. The actual expenditure will be approximately £12,836,000. The undrawn grants amount to £1,411,000. I do not think it necessary to weary the House with the variations between the amounts actually expended and the various votes, beyond stating that the most important was in connection with the railways and harbours, the appropriation for which was £7,100,000, whilst the issue was £6,558,000, leaving a saving of £541,000.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#expenditure">

<heading>EXPENDITURE.</heading>

<p>The expenditure of £12,836,000 has been financed in the following way: There was a balance to credit of the loan account at the commencement of the year of £2,487,000. The surrenders of issues in respect of 1924-'25 votes were £335,000. Loan receipts other than loans raised, i.e., proceeds of mining leases, land sales, etc., and recoveries of advances produced £2,230,000. The principal item in this group is, of course, the revenue from mining leases and bewaarplaatsen, which produced £1,425,000. The loans raised total £35,231,000 less loans repaid (£26,216,000 and costs of raising £201,000), £26,417,000 leaving a balance available for loan expenditure of £8,814,000. The total receipts and opening balance were £13,866,000, and the expenditure £12,836,000, giving a closing balance at the credit of loan account of £1,030,000.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#public_debt">

<heading>PUBLIC DEBT.</heading>

<p>Now I wish to say a few words in regard to the position of the public debt, which, at <span class="col_2137-2138" refersTo="page_0021"/>the commencement of this financial year, was £214,332,000, and comprised stock and debentures £195,332,000 and temporary loans £19,000,000. The debt in respect of stock and debentures has been increased during the year by £14,047,000, and that in respect of temporary loans has been reduced by £6,946,000. Two issues of 5 per cent, stock redeemable in 1945-&#x2019;75 of £4,000,000 each were made in London, and £3,000,000 4½ per cent, debentures, which matured in 1925, were repaid. The increase of our debt in London was therefore £5,000,000. The two loans were raised on the London market on very favourable terms, they being made at 99½, and the result shows that our credit is still very good in London. The results show that we have obtained If not better, at least as good, terms as any of the other dominions.</p>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>And better terms in London than anywhere else.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Locally we are in process of issuing a 5 per cent, loan redeemable in 1940-&#x2019;50, with the object of converting the 6 per cent, loan, whose first date of maturity is February 1, 1927, and of raising some fresh money. During the six weeks which have elapsed since the lists were opened approximately £4,500,000 of the 6 per cent, stock has been converted into stock of this loan, £1,250,000 Treasury bills have been converted, and £1,150,000 stock has been issued to subscribers for cash, a total of £6,900,000. I wish to say here definitely that, as already stated in the prospectus, we intend repaying the whole of this 6 per cent. loan. Notice of redemption will be given in due course, and the holders of that stock can take it definitely that we intend converting the whole of that balance. If they are waiting to subscribe, perhaps thinking that at the last moment the Treasury will not pay off this loan, they will find themselves mistaken. There is, of course, at present a considerable attraction held out to stock holders to encourage them to convert their holdings. They get a premium of 1 per cent, and also another 1 per cent, in connection with the interest which they would lose by converting their holdings of 6 per cent, stock into 5 per cent, stock a year before the maturity of the former. This offer remains open only until the 1st July. After that date no premium will be paid, and the whole balance of that stock will be paid off at par at the date of maturity. Custodian certificates of credit to the amount of £7,265,000 have been added to the public debt of the Union in terms of the Financial Adjustments Act of last year, and Treasury bills for the same amount have been surrendered by the Custodian and cancelled. Under the same Act the Custodian has also surrendered £615,000 5 per cent, local stock 1929-&#x2019;39, and £799,000 Treasury Bills which have been cancelled.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Has the stock which has been surrendered gone to the public debt commissioners ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>The stock which has been surrendered has been cancelled. An amount of £800,000 has been paid over to the public debt commissioners. These certificates which have been taken over have been cancelled.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#temporary_debt">

<heading>TEMPORARY DEBT.</heading>

<p>The temporary debt has been reduced during the year by £6,446,000 to £12,554,000, which figure includes £4,280,000 representing Union Loan certificates. In view of the fact that a large number of certificates reached their first date of maturity at the expiration of five years from the date of issue during the year, it is satisfactory to record a net increase of £164,000 during the year, representing an addition of 205,000 certificates. This satisfactory result and the coincident increase of savings bank deposits is attributable in no small degree to the good work of the National Thrift Committee. Which I desire to acknowledge have? The reduction of the temporary debt is, of course, due in the main to the adjustment of Custodian&#x2019;s certificates of credit to which I have referred.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#union_debt">

<heading>UNION DEBT.</heading>

<p>The present position is accordingly that the debt of the Union has increased during the year by £7,600,000 to £221,933,000, comprising £209,379,000 stock and debentures and £12,554,000 temporary loans. Of the stock and debentures £65,223,000 are registered in the Union and £144,156,000 in London. The whole of the temporary loans are domiciled here. Against this debt we have £1,000,000 cash in the loan account and £17,000,000 Union Government securities held by the sinking funds, taking them at their nominal value. The net debt of the Union at this date is, therefore, under £204,000,000.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#reparations">

<heading>REPARATIONS.</heading>

<p>During the year the Government has received various small payments in respect of reparations under the peace treaty. The amount received from the German Government in this respect to date has amounted to £52,000 and this money is being held for the time being by the Custodian of Enemy Property in virtue of his appointment as agent for the Union Government in regard to matters arising out of the peace treaty. I intend that it shall be applied to meet war claims by Union citizens after-these have been investigated by a commission or committee which I propose to appoint very shortly. It is proposed that only claims that are made by British subjects who before the war were domiciled in the Union or naturalized in any part of the territories forming the Union should be dealt with and that no compensation shall be paid in respect of:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) Loss of civilian lives (but not children or dependents) ;</li>

<li>(b) Permanent injury or ill-health caused by enemy action at sea, or as the result of internment or forced labour, etc., in enemy territory;</li>

<li>(c) Loss of personal effects ;</li>

<li><span class="col_2139-2140" refersTo="page_0022"/>(d) Damage sustained in the Cape Province as the result of invasion by German forces;</li>

<li>(e) Loss of merchandise in transit (but no compensation to be paid to claimants who were liable for excess profits duty during the period of the war or in respect of shipments after the outbreak of war where merchants and importers failed or neglected to insure against war risks or in cases where they recouped themselves by passing their losses on to the consumer) ;</li>

<li>(f) Damage to or confiscation of property in enemy territory (but not for depreciation of investments or similar losses).<br/>Claims in respect of remote damages such as loss of wages consequent on internment, time unemployed, depreciation of assets in Germany, etc., will not be entertained.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#year's_trade">

<heading>YEAR'S TRADE.</heading>

<p>The statistics in regard to production and trade in 1925 reveal some very interesting features and I desire to call attention to the most important of these figures. The value of all minerals (excluding quarry products) produced in 1925 was £54,369,000, or £3,802,000 less than in 1924. This reduction, however, is more than fully accounted for by the disappearance of the gold premium, which added just over £4,000,000 to the value of the gold produced in 1924. The production of gold in 1925 exceeded the record production of 1924 by a small margin&#x2014;22,552 ounces, value £95,796. But for the shortage of native labour during the latter half of the year the increase over 1924 would have been considerable. The total value of the gold produced was £3,971,000 less than the value of the somewhat smaller quantity produced in 1924, owing to the disappearance of the gold premium, and the dividends paid by the gold mines were about £1,400,000 less than in 1924. During the year the number of white persons employed on the Witwatersrand gold mines increased by 321 and the number of natives employed fell by 10,417. The number of whites employed on those mines in December, 1924, was 18,835 and coloured 181,120. While in December, 1925, the number of whites employed was 19,156 and coloured 170,703. The ratio of white to coloured employees on the Witwatersrand gold mines improved from 1 to 9.6 at the end of 1924, to 1 to 8.9 at the end of 1925.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#diamonds">

<heading>DIAMONDS.</heading>

<p>In regard to diamonds, the production of mine stones was higher by 38,028 carats weight and £408,474 value, while the production of alluvial stones was 48,298 carats less in quantity and £243,755 less in value. There was therefore a reduction in the total production of 10,270 carats but the value was £164,722 more than in 1924. The value of both mine and alluvial stones increased materially during the year, and the sales for 1925 exceeded those for 1924 by a large amount. The sales of mine stones were 605,575 carats greater in quantity and £2,156,135 in value, while the sales of alluvial stones corresponded approximately with the reduced production, so that the net sales were 557,381 carats and £1,912,725 value more than in 1924. The number of whites employed on the diamond diggings increased by 1,122 during the year.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#coal">

<heading>COAL.</heading>

<p>The production of coal was again a record both in tonnage and value. The increase was 515,000 tons in quantity and £56,000 in value, the pit&#x2019;s mouth value per ton being slightly lower. The Transvaal collieries increased their output by about 600,000 tons, but the output of the Natal collieries was about 85,000 tons less than in the preceding year.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#tin_and_copper">

<heading>TIN AND COPPER.</heading>

<p>Other minerals: The values of the tin, copper, lead and silver produced were all lower than in 1924 ; on the other hand osmiridium, asbestos and chrome all show remarkable increases. None of the platinum mines reached the producing stage in 1925, but production has commenced on a small scale within the last few weeks, and one may look for gradually increasing production of platinum during the year.</p>

<p>In regard to the Union trade in 1925, the exports of merchandise for the year were £79,794,000, but to get a true picture of the position one must add exports of £5,871,000, gold specie coined in the Union, because to that extent the gold was exported in the coin state instead of wholly in the form of bullion as in previous years. The gold export for 1925 was 8,089,761 fine ounces, valued at £34,363,000 (standard value, and £5,871,000 in coin, total value £40,234,000, against 9,463,734 fine ounces of the standard value of £40,199,000 in 1924. The exports must therefore be taken at £85,665,000, or approximately 7$ millions more than in 1924.</p>

<p>The increase in tonnage is about a million. The most notable article of export in 1925 was maize, of which there was shipped 929,820 tons of the grain and 132,450 tons of meal of the value of £6,489,000, as compared with 71,948 tons of grain and 57,176 tons of meal of the value of £879,000 in 1924, the increased value of the 1925 shipments being therefore £5,610,000.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#sugar">

<heading>SUGAR.</heading>

<p>Sugar amounting to 60,000 tons of a value of £767,000 was exported against shipments of under 10,000 tons, value £178,000, for the previous year.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#grease_wool">

<heading>GREASE WOOL.</heading>

<p>Grease wool to the amount of 220,668,000 lbs. weight and £13,888,000 value was exported in 1925 as compared with 166,041,000 lbs. weight and £14,229,000 value in 1924, and scoured wool of 7,947,000 lbs. weight and £1,207,000 value was exported in 1925 against 8,554,000 lbs. weight and £1,535,000 value in 1924. Owing to the fall in prices the value of the exports of grease wool fell by £341,000 though the quantity shipped was 54,000,000 lbs. greater.</p>

<p><span class="col_2141-2142" refersTo="page_0023"/>The value of scoured wool fell by £328,000, but in this case 607,000 lbs. weight less was shipped. The average value of grease wool shipped fell from a shade over 1s. 8½d. per lb. to a shade over 1s. 3d. per lb.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#skins">

<heading>SKINS.</heading>

<p>Sheep skins naturally followed the same course ; the quantity shipped, 25,740,000 lbs. being 3,587,000 lbs. less, and the value £1,452,000 being £405,000 less than in 1924.</p>

<p>On the other hand, goat skins improved in price as 7,062,000 lbs. were shipped of a value of £343,000 against 7,734,000 lbs. of a value of £329,000 in 1924.</p>

<p>Mohair: 11,560,000 lbs. valued at £836,328 were exported in 1925 compared with 13,666,000 lbs. valued at £1,142,000 in 1924, a falling off of 2,106,000 lbs., or 15 per cent, in quantity and £306,000, or 27 per cent, in value.</p>

<p>Cotton: In spite of the very wet season in most cotton areas, the shipments in 1925 were more than double those in 1924, being 6,981,000 lbs. weight and £350,000 value against 3,299,000 lbs. weight and £171,000 value in 1924. In spite of the dry season this year it is expected that the production of cotton will show a considerable increase.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#fruit_and_fish">

<heading>FRUIT AND FISH.</heading>

<p>Fruit: 751,814 boxes of citrus of the value of £351,000 were exported against 475,000 boxes of the value of £221,000 in 1924, and 1,248,208 boxes of deciduous fruit of the value of £268,000 against 1,016,000 boxes of a value of £200,000.</p>

<p>The export of dried fruit on the other hand shows decrease.</p>

<p>Fish: The export of crayfish shows a further improvement, though the price is not maintained, France being still the principal purchaser. The amount exported was £235,000 value against £226,000 value in 1924.</p>

<p>The exports of wattle bark and extract showed an increase of £270,000 over 1924, and the export of diamonds increased by roughly one and a half millions.</p>

<p>The export trade of the year may be summarized as metals and minerals £52,000,000 ; agricultural products £30,000,000; manufactured goods £3,000,000.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#imports">

<heading>IMPORTS.</heading>

<p>The value of merchandise imported was £63,000,000 against £60,661,000 in 1924, an increase of £2,339,000. Imports from oversea increased by over £2,500,000, while those from neighbouring territories fell by £350,000. The tonnage landed was 2,480,856, as against 2,368,318 in 1924. The imports may be summarized as follows: Agricultural products and manufactures £9,000,000; manufactured articles, textiles, apparel, and so on, £19,000,000: metals, manufactured machinery and vehicles £17,000,000; other manufactures, £17,000,000: materials for industrial purposes, £1,000,000. In the first group, i.e., agricultural products and manufactures, the principal items are: Wheat, 140,500 tons, value £1,652,000; the figures for 1924 being 172,000 tons, value £1,549,000; flour and meal 27,700 tons, value £433,000 ; the figures for 1924 being 26,000 tons, value £520,000; coffee £959,000 ; tea £704,000; rice £607,000; milk £294,000. There is a chance for a local industry.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motor-cars">

<heading>MOTOR-CARS.</heading>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>What is the proportion of motor-cars ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Of motorcars, 18,342 were imported at a declared value of £3,128,000 compared with 13,476 valued at £2,469,000 in 1924&#x2014;an increase of nearly 5,000 vehicles. On the other hand, the importations of motor spirit were reduced, 16,500,000 gallons of a value of £1,109,000 being imported in 1925 against 18,875,000 gallons valued at £1,199,000 in 1924, the year 1925, therefore, ended with a visible balance of trade in favour of the Union of approximately 22½ millions, and a review of the trade position shows a satisfactory expansion and development in many directions. A brief examination of the agricultural production brings out the fact that the 1925 mealie crop, which was about 5 million bags in excess of the next largest, has been a most potent factor in bringing about the prosperous condition of trade which we have been experiencing during the last few months. Unfortunately, this bumper crop of over 24 million bags is going to be followed by an unusually short crop. Let us hope, however, that we shall have sufficient for our own consumption, and that the crop will not disappoint us further. The cotton crop this season is promising, and, notwithstanding the unusually dry season, will probably be double the 1925 crop. The large increase in the cotton production of the U.S.A. in 1925, which has restored the position created by several years of shortage, has naturally had its effect on prices which are 30 per cent, to 40 per cent, lower than a year ago. Even at the lower prices, however, we may look forward to a promising future for cotton in South Africa.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#wool_and_mohair">

<heading>WOOL AND MOHAIR.</heading>

<p>Wool and mohair prices, despite the reduction of about 20 per cent, in the beginning of 1925 are still fair. It was hardly to be hoped that the boom prices of 1924 could be maintained ; in fact, it is not good for an industry to have an unstable market with prices fluctuating between very wide limits. It is to be hoped that the present market is stabilized, but this must depend in the main on the political situation in Europe.</p>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>What about ostrich feathers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I shall give my hon. friend the information just now. The Bradford trade has withdrawn the extra charge of a farthing per lb. for combing South African wool, which was imposed because the cost of combing was said to be increased owing to the presence of extraneous matter in the wool. The better manner of treating wool for the market, and the greater attention to packing had to be admitted by the trade, and our wool growers have benefited by adopting better methods to the extent of this farthing per lb.</p>

<p><span class="col_2143-2144" refersTo="page_0024"/>In addition, the trade conceded an all-round reduction in combing charges of an half-penny per lb. of merino wool. The total reduction of three farthings per lb., therefore, means to our wool farmers about £1 per bale of 320 lbs.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#wink_industry">

<heading>WINK INDUSTRY.</heading>

<p>The wine industry seems to have recovered under the operation of the Wine Control Act. For the first time in its history steps have been taken to mature wine on a large scale for the oversea market. It is, however, the export trade which has to be looked to for any permanent improvement in the industry, and it is only by the manufacture of large quantities of uniform type that success in the European markets can be achieved. The export trade in beef is improving. From under 5,000 quarters in 1922 and 1923, shipments have risen to 105,000 quarters in 1924 and 182,000 in 1925. Our meat appears to suit the Italian market, which has taken most of the meat exported, but shipments have also gone recently to France and Belgium, and it is hoped that it may also get a footing in those countries as well.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#fruit_export">

<heading>FRUIT EXPORT.</heading>

<p>The fresh fruit export is expanding so rapidly that it is necessary to extend the market to the Continent of Europe if prices are to be maintained at a payable level. All interested in the trade are alive to the situation, and the Government is affording all the help it can in that direction. The quality of our dried fruit, like that of our fresh fruit, is undoubted, and has secured for itself, one believes, a permanent footing on the London market. Hitherto sundrying methods have been employed, but the quantity of fruit available for drying and conditions in the west will necessitate resort to dehydration. With this in view, the Government is taking steps to experiment in dehydration under our climatic conditions.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#feather_market">

<heading>FEATHER MARKET.</heading>

<p>The feather market to which my hon. friend referred just now is still very depressed. Efforts are being made in Europe by a special committee appointed by the trade with Government representation thereon to bring about a revival by interesting those who control the fashions, but I am afraid with very little success so far. In this connection, I may also say that farmers have recently succeeded in organizing themselves into a co-operative company with a view to controlling the marketing of the product. Well, I believe, this is a step in the right direction, and I think the hon. member for Beaconsfield (Col. Sir David Harris) will agree that this method is pre-eminently successful in connection with another article of luxury &#x2014;but it cannot be said that the outlook for the industry is very encouraging. Dairying is another industry which is not in a very healthy condition. Overhead costs of factory production are high, and the yield of milk is, generally speaking, low. The Board of Trade and Industries have been asked to operate with the Department of Agriculture in a thorough investigation, especially from the factory side.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#egg_export">

<heading>EGG EXPORT.</heading>

<p>The growing egg export trade has, unfortunately, had a serious set-back owing to the contamination of the eggs by fruit apparently while in cold storage. The Government immediately appointed a commission of enquiry, whose report, as hon. members know, has been laid on the table of the House. As regards industrial production, the customs tariff Act of last year afforded direct assistance by way of increased duties to some 30 industries.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#industrial_development">

<heading>INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.</heading>

<p>Industrial development is a slow growth, and is subject to many complex influences besides those exerted by customs tariffs alone. The Government is satisfied, however, that a new tariff has tended towards increased activity in old-established industries, and the opening up of new enterprises with increased employment of labour. A recent survey of the labour returns of 291 firms who received assistance directly or indirectly through the tariff shows that between July and November of last year the total labour force has increased by over 4 per cent., and the European and coloured employees by over 3 per cent. It is confidently anticipated that when the industrial census returns are available they will show a steady forward movement in the employment value of our industries generally. It is significant that, during the period from August to January last, 100 firms which previously did not appear on the books of the customs authorities as approved manufacturers under the Factories Act, applied for and were granted registration as manufacturers entitled to the free admission of certain materials for use in their industries.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#boots_and_shoes">

<heading>BOOTS AND SHOES.</heading>

<p>The progress of the boot and shoe and tanning industries at Port Elizabeth has been particularly noticeable. New factories have been established and existing ones have been modernized. The success of these industries in this centre has attracted other forms of industrial enterprise, and Port Elizabeth is now regarded as one of the centres best situated for the manufacture and distribution of goods. We know that recently several large concerns have devoted themselves to the constituency of my hon. friend, and we are going to have the general motors people coming there in connection with the assembling of their motor-cars. The number of new factories established during the year was 343. The purchasing in this country of Government supplies is being steadily extended. For the first time for a good many years, Post Office Savings Bank deposits and advances increased during the year. The Post Office Savings Bank deposits exceeded withdrawals in 1925 by £170,000, and the depositors numbered 327,000&#x2014;the highest number recorded in the history of the bank. A recital of the financial transactions of the year would be incomplete without a reference to the most important economic reform effected for a long time&#x2014;the restoration of the gold standard.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#gold_standard">

<heading>GOLD STANDARD.</heading>

<p>The restoration of the gold standard by Great Britain, Holland, Australia and New Zealand <span class="col_2145-2146" refersTo="page_0025"/>just before we made the change, though not before we had decided to make it, naturally contributed to the ease with which the change was effected. It is idle to speculate on the results which might have followed on the Union taking this step alone. It is sufficient to say that the change was made without any disturbance of the price levels in the Union, and resulted at once in the disappearance of the difficulty previously experienced of transferring funds from London to South Africa. The change was, therefore, of immediate benefit to Union exporters generally. The gold certificates which had been issued subsequently to 1920 as receipts for the gold coin impounded by the Treasury, have been redeemed during the year practically in their entirety (there were £10,358,568 outstanding at the beginning of April, 1925, and only £20,484 outstanding on the 20.th March, 1926). The return to a gold currency has evidently been appreciated by the public of the Union, as very large quantities of coin have gone into circulation in place of notes. (The notes outstanding were £11,122,481 on 4th April, 1925, and only £7,217,000 on 20th March, 1926.) In a good year as this has been the note circulation would have increased but for the replacement of notes by gold.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#expenditure_from_revenue">

<heading>EXPENDITURE FROM REVENUE.</heading>

<p>The estimates of expenditure from revenue for 1926-&#x2019;27 total £26,952,000, that is roughly £550,000 more than the actual expenditure for the current year, after allowing for savings and surrenders on this year&#x2019;s votes. Allowing for savings and surrenders on next year&#x2019;s votes, the increase may be taken at about £400,000, that is to say, the same figure as the increase on this year&#x2019;s original estimates. The variations between next year&#x2019;s and this year&#x2019;s estimates are fully dealt with in my memorandum prefacing the estimates, and I need not explain them now, except to say that the principal increases are, as usual, inevitable, such as the increased provision for interest on loans consequent upon increased capital expenditure, increased subsidies to the provinces and increased provision for pensions. In regard to revenue for 1926-&#x2019;27 the bad season which is being experienced in many parts of the country, and the consequent reduction of agricultural production make it necessary to approach the task of estimating the receipts for the new financial year with some measure of caution. So far as customs duties are concerned, the receipts for the year closing are expected to be £8,160,000. A number of tariff alterations are proposed, and these will be referred to later. The receipts for this year may be taken as the basis for next year&#x2019;s estimates and, after careful consideration, I have decided to reduce them by £460,000, bringing out a figure of £7,700,000 for next year. There are no indications that recent importations have been excessive, or that stocks held in the country of imported goods are abnormal, so I think that the reduction allowed for should be adequate.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#excise_duties">

<heading>EXCISE DUTIES.</heading>

<p>Excise duties have vielded £1,830,000 in the current year. I allow for reductions of £40,000 in respect of spirits and beer and for small increases on cigarettes, sugar and matches, making a nett reduction of £28,000.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#postal_revenue">

<heading>POSTAL REVENUE.</heading>

<p>Postal revenue is put at £1,674,000 against receipts of £1,871,000 for this year, which allows for the loss of revenue through the return to the penny postage being set off to a considerable extent by increased business, and the receipt of a substantial sum of non-recurrent revenue representing arrear payments by the United Kingdom and foreign countries in respect of oversea mail business for 1924 and 1925.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#telegraphs_and_telephones">

<heading>TELEGRAPHS AND TELEPHONES.</heading>

<p>Telegraph revenue is put at £480,000 or £17,000 more than the receipts for this year, as the increase in telegraph business, we hope, will be maintained.</p>

<p>Telephone revenue is put up by £90,000 in view of the extension of the telephone system which has taken place.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mining_revenue">

<heading>MINING REVENUE.</heading>

<p>In regard to mining revenue, the income tax on gold mines is estimated to produce £1,100,000 against receipts of £1,062,000 for this year. I have already explained that the receipts for this year were reduced by £107,000 owing to deductions from the 1925 tax on dividend tax in respect of the same tax year paid in 1924-&#x2019;25. But for this adjustment, we should have received £1,169,000 this year. The estimate for 1926-&#x2019;27, therefore, falls short of the receipts this year as adjusted by £69,000. This reduced estimate is necessary to correspond with reduced profits due to reduced production arising from shortage of native labour, to increased charges for miners&#x2019; phthisis and in the case of some of the mines to other causes. Income tax on leased mines is put at £400,000 against £384,000 received in the current year. This is the proportion of the lease consideration which would be paid by way of tax in cases where tax is not specifically payable, but is merged in the lease consideration. In addition it is expected that nearly £1,600,000 will accrue to the loan account from the leased areas. A total sum of £3,100,000 is, therefore, expected to accrue to the revenue of the country from the gold mines in 1926-&#x2019;27. As regards the diamond mines, fortunately the prospects continue to be good, though a reduction in the price of the inferior stones may probably cause a reduction to the profits of the Premier Mine and in the Government&#x2019;s share thereof. Under Government ownership accordingly £450,000 is put down for the next year against receipts in this year of £480,000. I am allowing for probable increased receipts in the Government share of ownership profits of the Premier Mine. Under export duty £900,000, against £870,000 and under income tax £490,000 against £305,000. The reason for this large increase is due to the fact that this year&#x2019;s receipts were reduced by £62,000 on account of the adjustment of dividend tax, which I have explained. This reduction is restored in next year&#x2019;s receipts and the profits of some of the companies are improving and will yield a larger quota of <span class="col_2147-2148" refersTo="page_0026"/>tax. The total receivable from diamonds in 1926-&#x2019;27 is accordingly £1,840,000. It may be mentioned that the re-arrangement of the system of taxing companies effected last year, namely, the abolition of the dividend tax and the doubling of the normal income tax, produces almost exactly the same revenue as the old system. The income tax, apart from that received from mining companies, will, I anticipate, produce £3,650,000 or £175,000 more than the receipts for the current year. Not only is the carry-over larger than it was a year ago, but it is reasonable to suppose that the tax year ending June 30th. 1926, will be a considerably better year than the preceding one. In the case of super tax, I expect to receive £1,100,000 or £25,000 less than this year&#x2019;s receipts, as the falling off of the mining dividends will affect the receipts under this head.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#interest">

<heading>INTEREST.</heading>

<p>Other heads of the revenue estimates showing considerable variation on this year&#x2019;s collections include interest which is £285,000 up ; of this increase £150,000 is the normal increase arising through the increased amount of Government moneys advanced to the Land Bank, Provinces, Electricity Commission, etc., and £135,000 is transferred to this head from Railway and Harbour interest in respect of interest on the cost of the Colenso station, which will become a liability of the Electricity Commission on their taking over the station.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#miscellaneous_revenue">

<heading>MISCELLANEOUS REVENUE.</heading>

<p>Miscellaneous revenue is £80,000 up. This is due to the inclusion of receipts from the mint in excess of expenditure. Previously, these have gone to the loan account, and as that account has already received some £80,000 in excess of the capital cost of the mint, there does not seem to be any need to continue this arrangement. Any deficiencies in connection with the mint are paid from revenue. We have now paid off the full amount of the capital cost of the mint and, in future, the receipts will not be large, as we are not minting the same amount of silver coinage. The receipts from the mint will now go to ordinary revenue.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#quitrents">

<heading>QUITRENTS.</heading>

<p>Quitrents and farm tax revenue is reduced by £40,000 ; the amount which is surrendered to the Native Development Fund under last year&#x2019;s Act and death duties are reduced by £25,000. In other respects the revenue estimates, which I shall lay on the table this afternoon, do not call for any special comment. The revenue for 1926-&#x2019;27 is estimated to produce £27,019,000.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#tariff_alterations">

<heading>TARIFF ALTERATIONS.</heading>

<p>I shall table this afternoon the usual resolution covering proposed alterations to the tariff. As was to be expected nine months&#x2019; experience of working a completely new tariff has shown a large number of adjustments to be necessary. In addition to these adjustments the Board of Trade and Industries have recommended a number of alterations of duties as the result of investigation conducted since last session with the object of assisting local industries.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#flour_duty">

<heading>FLOUR DUTY.</heading>

<p>The principal alterations which the Government propose to accept on the recommendations of the Board are as follows: It is proposed to remove the existing dumping duty on Australian flour, which averages about 7d. per 100 lbs., but in order to retain the protection so afforded to the wheat farmer and the miller, it is proposed to increase the existing duties on flour from 2s. 11d. to 3s. 4d. per 100 lbs., minimum rates, and from 3s. 3d. to 3s. 8d. maximum rates. This nominal increase is, in fact, a reduction by 2d. per 100 lbs., in the combined duties now levied on Australian flour, which constitutes 80 per cent, of Union imports, and the taxation on this article will remain unaltered in the aggregate and no extra burden will be thrown on the consumer.</p>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>These permanent duties were to have been temporary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>We have always collected these duties. I say deliberately that this proposal will not entail any extra burden on the consumer. The price of bread in this country is regulated by the price paid for imported flour. The alteration in the flour duties necessitates a corresponding change in the wheat duty, taking into account the cost of milling, value of bye-products, etc., and it is proposed to amend the rate to 1s. 5d. minimum, 1s. 7d. maximum, per 100 lbs., thus retaining a margin which enables the miller to grist from imported and local wheat, and to sell his product in competition with imported flour, and at the same time affording the South African wheat grower reasonable protection against both imported wheat and flour. The local production of wheat has made wonderful strides in the last year or two, and with the greater incentive now offered, it is anticipated that the customs revenue from wheat and flour will not increase materially. The proposals come to this in regard to wheat and flour. There is really no increase in the effectual taxation of flour. The taxation of wheat has increased by about 5d. per 100 lbs., but this again will not entail any increase in the price of bread, because that is regulated by the price of imported flour, but it does reduce the present unsound and unfair margin between the amounts of the duty payable in connection with wheat and flour. It will take from the milling industry about 5d. per 100 lbs. which is given in protection to the farmers. This, however, will still enable the miller to import wheat, and to sell it at a reasonable profit and to compete successfully with imported flour.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>The consumer gains no benefit.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>No, but no burden is placed upon him.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#duty_on_spirits">

<heading>DUTY ON SPIRITS.</heading>

<p><span class="col_2149-2150" refersTo="page_0027"/>I now come to my next proposal which I am sure will find general support. Even if some hon. members think it is not really very sound. I am sure their sense of patriotism and disinterestedness will force them to support me. Here, again, I give the assurance that it need not necessarily increase the cost of living. I refer to the duties on potable spirits, i.e., whisky, brandy and gin. The duty will be increased from 37s. 6d. to 45s. per proof gallon, an increase of 12s. 6d. per case, or roughly 1s. per bottle.</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>You won&#x2019;t get much out of that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not expect I shall get very much, but I am sure it will please some of my hon. friends here, the hon. member for Piquetberg and others. Strong representations are made periodically by the local wine and spirits industry for a higher duty on imported spirits, and this increase is as far as the Government can go to meet them without jeopardizing a most important source of revenue, in the neighbourhood of half a million per annum.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>You had better put up the excise accordingly.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>No, I am doing it particularly to give some sort of relief to my hon. friends and their industry, which is very hard hit under existing conditions and the competition to which it is subjected. In this connection it will be remembered that in the past attention has been drawn to the great disparity between the import duties payable on these spirits in this country, and the duties payable on similar spirits overseas. I may tell my hon. friends here that that difference has not been so large as has been made out sometimes. This proposal will reduce the discrepancy and bring up our duty to 38s. 3d. per liquid gallon as against 48s. 4d. excise imposed on whisky overseas. Hon. members will see that, although I have made a substantial advance towards this, it is impossible for the Government to go to the extent that has been advocated, that is to equalize the duty on whisky brought into this country with the excise on whisky in the country in which it is produced.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#ready-made_clothing">

<heading>READY-MADE CLOTHING.</heading>

<p>Then I come to men&#x2019;s ready-made clothing. The duty will be increased from 15 per cent, to 20 per cent, ad valorem in the interests of the local industry. This does not apply to overcoats or underclothing, and is a reversion to the duty existing for many years prior to 1920.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#steam_wagons">

<heading>STEAM WAGONS.</heading>

<p>Then I come to another important alteration, steam wagons. Instead of being admitted free, as at present, these will be dutiable at 10 per cent, ad valorem, in order to put them on the same footing as motor trucks.</p>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Don&#x2019;t they burn our coal?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, but I don&#x2019;t know whether that would entitle them to the privileges which they have been having so far.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>The others, of course, burn American oil.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>The chassis of both classes of vehicle will be admitted at the lower rate of 5 per cent, to encourage body building in the Union. It has been represented to the Board of Trade by those who are interested in these concerns that they would very much like to go in for complete body building in this country, but the cost of machinery will be so excessive that it will not pay them to do so. I propose to meet the position by laying down an intermediate duty of 15 per cent, between that charged on motor-cars and that on motor-car chassis in respect of chassis imported for bodies to be partly manufactured in the Union. This alteration, involving a surrender of customs revenue, to an amount of about £35,000 per annum will give a stimulus to the construction of car bodies in South Africa as far as possible from raw materials, in place of the mere assembling now being done here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It is very easy to evade that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>No, it cannot be evaded.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#sugar_and_cotton">

<heading>SUGAR AND COTTON.</heading>

<p>Then I come to sugar. A suspended duty is proposed which will be brought into effect only on fulfilment of certain conditions relative to a maximum retail price for sugar, the revision of the existing agreement between planters and millers and an agreement as to the price of sugar to be charged to manufacturers of confectionery, etc.</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Will jams come into that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, confectionery, jams, etc.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>What is the suspended duty going to be ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>It will be 3s. 6d. per 100 lbs. The effective protection now is 4s. 6d. per 100 lbs., 3s. 6d. and 1s.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>What about the retail price ?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>That is a matter on which the detailed proposals of the Government will be laid before the House at a later stage. I may say generally that the increased revenue which will be derived from the various sources indicated, although in no case of great moment, will be offset by rebates of duty on materials for industrial purposes, and by a reduction in the duty on the cheaper classes of cotton piece goods which will compensate for the proposed increase on ready <span class="col_2151-2152" refersTo="page_0028"/>made clothing. The rates will be 12½ per cent, on all cotton piece goods, except those of United Kingdom manufacture costing less than 1s. 3d. per yard, the duty on which will be per cent, ad valorem. When the new tariff was introduced last year it was alleged it would entail a serious increase in prices. This prediction has not been fulfilled. Wholesale prices in the Union have shown a decreasing tendency in the last 12 months, and according to the latest statistics available were per cent, lower in January, 1926, than in April, 1925.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>That is due to the free admission of raw materials.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member (Mr. Jagger) says it is due to the free admission of raw materials, but of course I am dealing with the effects of the tariff as a whole.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#income_tax">

<heading>INCOME TAX.</heading>

<p>By way of giving some relief to smaller income taxpayers, I propose to increase the primary abatement from £300 to £400 in the case of married taxpayers, including in that term those widowed persons with young children who have always been treated for income tax purposes as falling within that class. I do not propose to extend the relief to unmarried persons. To do so would cost an additional £100,000, which we can ill afford, and it would also be giving relief where it is not required. The single person gets the primary allowance of £300 and the allowances for insurance and dependants, and though those allowances slide off rapidly, they are sufficient to give immunity to all cases which really require consideration. The cost of the relief for married persons is estimated at about £205,000, and it will have the effect of eliminating from the tax roll a large number of the smaller taxpayers. Some 10,000 taxpayers with taxable incomes between £300 and £400 will be eliminated entirely. Of the 15,000 in the next class, that is those with taxable incomes between £400 and £500, a very large proportion will also disappear, together with a certain number in the other classes. I have been urged to increase the primary abatement to £500 in the case of married taxpayers. This proposal I have been unable to accept for two reasons. In the first place, it would cost an additional £165,000 and that is more than I can afford to surrender. In the second place, having regard to the liberal abatements granted for children, insurance and the like, it would place the exemption from tax at an altogether unwarrantable figure. For it would mean that a man with two children would not pay a shilling of income tax, unless his income exceeded £650 a year. Such a man can, I think, rightly be regarded as in a position to pay his quota of direct taxation to the State and to exempt him would, therefore, be to reduce his sense of responsibility for the economical management of the State and to violate the fundamental principle of taxation that taxes should be paid in proportion to the respective abilities of the subjects.</p>

<p>Then in accordance with the recommendation of the Select Committee on Public Accounts in 1924, I have decided to increase the rate of interest paid to minors who have deposits in the Guardians Fund from 4 per cent, to per cent. This will involve a surrender of revenue to the amount of £15,000.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#revenue_surrendered">

<heading>REVENUE SURRENDERED.</heading>

<p>In this budget, therefore, the revenue surrendered in 1926-&#x2019;27, which really means a reduction of the existing burdens of taxation, will be the following: First in regard to penny postage, which was introduced on the 1st January, 1926, at an estimated cost per annum of £400,000. The loss of one-quarter, that is, £100,000 was allowed for in last year&#x2019;s budget. The additional surrender of revenue in 1926-&#x2019;27 will accordingly be £300,000. Then we get the Transvaal employers&#x2019; tax. The Provincial Subsidies Act of last year abolished this tax, but allowed for its collection by the province for the year ended June 30th, 1925, and provided that the subsidy to the province should be abated to the extent of the amount received from the mines. In effect, therefore, the Union received the tax paid by the mines in 1925-&#x2019;26. This amounted to £180,000, and is surrendered in 1926-&#x2019;27. In addition, other employers in the Transvaal are relieved of the tax paid by them which was £45,000 for 1925-&#x2019;26. Income tax: The increase of the income tax abatement involves a surrender of revenue amounting to £205,000, making the total revenue surrendered in this budget £700,000.</p>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Why take credit for the employers&#x2019; tax ; that is provincial.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, but I have to compensate the provinces out of revenue for the loss of that tax. I have to make it up to the provinces, and I have done so. Last year they got the tax and we reduced the subsidy. This year the tax goes, and I have to increase the subsidy. I think the hon. member will see that I am perfectly entitled to claim this. With the exception of the increased income tax abatement, these factors have all been allowed for in the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure. The final position in 1926-&#x2019;27 is, therefore: Revenue £27,019,000 ; deduct from income tax as the result of the increased abatement £205,000, leaving £26,814,000. Expenditure £26,952,000, giving a deficit of £138,000, which should be cancelled by savings on next year&#x2019;s votes. Just a word about Loan Account, 1926-&#x2019;27.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#loan_estimates">

<heading>LOAN ESTIMATES.</heading>

<p>The Estimates of Expenditure from Loan Funds have not yet been completed. It may be stated, however, that the expenditure is not likely to be much less than it was last year, that is in the neighbourhood of £13,000,000, of which at least half will be accounted for by Railways and Harbours Capital Expenditure. It will be necessary to make some additional provision on the Estimates of Capital Expenditure for next and subsequent years to give the <span class="col_2153-2154" refersTo="page_0029"/>provinces the means of putting the hospital accommodation on a proper footing, also for purposes of the new local loans fund for which we are now legislating. Towards meeting this expenditure we have, at the close of this year, a balance of £1,000,000 to credit of the Loan Account, and the receipts to Loan Account for next year for mining leases, etc., estimated at nearly £2,500,000. I have endeavoured to give to the House a true and honest statement of the country&#x2019;s finances as I see them. I think there is ample justification for the statement that our finances are again in a sound and healthy position. The accumulated deficits for the last few years no longer stare us in the face. We have returned to a normal state of balanced budgets without resorting to unsound financial expedients. We have taken steps which will guarantee the restoration of the pension funds ; the important question of debt redemption is also satisfactorily tackled, and last, but not least, I submit that we have made a good beginning in regard to the reduction of taxation and reducing the existing burden on the people. South Africa is, however, a country which is subject to violent economic fluctuations. The prospects as the result of the absence of rain over large areas certainly gives cause for anxiety as to the immediate future, but I think a general lack of confidence is not warranted. The country actually and potentially possesses such wealth and resources that the future cannot be denied, and I think we are entitled to look to the future with confidence. Nevertheless, the prudent management of our affairs is essential ; without that our manifold advantages will mean nothing. In order, therefore, to stimulate production and increased prosperity, I trust the country will give the Treasury its support in endeavouring to restrict the expenditure as much as possible, and also ultimately to reduce taxation. We do not want to stop or curtail legitimate development commensurate with our resources, but the demands on the Treasury are constantly increasing, and the country must realize that it is impossible to meet every demand. What the country needs most is not an aggravation of expenditure, but the reduction of the already heavy burden. Ever since I took office, I have done my best to curtail the growth of expenditure in directions that could not be justified. I hope I shall have the assistance of the country in this direction. It is for the House to judge what measures of success I have achieved. What is absolutely necessary is a public opinion. Nothing can be achieved if everyone is clamouring for increased expenditure in all sorts of directions and services.</p>

<p>I want to give notice that on Wednesday, 28th of April, I will move that the House goes into Committee on Ways and Means.</p>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>On the motion of the Minister of Railways and Harbours, debate adjourned ; to be resumed to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#economic_and_wage_commission">

<heading>ECONOMIC AND WAGE COMMISSION.</heading>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister of Finance when he is going to lay on the table the report of the Economic and Wage Commission.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I hope to lay it on the table to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#board_of_trade_and_industries_acts_amendment_bill">

<heading>BOARD OF TRADE AND INDUSTRIES ACTS AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Defence to introduce the Board of Trade and Industries Acts Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time ; second reading on 14th April.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#kopjes_township_bill">

<heading>KOPJES TOWNSHIP BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Third reading, Kopjes Township Bill.</p>

<p>Bill read a third time.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_on_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: Adjourned debate on consideration of second report of Select Committee on Railways and Harbours, to be resumed.</p>

<p>[Debate, adjourned on 29th March, resumed.]</p>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>As a member of the select committee, I do not oppose the adoption of the report, but I think members should know exactly what has happened. We find that the hulk of the payment of £44,809 is composed of £43,679 11s. 5d. spent on an unauthorized railway. The position is that on the Klaver-Kokenaap line works, ostensibly started for the relief of the unemployed, and later authorized for that purpose only, we find that the rails and sleepers were actually ordered before the Government came to Parliament for sanction for this new railway line. The amount spent, therefore, was unauthorized. The materials were ordered through the High Commissioner specially for this line. All this expenditure should have been in 1924-&#x2019;25. The expenditure in the first instance was debited against the construction of this line. The chief railway storekeeper in March, 1925, had debited this line with the expenditure. When, a little later on, the fact was disclosed, or it became known to the department, that the expenditure was unauthorized, the general manager recommended to the Railway Board, and the board resolved in May&#x2014;that is also before the question was finally settled in this House&#x2014;to reverse this debit. This amount was later put back&#x2014;a month after only&#x2014;to the debit of the Klaver-Kokenaap line, but the position was that nobody could know that the money was being spent for the material for the construction of a specific line before that line had been authorized by Parliament. We find, from a letter from the railway storekeeper at Salt River, to the chief railway storekeeper, the reasons for these reversals, and it is right that one should read this letter to show how the debits have been changed from one account to another, unquestionably to avoid a debate in Parliament. The letter is as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">On the 26th March the resident engineer, Klaver, wired me: &#x201C;Wire early approximate <span class="col_2155-2156" refersTo="page_0030"/>value permanent way material now coming forward you intend include in March, accounts,&#x201D; and I replied: &#x201C;Include steel sleepers Gloucester Castle £12,010,&#x201D; as it was natural to assume that the resident engineer desired to include as much as possible in March accounts, and was making the necessary financial provision. My wire was, however, either mutilated in transmission or misread as £2,010, and, as stated in my wire T411, this is the real cause of the trouble, and not the fact that some of the trucks did not leave the docks until after March 25th. On the 19th instant, I had an interview with the general manager&#x2019;s financial assistant (Mr. Marshall) and explained what had happened and, while not disputing the correctness of the allocation as March expenditure, he pointed out the difficulty involved in having to seek a vote for unauthorized expenditure, and in answering the usual audit queries which would naturally arise. Such being the case, I said I was quite prepared to reverse the debit if you agreed, so your wire 10/271 was not unexpected.</block>

<p>The position, shortly, is that this amount was debited against a particular expenditure not authorized by Parliament, and when the financial assistant of the department thought that there would be some difficulty in getting this vote carried by this House, and the auditor-general would raise queries, they had the debit reversed, and nobody in this House knew that this amount was spent on an unauthorized railway line. The practice is where material is purchased for a specific line, that it should be charged to that line. What we are asking is the continuation of the system advocated by the chief railway accountant and by the select committee, and in the letter from the chief accountant and by the auditor-general. Besides, we have the departmental stores regulations, which clearly lay down that all material laid down to debits in the London books should be charged to the works concerned. The department makes an entry which is contrary to all that. The auditor-general points out, on a previous occasion under similar circumstances, the amount was charged to the specific works&#x2014;he mentions the Oudtshoorn-Calitzdorp account. I find, not only is there an error in the debit, but the debit was changed three times, and Parliament should know what actually has happened, because this report recommends that this amount should be voted. I think it is right to draw the attention of the House to this matter</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I am surprised at the remarks of the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) (Maj. G. B. van Zyl). This is indeed a case of flogging a dead horse. He makes a statement here which he cannot prove, as he tells us that I told the House that the Klaver-Kokenaap line was distress relief work, and not really building a railway line. I never made a statement of that sort. I told Parliament that that line was being built without the authority of Parliament, but there was never any question that this was not a railway line. Where does the hon. member get that absurd statement from? I never made any secret of it that we were building that line, and that why we were not waiting for parliamentary approval was because we were doing it to meet distress in the district. The hon. member has said that this amount should be debited in a different account, and then I would have had to come to Parliament for the additional amount. This is purely a matter of book-keeping. The hon. member will not deny that the facts were that the material was ordered, and he will not deny that the delivery was not completed by 31st March.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>You paid for it before.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>But delivery had not taken place. Before that the debit is not usually made. There is nothing we have to hide, and as the select committee has supported the Auditor-General, I have not the least objection to accept their decision. The whole position is a perfectly straightforward one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person></from>

<p>rose.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I have allowed the Chairman to reply, and we cannot allow further discussion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Can&#x2019;t I speak?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>You can speak on the Bill itself. You will have an opportunity later on.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to, and a Bill brought up.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harrours_unauthorized_expenditure_(1924-&#x2019;25)_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARROURS UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE (1924-&#x2019;25) BILL.</heading>

<p>Railways and Harbours Unauthorized Expenditure (1924-&#x2019;25) Bill was read a first time ; second reading to-morrow.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_on_architects_and_quantity_surveyors_(private)_bill">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE ON ARCHITECTS AND QUANTITY SURVEYORS (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: Special report of Select Committee on Architects and Quantity Surveyors (Private) Bill to be considered.</p>

<p>Report considered.</p>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That leave be granted to amend the preamble in accordance with the report,</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. I. E. DE VILLIERS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to. [No quorum.]</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#irrigation_commission_bill">

<heading>IRRIGATION COMMISSION BILL.</heading>

<p>Fourth Order read: Second reading, Irrigation Commission Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>In connection with this Bill, it is not necessary to detain the House long, because I think that the principle of a permanent irrigation <span class="col_2157-2158" refersTo="page_0031"/>board is accepted by all parties. In connection with irrigation works, we feel that the same thing has happened as has happened in other countries. After a certain time, people saw that things were so confused that a new commencement had to be made. We have not now come to that stage with reference to irrigation schemes, and the schemes are now in such a state that people are being ruined. People are so heavily taxed that it is impossible for them to come out, and we find that the way in which schemes were begun was not the right way, and that a new method should be adopted in new schemes. There ought to be more detailed enquiry, and an impartial board for new schemes. I need not plead for a permanent irrigation board. There is no difference of opinion about that, but the important point is the powers which should be granted to the board. I have had difficulty in connection with that, and it is no secret that various drafts have been prepared of the Bill which I am now introducing. Not only were the law advisers and the department consulted, but the assistance of the commission which was appointed last year on irrigation matters was also asked. Especially the chairman of that commission, the present Administrator of the Cape Province, gave us his advice, and eventually, when this Bill was examined by him, he said he entirely agreed with it, and that in his opinion the Bill set out the wishes of the irrigation board and their point of view. I do not say that this is enough, but much advice has been obtained. I think it will be best, after a short introduction, to adopt a motion to adjourn the debate, and that the House should pass the second reading after the Easter vacation ; the matter then to be referred to a select committee. That select committee can then particularly bear in mind the powers of the irrigation board. We have had difficulties in connection, but I think we are now on the right road. Moreover, there are many hon. members who are acquainted with irrigation works, and I do not doubt that they will be able to give much assistance with regard to difficulties which will arise in the evidence. There is no doubt that an alteration must be made. We are at present in the same stage as other countries, such as America and Australia, formerly were, and they tried in the same way that we are now doing to make a new commencement. I hope that, through the alterations which we are now going to make, there will in future be more co-ordination. In the past, as many irrigation works were established as possible, irrespective of immediate results. Eventually this was at least attained, that there were more conserving places, and I am not one of those who regard all the work that has been done as a failure, because we have the result that in various parts of the country water reservoirs have been built, even if the schemes were in most cases wrongly carried out. I think we should make the best of existing schemes, and when new ones are established, put them on a proper basis. As to the powers of the irrigation board, e.g., in connection with irrigation settlement areas, there were difficulties. Various duties with regard to settlement which now pertain to the land board are transferred to the irrigation commission. The irrigation commission in that way becomes responsible for these matters to the Minister of Lands, in the same way as the land boards now are. That matter is dealt with in Clause 2. Clause 4 provides what capacities, duties and obligations, now in the hands of the Director of Irrigation, under the irrigation laws shall be transierred to the immigration commission, as well as the business of the irrigation Department which is also being transferred. The intention is to take the general policy of any scheme under the irrigation law administratively out of the hands of the Director of Irrigation, and to hand it over to the commission. This, of course, does not prevent the present Director of Irrigation from remaining the head, but the broader policy in connection with the Irrigation Art is being put into the hands of the irrigation commission. The position of the director is not touched so far as his salary, etc., is concerned, but if he thinks that he is losing his status by the change, then we can treat him as one who has been removed from his post. I should not like that position to arise, but I wish to anticipate at once questions in connection with salaries in which no alterations are being made. That also must be fully gone into. It has been fully gone into by my advisers, but there may be other points of view in connection with the point. The select committee will be able to go properly into it. Clause 6 deals with the acquisition and disposal of land in irrigation settlement areas. The Lands Department is now applying itself more to the disposal of ground in dry areas, and not so much in irrigation areas. An alteration must be made here, and in Clause 6 functions are given to the commission in connection with such areas, and that body will be able to do good work. The general functions are described in Clause 7. They are pretty fully laid down, but it may possibly be that members of the select committee will think that the functions are too wide, or are not wide enough. As already stated, I have had trouble in laying down the functions of such an irrigation board. We have, of course, other examples of such boards in our legislation. We have the University Council, the Railway Board, the Board of Trade and Industries, but in certain respects there is a great difference between the irrigation boards and the other boards, as also with reference to the functions of the boards mutually. It is impossible, therefore, to lay down a general rule as to how the boards are to go to work. We all appreciate the necessity for the irrigation board and the functions which on broad lines must be given to it. But we shall have to go into a more detailed definition of the functions. That will probably be the only point of difference, and it cannot be properly dealt with in a second reading debate. Hence my proposal to adjourn the debate after I have made my speech, and to <span class="col_2159-2160" refersTo="page_0032"/>appoint a select committee after the second reading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. D. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The subject of the Bill which has just been introduced is one of very far-reaching importance. As the Minister has indicated it is one on which there can be no great difference of opinion as to the principle, but as he has stated there will no doubt be a considerable amount of discussion and divided opinions as to details. But we are on the we of a vacation, and the matter is an extra-ordinarily important one, and I would ask the Minister&#x2014;he has anticipated this&#x2014;to allow the debate to be adjourned, to enable not only the House, but the public, to think over the matter ; so that we can give it more serious attention on our return. On the motion of Col. D. Reitz, debate adjourned ; to be resumed on 12th April.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#british_nationality_in_the_union_and_naturalization_and_status_of_aliens_bill">

<heading>BRITISH NATIONALITY IN THE UNION AND NATURALIZATION AND STATUS OF ALIENS BILL.</heading>

<p>Seventh Order read: Second reading, British Nationality in the Union and Naturalization and Status of Aliens Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>This Bill is complicated and unfortunately the Order Paper being rather quickly disposed of this afternoon, we have come sooner to the Bill than I expected. I am sorry that I am not perhaps so well prepared to talk on the subject as I should have liked. Still, I will do my best and I hope hon. members will make allowances. The Bill makes provision as to British nationality and the status of aliens in the Union, in other words this is a naturalization Bill. I introduced the Bill last year in a different form. To-day it comes up in an improved form. I intended it to be auxiliary to another Bill to be introduced during the present session. It will be introduced if an agreement is come to between the various parties, with reference to the provision of a South African flag and the definition of a South African nationality. This Bill deals with British nationality and British subjects. It assumes, taken together with the other Bill which I intend introducing, that we have a South African citizenship, but the South African citizenship again assumes that every South African citizen is also a British subject. Therefore this Bill deals with both South African citizenship and British nationality. It agrees in a certain measure with the existing law, viz., the 1910 Act. That Act was one of the first passed by the Union parliament, defining British citizenship. That Bill is being repealed because it is unsatisfactory to a great extent, but the present Bill in a great measure follows the 1910 Act, and supplements it. The 1910 Act laid down the minimum periods which anyone must have been resident in South Africa to be regarded as a British subject. According to the 1910 Act a person must have lived within the British empire for two years out of the five preceding his application for naturalization, before he could be naturalized in South Africa. Those periods are now amended to the extent that the person applying for naturalization must out of the immediately preceding eight years have lived five within the British empire, and for one of those years he must have lived in South Africa. If he has not lived here for a year he cannot be naturalized. The 1910 Act further laid down certain requirements for a person applying for naturalization before the Minister is entitled to issue them. The present Bill also follows those provisions. In the first place the person who wishes to apply must publish his intention to make application. In the second place he must make a certain affidavit and furnish information which the Minister may require. In the third place he must be of good character, and in the fourth must take the oath of allegiance. If he satisfies these requirements then the Minister will be in a position to naturalize him. All these things are required under this Bill. The Act of 1910 also made provision for the recognition of our naturalization by the United Kingdom. Our naturalization is, however, only recognized in the United Kingdom under the Act of 1910, and not in the other Dominions. This Bill that I have now introduced extends the recognition of our naturalization (under certain conditions', over the whole of the British empire. In the fourth place the Act of 1910 laid down what the effect of naturalization here was on the wife and minor children of a foreigner who adopted our nationality. The same provision is made in this Bill in a somewhat modified form. The Bill now introduced, however, not only follows in its broad outlines the Act of 1910 which is being repealed, but goes further and remedies certain defects in the Act of 1910. In the first place the Act of 1910 had made no provision that a foreigner once naturalized could subsequently lose the nationality. Something like that is necessary, and provision to that effect was made in the laws of other countries at the time and after the recent war. It happens, e.g., that a person comes as an alien to the country and becomes naturalized and war breaks out against the country which he belonged to, and he does something which shows that he identifies himself with the enemy, and which thus breaks his connection with his adopted country. In that case our present law makes no provision as to taking away citizenship, This Bill makes such provision. Another case I may mention is that of someone coming to South Africa and being naturalized and then leaving South Africa or going to live outside the British empire and never coming back again into the empire. He has altered his domicile and broken away for ever from the empire, or more particularly from South Africa, and no provision is made in the existing Act to release such a person from his citizenship. This Bill also provides for that. The chief defect <span class="col_2161-2162" refersTo="page_0033"/>of the 1910 Act which is to be replaced by the present Bill is that no provision is made in the old Act for recognition of our nationality in other countries of the world, nor even in other parts of the British empire. If a foreigner comes to South Africa and we naturalize him, so that under our law he becomes a British subject, it avails him nothing if he lives outside of South Africa. As soon as he gets three miles from the coast outside the territorial waters his British citizenship lapses. In the first place, that is not consistent with the dignity of South Africa and with the constitutional status we have attained. Naturalization granted by any other country is recognized outside the territorial waters of such country, but when granted by us in South Africa it is not recognized outside the three-mile limit. For the recognition of our nationality in other parts of the British empire and of the world provision has to be made. It is something which will raise our prestige and status. Let me mention a special case. There is a German&#x2014;I believe it is an actual case, but I need not mention the name&#x2014;who came to South Africa, obtained naturalization and became a British subject. He identified himself with South Africa and the country had so much confidence in him that it appointed him to the consular service. Now I take the case of such a person being appointed to an important post overseas. What is his position then ? He has broken with Germany and accepted our citizenship, but as soon as he is outside our territorial waters he has lost his citizenship and has actually no legal nationality. The Bill will also remedy that defect. The Bill in the first place defines under what circumstances British citizenship can be lost. In the second place it lays down the circumstances under which British citizenship when once obtained through naturalization can be taken away, and it lays down the procedure to be followed in that connection. In the third place the great advantage of the Bill is that it establishes the principle of reciprocity between South Africa and the other portions of the British empire. We recognize their citizenship, and they ours. Therefore the nationality which we give to people will have a wider effect than has been the case hitherto. The various divisions of the Bill can quite appropriately be discussed in committee, and I will not go much into detail now. The first chapter of the Bill defines a&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">natural born British subject.</block>

<p>Three different kinds are provided: In the first, a British subject is a child born of a British subject in &#x201C;his Majesty&#x2019;s dominions and allegiance.&#x201D; Secondly, a British subject is one born outside his Majesty&#x2019;s dominions whose father was at the time of the person&#x2019;s birth a British subject, or who has become such by naturalization or annexation, or whose father was in the service of the Crown. Thirdly, a person is considered a British subject if he was born on a British ship whether within or without the territorial waters. The second chapter deals with the way in which aliens can be naturalized. Four qualifications are laid down: Firstly, the residential qualification. Anyone wishing to become naturalized must for five years out of the immediately preceding eight years before his application, have lived within the British empire, and for one of those five in South Africa. Secondly, the person must be of good character and know one of the two official languages of the country. Thirdly, he is but clearly express his intention to remain in South Africa, not coming here for a temporary purpose. Fourthly, he must take the oath of allegiance. There are certain exceptions allowed in the Bill to the requirements provided, but they are of minor importance. One of them deals with a wife who is married to an alien and has thus lost her British citizenship. If she returns to South Africa it is not required that she shall have resided for five of the preceding eight years within the British empire. That is in the case of a woman who was a British subject, and under special conditions wants to resume that status. The Bill provides that no one who has obtained any rights under the previous naturalization Act will lose privileges under this Bill. The introduction of the Bill will not therefore rob any one of any privilege which he has already obtained. The additional privilege is that whereas a person has obtained his naturalization under the previous Act, which had a limited application and only granted naturalization for South Africa he will now possess his rights throughout the whole world. No one loses anything by the introduction of this Bill. The Bill makes provision that the Minister shall have the right in case of doubt about anyone&#x2019;s naturalization to issue letters of naturalization. A case of this nature, e.g., has come to my notice. Suppose a German subject was naturalized by us. It is certain, at least morally certain, that when he applied for naturalization he took the oath of allegiance. Uncertainty has arisen about it, and I have not had the power to issue to his son (who was born in South Africa, and subsequently went to live in another part of the British empire) letters of naturalization, which acknowledged him as a British subject, for the reason that doubt existed, and he could not prove that his father had taken the oath of allegiance. That is the hard case of a man who lost his status. The Bill gives the Minister the power in such a case to issue letters of naturalization to the individual. Then there is another important provision in the Bill which ought long ago to have been introduced. During the second war of independence there were many foreigners in South Africa, especially Hollanders, who for years had lived in the Transvaal, and joined the Boer commandoes in the war. At the time the Transvaal Government issued a proclamation that persons taking part in the war on the Transvaal side would get Transvaal citizenship provided they applied for it and signed the necessary papers. Through the confused condition of things at the time <span class="col_2163-2164" refersTo="page_0034"/>many cases occurred where people made application but the applications were never properly dealt with and the papers signed by them never reached the head office. There is no record of such cases. The people now take up the attitude that they have been living in the country for years, took part in the war, signed the necessary naturalization papers, and they do not want to apply for naturalization just like other aliens. There they are in the Transvaal, and they are deprived of the franchise. This Bill makes provision that if the Minister is satisfied that the case is bona fide and that the man actually was in that position, he can issue naturalization papers without the ordinary procedure being followed. Then there is another class of persons in the Transvaal who were born between 1894 and 1900 of fathers who were not British subjects at that time. Up to 1894 there was an Act in the Transvaal which provided that every person born in the Transvaal, whether his father was a Transvaal citizen or not, became a Transvaal citizen by virtue of his birth. That Act was, however, altered in 1893, and between 1894 and 1900 persons born in the Transvaal were not necessarily Transvaal citizens and they had to make application for naturalization. There are to-day persons in the Transvaal who are not legally British subjects although born in the Transvaal. They do not know that they are not British subjects until some day their political opponents find out that they were born during those years, and then when they can be taken off the voters&#x2019; roll, they find it out. I do not know whether many people have not recently disappeared in this way from the roll. If this Bill becomes law, persons born during that period in the Transvaal will be regarded as British subjects unless they give notice within a stated time that they do not want to become such, or have gone to live abroad. In the last case, if persons return to South Africa, they must live here for a certain time before they can again apply for naturalization. I think the provision which is made in this case is fair, and I do not think that anyone in the House will be opposed to it. The Bill further provides that naturalization once granted can be taken away. As regards this, it agrees with the same provision in the British Act, and the second part of the British Act is taken as a basis of reciprocity within the British Empire. I have taken it over in full except that in a small matter I have made an alteration. According to the law advisers of the Government the amendment will in no way affect the fact that the second part of the British Act will serve as a basis of reciprocity. The British Act is worded a little too widely, and too much power is given to the Minister to take away naturalization rights. The British Act says, e.g., that if the Minister thinks that a person was not of good character when he applied, the naturalization can be cancelled, which gives too much discretion to the Minister. It is provided in the Bill that the nationality can only be taken away when the person is convicted by the court of certain offences mentioned. Just a word more about reciprocity which is brought about by the Bill between us and other parts of the British empire. The common foundation for reciprocity is laid down in the second chapter of the British Act of 1914, as amended in 1918 and 1922. It has long been felt, for reasons already mentioned, that there should be reciprocity as regards naturalization between the various parts of the empire, and that our naturalization should be recognized without our territorial waters. At the imperial conferences there have been discussions about the matter, and a commission was appointed which made enquiries and recommended things which were put before the various dominion governments. The second part of the British Act is the result of those discussions between the various governments. Our Government also took part in the discussion. Under the circumstances, I think the House need have no difficulty in adopting the second part. With the exception of New Zealand, I can only say that South Africa is practically the only part of the empire to-day which has not yet adopted the second part regarding reciprocity. We are therefore in the unpleasant position that if we do not adopt it, our nationality is not recognized outside the territorial waters, while the naturalization of other parts of the empire is recognized. I think the time has arrived for us to fall into line with the other parts of the empire.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I entirely agree with the Minister that this Bill is one that ought to be passed by this House, and I think it is unfortunate that it was not passed long ago. It has figured on the Order Paper of Parliament for quite a number of sessions, but for some reason or another it got shoved off and nothing happened. The great point about this Bill is, as the Minister has just explained, that it brings us into a general system of British nationality, and makes the naturalization of aliens in South Africa, not only of effect within the borders of South Africa, but gives them the status of natural born British subjects throughout the world. This removes a defect in our law which has been in existence far too long and caused inconvenience and trouble&#x2014;an alien who became a British subject in South Africa was a British subject only inside South Africa, and when he goes outside I do not know what he is&#x2014;he, reverts to his previous status. As the Minister has also said, this is a matter which was discussed again and again at the imperial conference, and this Bill is the outcome of the discussion. I welcome the provision which gives the Minister power to issue a certificate of naturalization to an alien who served on commando during the Anglo-Boer war. I experienced many instances of that kind when I was in office of men who had lived in the Transvaal for some time and served with the republican commandoes, and had every reason to believe they were naturalized in the field, but then objection was taken to their names on the voters&#x2019; list. The contentious matter, as far as I know&#x2014;I do not know whether it will be very contentious in this House, but it is very contentious in some places&#x2014;is the provision in <span class="col_2165-2166" refersTo="page_0035"/>regard to women. This Bill adopts the law of England and other dominions which have adopted it, which provides that the wife of a British subject becomes a British subject, and the woman who marries an alien becomes an alien. The contention of women&#x2019;s organizations in this country is that the nationality of a woman should not be affected by marriage, and it was represented to me very strongly&#x2014;I do not know whether the Minister has heard of this point&#x2014;that the women claim that a woman&#x2019;s nationality should not be affected by marriage and should be free to choose her nationality like a man. There is a good deal to&#x2019; be said for that in theory, but I was not able to adopt that when I was in office, so I am not going to impress that upon the Minister now, and I leave that to the Minister. I am old-fashioned enough to believe that when a woman takes a husband she takes him for better or worse, and takes his nationality with him. This provision is modified in two respects here. If a man becomes naturalized and is then naturalized to another nationality the wife can retain her nationality by making a declaration that she desires to remain of British nationality. In the case of an alien whose wife is a British subject by birth, if his State becomes an enemy State to the British empire, she may retain her previous British nationality. These are the two exemptions that are made to provide for certain hard cases that arise, and I think, subject to that, the Minister has gone as far as can be expected. Generally, I welcome the Bill, and hope it will be passed into law this session.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think we ought to rush a Bill like this through. If the Bill had been introduced in its original form, I would have opposed it ; because there were some very serious provisions which interfered with the rights of those who have already been naturalized, and put them under serious disability. I must say that, substantially, the Minister has met everyone of those objections, and the Bill brought forward to-day is a very much fairer Bill, and I do not think it is going to lead to any particular opposition. At the same time, I think that the Bill requires more consideration than we can give it at such short notice.</p>

<p>On the motion of Mr. Alexander, debate adjourned ; to be resumed on 12th April.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1926-03-31T17:48:00">5.48 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

