---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-08-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council —

      1) notes that on Sunday, 15 August 2010 there was a historic step in
         the realignment of South African politics, when a political
         memorandum of understanding was signed between the Independent
         Democrats and the DA to come together and fight elections under the
         DA’s banner;


      2) further notes that this memorandum of the DA and the ID heralds the
         beginning of a new phase in South Africa’s journey away from the
         politics of racial identity, towards the politics of shared values,
         which will form the bedrock of the new majority we are building in
         South Africa;


      3) recognises that the political contest in South Africa is now
         between the values of openness and opportunities for all, envisaged
         in the Constitution, versus the ANC’s drive to close down the
         democratic space and limit opportunities to the politically
         connected few;


      4) acknowledges that more and more South Africans are discovering this
         every day and in 2011 they will express this at the ballot box,
         which will result in a greater number of municipalities falling
         under the control of the DA; and

      5) looks forward to making the South African dream, of one nation
         united under the Constitution, a reality for all who live in it.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council —

      1) notes the desperate attempts of the DA to gobble up smaller parties
         by sneaking in the abolished floor-crossing legislation;

      2) acknowledges that this unholy marriage is a clear sign of a frantic
         party that is scrambling for anything to remain in power in the
         Western Cape;


      3) further acknowledges that the ANC remains the only party that
         represents the aspirations of millions of South Africans who are
         poor and who have been victims of colonial and apartheid rule; and

      4) takes this opportunity to call on the people of South Africa,
         particularly those in the Western Cape, to be aware that this is a
         party that failed to appoint a single African leader in its
         leadership and, despite being led by a woman, has failed to elect a
         single woman in the provincial government of the Western Cape and
         has leaders who still believe that the place for a woman is in the
         kitchen.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council —

      1) debates the efforts by the current Minister of Human Settlements to
         eradicate corruption in housing contracts, which has been allowed
         to take root over the last 16 years, affecting the delivery of the
         quantity of houses as well as their quality;


      2) notes that the vigorous determination of the present Minister has
         led to 1 290 individuals or companies being prosecuted as a result
         of 10 000 projects being assessed; and

      3) calls on the government to assess all contracts and procurements
         over the last five years, in order to fight corruption across a
         wide front so that the success achieved by the Minister of Human
         Settlements can be extended to all departments.

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council —

   1) debates the threats made by the SACP to Premier Modiselle and her
      government that the SACP would immediately withdraw its members from
      that government and take other action if the MEC for Sport, Arts and
      Culture, namely Grace Bothman, was not immediately reinstated;
   2) notes that the alliance has indeed reached a breaking point, making it
      impossible for the present ANC administration to govern with authority
      and integrity; and

   3) calls on government to resist being openly blackmailed in this way as
      any weakness on its part in this regard will render South Africa
      totally ungovernable.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council —

      1) debates whether the mineral rights that are awarded by the
         Department of Mineral Resources, DMR, become immediately tradable
         and transferable in the hands of the awardee and can therefore be
         made over to the highest bidder, as happened with Imperial Crown
         Trading;

      2) notes that to all intents and purposes the DMR does not require any
         applicant to prove that it has the capacity to undertake the kind
         of mining linked to the rights but that “political links to key
         centres of political power” appears to be the sole criterion used
         by the DMR; and

      3) calls on government to explain to the unions, investors and the
         people of South Africa whether the nationalisation of the mines has
         already begun by stealth and furthermore to clarify its policy of
         limiting beneficiaries to those who have “political links to key
         centres of political power” as is evident in this and other cases.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Thanks, Chairperson. I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:


   That the Council —

   1) debates whether the government has proactively anticipated the arrival
      of measles, given that measles has spread from Malawi to Zimbabwe and
      is widespread in both countries;


   2) notes that complications with measles are generally common and these
      are diarrhoea, pneumonia, encephalitis and corneal ulceration; and

   3) calls on government to act at once to begin large-scale immunisation
      to protect South African citizens from what Malawians have already
      gone through.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Can I make an amendment, Deputy Chair?
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Ntwanambi, I will
allow you to do that, but please behave.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chair, can I make an amendment
because the last part of the statement seems to be so Afrophobic as it
accuses Malawians of the spread of measles.

                   DISMISSAL OF MESSRS ABBASS AND CAMPHER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that two former employees of Parliament, Messrs Abbass and
         Campher, were dismissed when they stood as candidates in the 2006
         local government elections;

      2) further notes that the SA Human Rights Commission, SAHRC reported
         on 21 May 2010 that the dismissals were unconstitutional;

      3) recognises that our political freedom was achieved at a high cost
         through the contributions of Madiba and many other freedom fighters
         and as we celebrate this legacy of our father Madiba, let us make
         every day a memorable one;

      4) therefore moves that Parliament should —

          a) reinstate and reimburse them for their loss of income;


           b) address the lack of opportunity and professional development
              suffered by them;

           c) provide redress for the violation of their human rights and
              the losses suffered; and

           d) apologise to these two patriotic South Africans for violating
              their human rights.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is there any objection
to the motion? [Interjections.] Hon Bloem, I can’t even proceed now because
I am listening to you.

Mr D V BLOEM: I apologise, Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): So, there was an
objection to the motion. In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.
                    CONGRATULATIONS TO SHARKS RUGBY TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R A LEES: Hon Deputy Chairperson, on behalf of the DA I move without
notice:

   That the Council –

      1) notes the excellent play of the Sharks rugby team on 13 August
         2010, when they gave the Leopards a 51-6 hiding and on 7 August
         2010, when they trounced the Lions 48 to 19; and


      2) therefore congratulates John Smit and his team for outstanding
         performances and expresses its confidence in their bringing the
         Currie Cup home to the Shark tank.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                      NATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY CELEBRATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D Z RANTHO: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –
      1) notes that our nation celebrated National Women’s Day on 9 August
         2010;


      2) acknowledges that this day is intended to pay tribute to countless
         sung and unsung heroines of our struggle for their contribution in
         the liberation of our country;


      3) takes this opportunity to pay tribute to all the women of South
         Africa and all those who laid down their lives for the liberation
         of our nation, including uMama uLilian Ngoyi, uMama uHelen Joseph,
         uMama uRahima Moosa and all those who still live to fight for the
         liberation of women in our country, including stalwarts and
         veterans such as uMama uSophia Williams-De Bruyn; and

      4) further takes this opportunity to wish the women of South Africa a
         happy and progressive Women’s Month.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem! Please!
Please!

Mr D V BLOEM: No, Deputy Chairperson, I want to put the record straight. It
was not me; it was Nesi. Honestly, I respect you, Deputy Chairperson; it
was him. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I am not going to argue
with you. Sit down.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

              DEVEN PILLAY ORDERED TO APOLOGISE AND PAY DAMAGES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B P MABE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

      1) notes that a wealthy businessman, Mr Deven Pillay, who painted the
         words “I am a monkey” on the chest of an African child attending
         his daughter’s birthday party, was ordered to unconditionally
         apologise and pay R15 000 in damages to the child’s father;


      2) further notes the presiding magistrate of Durban’s Equality Court,
         Adv John Sander, ruled that the discrimination suffered by the
         child and his father “strikes at their human dignity and the
         heartbeat of our democracy and our Constitution”; and

      3) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
         Mr Pillay’s crass racist act and the insulting behaviour directed
         at the child.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             POLLUTION OF CROCODILE RIVER AND HARTBEESPOORT DAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Chairperson, on behalf of the DA I move without notice:

   That the Council –

      1) notes with disgrace how rivers in the North West province are being
         polluted by raw sewerage running into the Crocodile River and the
         Hartbeespoort Dam;


      2) further notes that this polluted water affects the health of human
         beings as well as the growth of many different fruits and
         vegetables along the Crocodile River; and

      3) therefore calls for a serious investigation and quick reaction from
         government to avoid illness of people in these areas.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       WORST PROVINCE IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council –


      1) notes that, following the Auditor-General’s consolidated report on
         municipalities in the various provinces, the Free State province,
         followed by the Northern Cape, was the worst province in South
         Africa, with 18 municipalities receiving either disclaimers,
         adverse or qualified reports; and


      2) further notes that this state of affairs is shocking, to say the
         least, and trusts that the voters of the Free State province will
         take note and elect honest and responsible councillors and a good
         administration in next year’s local government elections

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Any objection? Hon
Mabe, is it an objection?

Ms B P MABE: Yes, Deputy Chairperson.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion.

                  KILLING OF ILLEGAL MINERS AT AURORA MINE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –


      1) notes the senseless and heartless killing of illegal miners at the
         Aurora Mine at Ekurhuleni on Monday, 9 August 2010;


      2) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest terms this
         utterly barbaric display of disregard for human life; and

      3) appeals to our law enforcement agencies to investigate this matter
         with the urgency it deserves and ensure that the perpetrators of
         this brutality are brought to book.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is there any objection
to the motion?

Mr Z MLENZANA: Deputy Chairperson, I stand to object.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion.

 NATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY: WORKING TOGETHER FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES AND PROGRESS
                                FOR ALL WOMEN

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): The first speaker will
be hon Minister Mayende-Sibiya. [Applause.] May I ask permission from the
House to let her speak from where she is seated? Is that acceptable?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Deputy
Chairperson and hon members of the House, I am once again very honoured to
be addressing and participating in this debate of the NCOP, which has
allocated time for a debate on Women’s Month, under the theme: “Working
together for equal opportunities and progress for all women”. This session
takes forward the process of engagement that has been happening in various
provinces, looking at the progress we have made as a country in improving
the status of women and working towards a truly nonsexist South Africa.

Over the past 16 years, we have seen our country taking major steps aimed
at improving the status of women in socioeconomic, political and cultural
spheres of life. Representation of women in the legislature increased from
25% after the first democratic elections in 1994 to 44% after the April
2009 elections. South Africa proudly stands at number three amongst the
countries of the world with the highest number of women in Parliament. The
number of women members of Cabinet, Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
increased from 18% in 1994 to 40% after the 2009 general election.

The ruling party, the ANC, adopted the principle of 50-50 gender parity at
its last national conference in Polokwane in 2007. The Ministry of Women,
Children and People with Disabilities is taking action to ensure that this
resolution, which is also in line with the SADC Protocol on Gender and
Development, is realised.

We are currently developing the Gender Equality Bill, which is going to
serve as an overarching Act to ensure gender equity throughout our society.
We have to ensure full participation by women in all spheres of life. It
should encourage the culture of gender equality throughout our society. It
will strengthen the legislative basis for promoting gender equality and
seek to reduce gender-based discrimination in all areas of life in South
Africa.
Such a Bill will be a major tribute to the pioneers of our struggle for
gender equality and democracy in our country. These are the courageous
women whom we remember this month. On 9 August 1956, these 20 000 women,
carrying 100 000 petitions, descended on the Union Buildings, the seat of
the then mighty apartheid government. These women protested against the
inhumane act of having to carry passes in the urban areas, something their
white sisters did not have to do.

They delivered the petitions to the office of J G Strijdom. Women
throughout the country had put their names on these petitions, indicating
their anger and frustration at having their freedom of movement restricted.
These women of South Africa sent a strong message that they would not be
intimidated and silenced by the unjust laws of the time.

Fifty-four years later, the famous women’s march phrase, “You strike a
woman, you strike a rock; uzokufa, Strijdom; wathint’ abafazi!” ... [You
will die, Strijdom; you strike women!” ...]

HON MEMBERS: Wathint’ imbokodo! [You strike a rock.]

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: ... has come
to represent women’s courage and strength in South Africa. As a group that
had been marginalised, women rose to question the barrier and fought for
their emancipation and freedom for all.
Since 1994, this day has been commemorated every year to recognise and
recall the bravery of these women who risked arrest, banishment, forced
exile and even death, to have their voices heard. This day on our country’s
calendar serves to remind us that we need to review the path we have
travelled and find solutions for the challenges facing us now. Like our
mothers did in 1956, we, the women of South Africa, must today continue the
struggle against a system of patriarchy and sexist stereotypes, the
underlying factors that hinder progress towards gender equality and
perpetuate gender-based violence.

Our country can show many gains and achievements in promoting women’s
rights and advancing gender equality. However, many challenges persist and
need to be overcome if we are to achieve a truly democratic and nonsexist
state. The key issues include the intensification of poverty eradication,
rural development, economic empowerment of women, and an effective response
to the major challenge of violence against women and girls.

Our programme for this month is a dynamic one. It seeks to reach women of
different social backgrounds in their localities. We are taking an approach
of reaching out to women in rural and urban areas - employed and
unemployed, rich and poor - seeking to address the various ways in which
patriarchy affects their lives and limits their development.

We have met with young women from universities to discuss issues of
education and the critical role they have to play in transforming the
gender demographics of our economy through the careers that they choose. We
gathered with women from various churches and prayed together for a society
free of all forms of abuse of women and children. On the historic day of 9
August, we gathered with thousands of women in East London, where we
received a visionary address by the President.

We also saw many activities around the country celebrating this day in
August. We have met with influential women in the private sector to discuss
issues of the glass ceiling put on women and engaged with working-class
women through the Women’s Day event organised by Cosatu last Sunday. We
have debated issues affecting women in the National Assembly and in
provincial legislatures. I had the honour of participating in a debate a
week ago in Mpumalanga. Today we are debating this issue in this august
House of the NCOP.

We are also paying attention to the particular challenges faced by women
with disabilities. On 27 August, we will pay special tribute to women with
disabilities who have made significant progress in their chosen fields of
work. We hope that this event will serve as an encouragement to other women
who are faced with the double challenges of gender inequality and various
limitations that our society still places on people with disabilities.

The outcome of all these activities should inform the strategic approach we
take in addressing the various challenges facing women in our country. We
will be reflecting on all our engagements at the closing event for Women’s
Month, which is being planned to take place in Limpopo, and at the national
gender conference scheduled for October this year.

All of these discussions should culminate in a clear programme of action
that enables all of us to respond to the many challenges facing women in
all provinces. That programme of action should also guide our endeavours to
ensure that South Africa makes significant progress towards the attainment
of commitments such as the Beijing Declaration and the Millennium
Development Goals that come under review at the United Nations, UN, next
month.

A lot of effort has gone into ensuring full participation by all sectors in
this year’s Women’s Month celebrations. We are, indeed, satisfied that this
month is becoming a period when all of us as South Africans reflect on
advances made and recommit ourselves to address the many challenges on our
path to creating a truly nonsexist and democratic society.

Let us work together for equal opportunities and progress for all women.
Let us make the period from 2010 to 2020 a truly prosperous decade for all
African women on the African continent. I thank you. [Applause.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon
Minister Mayende-Sibiya, hon members, referring to the theme that the
Minister has alluded to, I think it is a fitting theme as we mark the 54th
anniversary of the commemoration and celebration of the women’s antipass
march to the Union Buildings on 9 August 1956. This historic march led to 9
August being declared National Women’s Day after 1994. Women’s Day is a
celebration of the struggles of women for a nonracial, nonsexist and
democratic South Africa.

The sacrifices made by women over the years, in fact, for decades or
centuries, provide the way forward on how we should be dealing with issues
of women empowerment in our democratic order. Women have stood up to say:
“Nothing about women without women”. However, often we find that there are
still tendencies to delay the advances made by the democratic movement in
recognising the rights of women as equal citizens in our democracy.

Today, women are involved in a different terrain of the struggle. While
their rights to participate in decision-making are entrenched, they are
still the worst affected when it comes to poverty, diseases, violence and
other social ills. As a result, the girl-child is the most vulnerable in
society. This is indeed a concern because, in this way, the challenges that
the mothers faced and are still facing are being visited upon the girl-
child. This threatens to delay the struggle for the total emancipation of
women.

At the centre of the challenges facing the girl-child is education. This is
one of the reasons that education remains one of the key priorities of the
ANC. To facilitate the emancipation of women, we must make sure that we
reduce illiteracy levels amongst women so that they are able to partake in
opportunities being made available under our democratic government. Without
education, women will continue to rely on others for their own survival and
development. They will continue to be subjects of abuse.

NgesiNtu sithi: Ukufundis’ umfazi kuluncedo kwisizwe siphela, kuba abafazi
banendlela yabo abazijonga ngayo izinto eziza nenkqubela. Banemfobe yendalo
kuba badalelwe ukuncancisa isizwe. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[In isiXhosa we say: To educate a woman is helpful to the whole nation,
because women have their unique way of looking at things that bring about
progress. They have natural compassion because they have been created to
nurture the nation.]

Education for women is, therefore, very important, and it must be used as a
tool to address the social inequalities resulting from apartheid laws and
policies. It is our responsibility to also ensure that women are taught
about their rights as enshrined in the Constitution and other legislation.

So far, we are proud that South Africa has done very well in expanding the
access of women to education at all levels of the system. In higher
education, women are a majority, but they are not a significant presence in
science and engineering. Education and training must meet the economic,
social, cultural and political needs of women in South Africa.

Government has made important interventions towards empowering women on
other fronts. Some examples of government’s strides towards women
empowerment include, amongst others, the establishment of the Ministry for
Women, Children and People with Disabilities, which consolidates our
programme to continue the development of women in our country; the Women’s
Empowerment Fund and the Employment Equity Act, which continue to ensure
appointment of and support for women in top leadership positions in
government and the private sector; economic empowerment programmes for
women; and initiatives by the Department of Trade and Industry in areas
such as access to formal finance. There are many other areas of
intervention, some of which the Minister has already referred to.

Hon members, remember that it is us, the public representatives and women
leaders, who carry the hopes of vulnerable women and children, especially
those in rural areas. We have to give them hope that indeed they have a
future in the South African democratic order.

We are proud of the fact that today, as a result of the struggle that the
masses of our people waged — including women — our country’s Constitution
includes the objective of the transformation of our society into a
nonsexist society. This constitutional provision means that our country as
a whole, including the government, has an obligation to ensure that this
objective is realised.

It is an undeniable fact that women’s access to political influence and to
decision-making in Parliament has improved significantly since the
country’s first democratic elections in 1994. However, this is not enough
since equality, logically, means 50-50. This significant desire to improve
women representation was further entrenched in Polokwane, where the ruling
party resolved that we needed to gear ourselves up to meet the new target
of 50-50 representation.

Deputy Chairperson, may I take this opportunity to congratulate women of
this House, Wendy Makgate and Elizabeth van Lingen, for their work and for
reaffirming the 50-50 policy of representation even when they were abroad.
That is good progress. This achievement reflects true empowerment of women
across all races and class barriers, particularly black women. However, we
need to ensure that this intended target is realised through, among other
things, capacitating women meaningfully.

With regard to provincial progress and achievements, the Gauteng provincial
government has launched 200 women-only co-operative schemes across the
province since 9 August. Furthermore, in Gauteng, private and public
sectors will support the Take a Girl-Child to Work initiative on 19 August.


The Office of the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal — my province — continues to co-
ordinate the promotion of human rights empowerment, the protection of women
committed to social programmes, and the development of women and other
vulnerable groups. In the Eastern Cape, the department of agriculture and
rural development has honoured the women of the Eastern Cape who have
worked tirelessly to ensure that they participate in economic development,
food security and job creation in the province.

In the North West, housing delivery received a major boost as the National
Women Build 2010 was launched on 30 July. Therefore, the North West
province will construct 1 956 houses by the end of August. The 54 units
will mark the 54th anniversary of the Women’s Month. Malibongwe! [Let it be
praised!] [Applause.]

Mrs S S CHEN: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, my hon colleagues, all
distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman, our topic today is: “Working
together for equal opportunities and progress for all women”. I must be
honest and admit to you today that I was surprised but not too excited to
have been asked to make this speech.

I have not been a strong proponent of the women’s movement simply because I
did not believe in being treated differently just because I am a woman. I
believed, rather, that a person should progress according to merit and
ability. Personal opinions aside, however, I also cannot turn a blind eye
to the reality that is still around us, even after all the progress women
have already made towards equal opportunity.

I will always remember how my own mother was never allowed to sit and eat
with us at the dining table; how she always had to keep quiet and be
submissive at any family gathering; and how she never had the opportunity
to pursue an education and, as a result, had to raise her three children
doing hard labour and manual work. Despite all the adversity my mother had
to go through as a woman, she never made us feel inferior as daughters, or
that we were not worth the stuff dreams were made of. That is why I found
the strength to always strive for more and reach higher, rather than
feeling like all women are born to suffer. My mother’s struggles made me
realise that anything is possible if you put your mind to it.

It is undeniable that women have become invaluable assets in the economy as
they bring different qualities to any organisation. Traditionally being
carers and keepers, women possess a deep understanding and empathy for
others, have good communication and multitasking skills, are inclusive
leaders who are open to suggestions, and are skilled at resolving conflict
and handling stress.

Although women have made headway in entering the economy, the scale is
still vastly unbalanced with most economic sectors still dominated by men.
At grass-roots level, even more inequality against women continues to
exist. In many parts of the world, including South Africa, women,
especially those in rural areas, are still being deprived of an education
and opportunities of employment. Worse still, they are not even aware that
they have rights and choices about their lives.

Startling statistics from the SA Institute of Race Relations indicate that
more than 72 000 girls aged between 13 and 19 did not attend school in 2009
because they were pregnant. Something is very wrong with our country if we
are encouraging girls as young as 13 to become mothers.

Let this year’s Women’s Day not be just another public holiday, but one
that makes a difference. Let us actively do something to change our current
situation. My colleagues in the National Assembly have raised a number of
ideas.

In conclusion, I want to echo my leader, Helen Zille, when she said that
parents have two most important jobs to do: to raise sons who value women,
their choices and their capabilities, and to raise daughters with a belief
in the validity of their voice and in themselves. Parents, therefore, need
to be informed and educated about individual rights and responsibilities,
for both children as well as adults.

We need a culture that values education and respects equality, and to
instil this in our future generations. We will then ensure that our
children, both girls who become women and boys who become men, have access
to, receive, and go on to complete a quality education. This will be the
foundation of open opportunity for all. Equal opportunity and progress for
women also means equal opportunity and progress for all. This is not only
the responsibility of women, but the responsibility of society as a whole.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A ROSSOUW (Western Cape): Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, I thank
you for the opportunity to participate in this debate today. Life is about
opportunities. Opportunities arise in life for every person to utilise or
make use of. There are no glass ceilings for women. In the South African
Constitution, women and men are regarded as equal. It is then up to you and
me to ensure that opportunities are grabbed with both hands. We need to
enable and prepare our women to make choices that will enable them to
realise when and where in their lives there is an opportunity to take
advantage of.
The Bill of Rights in section 9(1) of the Constitution states:

   Everyone is equal before the law and has the right to equal protection
   and benefit of the law.

Furthermore, section 10 of the Constitution states:

   Everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity
   respected and protected.

Die Grondwet bemagtig op papier, maar wat gebeur in die werklikheid?
Watter ondersteuningsmeganismes word van die regering se kant af gedoen om
werklik ons vroue te bemagtig en diskriminasie, wat steeds bestaan, teen te
staan? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The Constitution may be empowering on paper, but what happens in reality?
What support mechanisms does the government have in place to really empower
our women and to oppose discrimination when it occurs?]

The questions we have to ask today are: What do we, as government in all
spheres, do to promote the equality defined in the Bill of Rights? What do
we do about the Millennium Development Goals set out by the UN?

Hierdie doelwitte is die volgende: om uitermatige armoede en honger uit te
skakel; om primêre onderwys vir almal verpligtend te maak; om
geslagsgelykheid en bemagtiging van vroue te bevorder; om die gesondheid
van vroue te bevorder; om kindersterftes te verminder; om HIV/Vigs, malaria
en ander voorkombare siektes te bekamp; om seker te maak dat die omgewing
die nodige ondersteuning kan bied om die verlies aan natuurlike hulpbronne,
wat so noodsaaklik is vir oorlewing, teen te werk; en om ’n wêreldwye
vennootskap te stig vir die ontwikkeling van ’n oop finansiële stelsel.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[These goals are as follows: to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger; to
make primary education compulsory for all to promote gender equality and
empower women; to promote the health of women; to reduce the child
mortality rate; to combat HIV/Aids, malaria and other preventable diseases;
to ensure that the environment provides enough support to counter the loss
of natural resources that are so essential for survival and to establish a
worldwide partnership for the development of an open financial system.]

Where do we stand today in relation to these goals? If these issues are not
addressed, we in government fail the women of South Africa.

The UN Deputy Secretary-General, Asha-Rose Migiro, called for greater
investment to ensure the health and wellbeing of women. She stressed that
healthy women can lead to better families and societies and can help
achieve the globally agreed development targets for 2015. She said:

   We need to tell people that it pays to invest in women — that investing
   in the health and rights of women triggers greater progress for all. We
   must meet our obligations to the world’s women and children ... Healthy
   women are the answer to solving many of the world’s complex and pressing
   problems: poverty, hunger, disease, and political instability. Healthy
   women are the foundation upon which all of the Millennium Development
   Goals stand.

Through violence, women are taught to know their place and not to put
themselves first.

Hoe dan kan ons ooit verwag dat dié vroue sal ontwikkel om leiers in die
samelewing te word? Hoe kan sy uit haar groef wegbreek en genoeg geloof in
haarself opbou, om haarself te bevorder en om nuwe geleenthede aan te gryp?

Daar is beslis ’n direkte verband tussen Suid-Afrika se grootste knelpunte
en die grootskaalse verbrokkeling van huwelike en gesinne in ons land.
Slegs een derde van ons kinders word groot in ’n normale gesin van twee
biologiese ouers.

Krisisse soos gesinsgeweld, armoede en swak skoolprestasie is daarom nie
die grootste probleme in ons land nie; veel eerder die skrikwekkende gevolg
van die verbrokkeling van die gesin in Suid—Afrika.

Die groot trek van die vrou vanaf die huis na die werksplek het talle
voordele meegebring, maar het ongelukkig ook negatief op gesinne en kinders
begin inwerk. Die stootfaktor is die stygende lewenskoste, en die
trekfaktor is dat daar soveel meer geleenthede vir vroue is om hulself in
die beroepswêreld te bewys.

Die oplossing lê nie daarin om die vrou weer huis toe te stuur nie. Die
probleem is eerder dat die samelewing nie genoeg aangepas het om die werks-
en lewenswyse te hanteer nie. Die ekonomie plaas ’n ongelooflike druk op
die vrou om ’n vierdubbele rol te speel. Sy moet vroulief wees, huisvrou
wees, sy moet ma wees én sy moet voltydse werker wees. Dan moet sy dit
alles balanseer.

Kan ons te alle tye met alle sekerheid sê dat ons genoeg gedoen het vir ons
plattelandse vroue en dogters deur, onder andere, ons skole en ons klinieke
te besoek? Is ons publieke vervoerstelsel van so ’n aard dat dit vir haar
maklik is om die skool, die kliniek of selfs haar werkplek te bereik? Dit
is van die faktore wat daartoe bydra dat veral ons plattelandse dogters en
vroue dikwels toegang tot basiese onderwys ontsê word, en dus ook die
geleentheid om ’n aktiewe rol in die ekonomiese wêreld te speel.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[How then can we ever expect these women to develop into leaders in
society? How can she break free from her rut and summon enough self-
confidence to improve herself and to grasp new opportunities?
There is a direct correlation between South Africa’s most pressing issues
and the large-scale disintergration of marriages and families in our
country. Only one third of our children are growing up in a normal family
of two biological parents.

Therefore crises such as domestic violence, poverty and poor school
performance are not the greatest challenges in our country; on the
contrary, they’re rather the result of the deterioration of the family in
South Africa.

The great migration of women from the home to the workplace resulted in
many gains, but unfortunately also had a negative effect on families and
children. The push factor is the rise in the cost of living and the pull
factor is that women now have many opportunities to prove themselves
professionally.

The solution is not to send women back home. Rather, the problem is that
society has not made enough adjustments to handle work and the way of
living. The economy places unbelievable pressure on women to play a
fourfold role. She must be a wife, housewife, mother and full-time worker.
She has to balance everything.

Can we always say with certainty that we have done enough for our rural
women and daughters by, for instance, visiting our schools and clinics? Is
our public transport system of such a nature that she finds it easy to
reach the school, the clinic or even her place of work? These are some of
the factors that contribute to the fact that our rural women and daughters
in particular often have no access to basic education. Hence they do not
have the opportunity to play an active role in the economic world.]

Where opportunities, even modest ones, are provided, the results are
gratifying. Women have demonstrated the multiplier effect of passing on the
benefits of empowerment to their families and communities. It is a potent
weapon against poverty and provides role models for some and inspiration to
others.

We must acknowledge that no single government department can address the
glaring inequalities that deny women — especially rural women — the rights
of economic development to which they are entitled under our Constitution.
I believe that a good education is everyone’s birthright; but rights come
with a price tag of responsibilities. We need to instil the notion in our
students and learners that, when you are responsible towards yourself and
your community, you start accumulating rights.
Educational investment leads to job creation. Show someone how to fish and
there will always be food on the table. Only education can free people from
the shackles of poverty. Only education can drive back and stop the
onslaught of poverty. Only education can build a wall against and contain
the erosion that threatens to devour our communities.

We as women need to dispel the myths and act on the truths. We should have
faith in our abilities. Only the strongest, fittest and toughest will get
somewhere.

Do we make sure that a deaf woman has an interpreter when she attends
court? Does a blind person always have the notes in Braille at the end of a
meeting? Does the person in a wheelchair have easy access to a building?
Marlene le Roux of Artscape in the Western Cape showed the world that,
though she has great difficulty walking, she can dance, and is teaching
other women to do the same.

Let those of us privileged to be in government lead so that others might
follow.

Laat ons bou aan ’n geleentheidsamelewing wat vir almal tot voordeel sal
strek. Die ekonomiese sukses en vooruitgang van ’n land hang nie van sy
grootte, ras, natuurlike hulpbronne of geskiedenis af nie. Ja, dit help.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Let us build an opportunity society that will be to the advantage of
everyone. The economic success and development of a country does not depend
on its size, race, natural resources or history. Yes, they do play a role.]

However, it depends primarily on whether the country has the rule of law,
an open society and equal opportunities. If it does, it will be successful
and lift people out of poverty. The state must understand its role and
fulfil it. South Africa, in particular, with such limited capacity, must
focus on the functions that facilitate economic growth — an effective
criminal justice system, an excellent education system and infrastructure.

The DA recognises that some people are so poor that they need help to enter
the economy. However, the purpose of these measures is to promote equal
opportunities. We want to see all government departments working toward the
good of our women.

There has never been a moment in history when all countries and all people
within those countries have enjoyed exactly equal wealth and advantage. But
the best way – indeed, the only way — of reducing these inequalities is
through an open society and equal opportunities for all, where all people
are free to realise their own gifts and hopes and contribute to society
with their own skill and energy. This is the fundamental philosophy of the
DA, and it’s the only way to overcome poverty and underdevelopment.
I would want to make it known to every woman and girl-child in South Africa
today: Own your own future, and own your own success. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon colleagues, once
again South Africa is commemorating Women’s Day. All South Africans are
reminded to pause and remember the 20 000 women, from all walks of life,
who marched to the Union Buildings in 1956.

When we talk about the women’s march of 9 August 1956, four women who led
the march and handed over the petition protesting against the pass laws to
the then Prime Minister are mentioned. Today, as Cope, we would like this
House to join us in acknowledging and paying tribute to the role played by
Ms Bertha Gxowa and others who organised this political and historic day in
our country.

As we are spending time reflecting on the milestones achieved in women
development in our country under the theme “Working together for equal
opportunities and progress for all women”, women development is still a
pipe dream, despite legislation and the establishment of the Ministry of
Women, Children and People with Disabilities. Absolute poverty,
feminisation of poverty, unemployment, increasing fragility of the
environment due to climate change and continuing violence against women put
emphasis on the need to continue the search for women development and
gender equality.

One of government’s key priorities is the reduction of poverty by
empowering women economically through income support structures. We have
witnessed the Minister of Social Development launching the Hemp Project on
19 October 2009 in Soweto. Guess what? The majority of people participating
in the Hemp Project are rural women from the Eastern Cape, one of the
poorest provinces in South Africa.

The Hemp Project has economic benefits; the potential to contribute to
human nutrition, which gained worldwide recognition; and the potential for
poverty reduction in the impoverished rural areas of the Eastern Cape. The
Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities should facilitate
and speed up the legislation of hemp to be grown in South Africa for mass
production and exportation, joining 27 other countries, like Russia.

Yes, it is time for celebration, but it’s also time to reflect on the
violence against women. Women in South Africa are six times more likely to
be killed by their male partners than elsewhere in the world. This means
that four women are killed every day by their intimate partners. This is
unacceptable and as Cope we believe that more should be done to change the
status quo.

Violence against women is an injustice that is putting them at higher risk
of being infected with HIV. The department needs to ensure that violence
against women is integrated into HIV prevention. HIV has a negative impact
on the growth rate of the South African population. It is estimated that
the growth rate of females is 0,94% lower than that of males.

The growth rate for females is not the only thing that is lower, so is the
female labour force, according to the MasterCard Worldwide Index of Women’s
Advancement released recently: fewer women hold managerial positions;
women’s income level has dropped to a fifth compared to the peak of 2008;
and women’s positions in the workplace in South Africa also declined. Cope
believes that the new Gender Equity Bill proposed by the Minister will not
speed up the slow progress of gender equity in South Africa.

We, as Cope, propose that the Ministry should continually implement legal
amendments designed to eliminate discrimination against women. We also
propose that the Ministry should learn lessons from India — a country with
a gap between policy and practice and one that is home to some 500 million
women faced with discrimination. According to the MasterCard survey, women
made the most gains there.

In conclusion, women play a critical role in the family. The family is the
basic unit of a society and should be strengthened. Women make a great
contribution to the family and to the development of society. Much of the
progress can be made by increasing women’s access to education and a
greater awareness of their constitutional rights. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B P MABE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, the struggle of women in South Africa
has its roots in the struggle against colonialism and slavery. Women have
fought not only because they were brutally oppressed but for their children
and for the integrity of their families.

For centuries, black women of our country have been subjected to all sorts
of unimaginable degradation: a lack of proper education, a lack of health
facilities, semi-slave labour and countless other inequalities. Many of
them have suffered harassment and brutal torture, but they did not succumb.
Women suffered as part of the exploited black labour force, as impoverished
mothers and as members of an oppressed community.

They were expected to accept the extension of the pass laws to African
women because the perpetrators of apartheid grasped, in some insidious way,
that the foundation of the system finally rested on the subjugation of the
African woman by isolating her in the reserves, where she became
conditioned to bearing and raising children as well as caring for the old
and ill.

The Land Act of 1913 legalised the dispossession of the South African
people of their land. While our people were driven off their land to work
for the maintenance of the white economy, the pass was used to permanently
control the movement of black people and curtail their development as a
nation.

The late 1940s and early 1950s witnessed an intensification of the people’s
struggles. The regime had devised a unique form of institutional racism
through the application of over 2 000 pieces of legislation designed to
restrict the work and destroy the family life and, indeed, the very
existence of the black majority.

In 1950, an impending amendment, which would enable government to introduce
passes for African women, galvanised women into protest on a national
level. The Women’s Charter of 1954 was part of this broader campaign, and
it was at this point that the ANC Women’s League identified a need for a
broader women’s struggle to ensure total emancipation.

Passes were first issued in 1956 in the Orange Free State in the town of
Winburg, where many women were arrested when they burned their passes. In
Lichtenburg, more than 1 000 women met government officials to protest when
they arrived to register them. In Nelspruit, women attacked the car of the
magistrate when he announced that passes would be distributed. In
Pietermaritzburg and Polokwane, 2 000 women stoned officials who came to
register them.
Cato Manor in Natal became the site of large-scale protests when the
municipality attempted to end all illegal liquor stills. Beer brewing was
an important source of income for African women. In June 1959, women
marched and organised a beer boycott, which led to wide-scale uprisings all
over Natal.

In 1977, the apartheid government announced that Crossroads would be
demolished and the 20 000 residents would be sent to Transkei. The women
organised the Crossroads Women’s Movement with their rallying cry: “We are
not moving.” This caused the regime, under massive international pressure,
to announce that it would not force the residents to leave the Cape Town
area.

The burden became too heavy to bear, and the women’s section of the ANC
started mobilising women throughout the country to take a bold stand. The
determination born out of anger united them even more. United we stand,
divided we fall.

Fifty-four years ago, on 9 August 1956, South Africa saw more than 20 000
women of all racial groups and from all parts of the country converging in
Pretoria. Most of them carried their babies on their backs and were led by
Lilian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Fatima Moosa and Sophia Williams.

Siyabonga bomama besizwe. [Thank you, mothers of the nation.]

That was the beginning of what was later to be observed in many parts of
the world as “South African Women’s Day”, in support of the South African
women’s struggle for liberation and fundamental human rights.

Women were prosecuted and persecuted on a wide variety of political
charges, reflecting the range of their involvement in the struggle against
apartheid. Among those who were serving jail sentences were women of all
colours, ages and religions; young girls; and many mothers and
grandmothers, some of whom were older than 70 years.

The oppressed women of South Africa, since the turn of the previous
century, emerged as primary catalysts for protest against and challengers
of the apartheid regime and colonialism. They were forced to shoulder a
greater share of the burden of apartheid and they became increasingly
conscious of the fact that the road to their emancipation was going through
the destruction of apartheid and the creation of a nonracial, nonsexist,
democratic society.

As we observe the 54th anniversary of that historic march to Pretoria, we,
the women of South Africa, look back with a sense of achievement over the
100 years of our relentless participation in the national liberation
struggle against colonial subjugation and oppression in South Africa.

Former ANC president, Albert Luthuli, wrote about the women’s actions:

   Among us Africans, the weight of resistance has been greatly increased in
   the last few years by the emergence of our women. It may even be true
   that, had the women hung back, resistance would still have been faltering
   and uncertain.


National Women’s Day is about women in South Africa, the social conditions
and the laws that affect them in their personal lives and in their wider
field of education and conditions of work.

It is also about the way in which women have organised in the past and
their struggle to overcome disabilities and difficulties under which they
lived. It is about the part they played in the struggle for the liberation
of the people of South Africa.

Remembering the beer boycott of 1959 in Natal, we can today rejoice in the
fact that African women are standing strong in the liquor industry, with
more than 1 000 tavern owners — traditionally women — having significant
shareholding in the wine industry. After so many years of struggle, it is
good to see recognition of economic benefits for women who labour in the
wine and spirit business.

Furthermore, looking back to the 1956 pass law marches, we can rejoice that
we have a new form of identification that does not discriminate against or
subjugate women but allows them to actively participate in South Africa’s
civilian, social, legal and economic rights. The current form of
identification assists women in registering their children, applying for
employment, receiving social benefits and pensions and travelling without
hindrance.

The National Women’s Month must, therefore, be more than just a month of
remembrance. It should be a tribute to our history of struggle, as well as
a reminder of the work that lies in the months and years ahead.

In conclusion, I wish to pay homage to Comrade Ntswaki Lephuthing,
provincial treasurer of the ANC Youth League in Gauteng, who tragically
passed away recently. I also wish to congratulate the Gauteng ANC Youth
League, led by Lebogang Maile, for the successful conference and for
electing three women to serve on their five-member executive. [Applause.]
We pledge to continue along the path of the 9 August occasion charted by
Lilian Masediba Ngoyi, the great heroine of our people. Malibongwe! [Let it
be praised!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Ms B P MABE: Long live 9 August, South African Women’s Day, long live!

HON MEMBERS: Long live! [Applause.]
Ms L L ZWANE (KwaZulu-Natal): Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, members, in
South Africa the month of August is dedicated to celebrating the economic,
political and social achievements of all women, irrespective of their
political preferences, socioeconomic status and religious affiliation.

Celebrating the strides that women, from all walks of life, have made is a
sentiment close to the heart of our icon, Nelson Mandela, who is a world-
celebrated leader and father of the nation. We all actively participated in
the International Nelson Mandela Day on 18 July 2010 by doing something to
uplift the spirits or the lives of the less fortunate.

We can all attest to the fact that that kind of self-giving activity was
self-fulfilling. It is the kind of activity that we need not do on this
particular day only, but it should be something that, as women, we do every
day of our lives by caring for those women who are less fortunate. One of
the effective ways of taking forward this legacy left by Tata Mandela and
other women, whom we are celebrating as heroines today, is to do good to
everyone, every time, anyway, despite the challenges and obstacles that we
always face as women in the daily activities of our lives. I subscribe to
Mother Teresa’s thinking when she says: “We cannot all do great things, but
we can do small things with great love.”

Coupled with celebrating the sacrifices of former President Nelson Mandela,
this month we are remembering and learning from the stories of ordinary
women who made history. They are indeed great women who have pioneered the
change that we see today in different aspects and facets of life. They
themselves became the change that they wanted to see. Many have contributed
in ensuring that the world that we live in today transcends gender
limitations and often women themselves have pioneered these changes.

If we go far back in the history of KwaZulu-Natal, even during the
precolonial era, we can remember great women like, for instance, Mkabayi
kaJama, a woman who contributed greatly in the formation of the Zulu
nation. When things did not go well in KwaZulu-Natal at that time, Mkabayi
decided not to keep quiet about it. She had to take very tough decisions to
call things to order even during that era.

When I look at the actions and decisions that she had to take, I sometimes
say to myself, even at that time, Mkabayi kaJama was a Member of
Parliament. When things went wrong, she did not keep quiet. She was brave
enough to face even the king who was ruling at the time, and went further
to actually orchestrate his assassination because she wanted to deliver
people and wanted justice to prevail. It is such women that we are looking
for today. It is such women that we need to support — women who are not
afraid to speak out when things do not go right.
If, for instance, we could refer to what other speakers said earlier on by
way of remembering the heroines that contributed to the struggle, now that
we are here today, there are people who went before us and sacrificed their
lives.

However, the struggle, as it was explained earlier on, did not begin in
1956. Around 1913 there were already marches led by different women who
were fighting the injustices of the government of those times. For
instance, women were not quiet about the Land Act, where the whole Act was
actually meant to disadvantage blacks to the extent that blacks were given
only 13% of the land. Women were not quiet about that. It is only that
maybe they did not approach that whole issue in an organised fashion.

Around 1948 and 1950, women organised a potato boycott. I suppose you
remember that boycott, when women took a firm stand and said that they were
not going to buy potatoes because prisoners were used by the government of
the day to plant those potatoes, and, in the process, some of the prisoners
were killed and were buried there.

Bathi abesifazane ngeke sisawathenga amazambane, ngempela kwama nse
ukuthengwa kwamazambane ... [The women said, we will no longer buy
potatoes, and indeed people stopped buying potatoes ... ]

... for a long period.

Ngoba bengafuni ukudla ukudla ekubeni umhlabathi wakhona uvundiswe
ngezidumbu zezingane zamanye amakhosikazi. [Because they did not want to
eat food which was grown in soil fertilised with the corpses of other
women’s children.]

Women stood firm and fought for that. It is women in KwaZulu-Natal —the
previous speaker alluded to that — abaya kwalihhoko, ehholo labhiya,
kwamayemaye [who went to lihhoko, a beer hall, in Mayemaye].

The men were busy drinking beer and had forgotten their duties. They had
even forgotten their bedroom duties as men ... [Laughter.] ... because they
were so glued to and so hooked on drinking this beer that was actually
killing the systems that they need to use to procreate. So women went there
and said enough is enough.

Bachitha utshwala bafaka isibhaxu. [They spilled the beer and beat them.]

And then men had to come to their senses and take their responsibility of
providing for and protecting women in their own homesteads. It was women.
Women can bring about change if they want to.

Uma besathule bathule ngoba besafuna isu ... [When they are quiet, they are
actually devising a strategy ...]
... not because they are afraid. It was women who actually organised the
strikes against the dips.

Isiteleka samadiphu. Izinkomo zamadoda zifa, kodwa ezabelungu izinkomo ...
[The dip strike. Men’s cattle dying, but cattle of the whites ...]

... were not dipped in the same dip where the other cattle were dipped.
There was something fishy about that because it indicated that there was
some poison that was put in to kill black people’s livestock. Women stood
up and actually closed the dips. It is women who brought about that kind of
change.

Nango-1980 siyabakhumbula abesifazane abanye babo abakwaZulu-Natal ...
[Even in the 1980s we remember women, some of whom were from KwaZulu-Natal
...]

... who actually remained in their homesteads when their husbands were away
in exile. These women had to take decisions and run the homesteads on
behalf of the husbands who were away.

Siyamubonga umama uSizakele Zuma,umaKhumalo.[We thank Mrs  Sizakele Khumalo-
Zuma.]

Today, her husband is the President, but she had to remain and actually run
the homestead, faithfully, until the President came back. [Applause.]

Ngakho-ke siyakubonga ngomnikelo owasenzela wona, namuhlanje sinoMengameli
ngoba wahlala wabekezela ezimweni ezinzima. [We therefore thank you for
your contribution, for today we have a President because you remained and
persevered in dire conditions.]

There are other women who contributed to the struggle, women like Dorothy
Nyembe, Margaret Mncadi, Tryphina “MaMboxela” Njokweni, Florence Mkhize,
Busi Mhlongo, the artist, and Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang. Those are the
women who made men’s contributions. As we are here today, we will be making
a grievous mistake if we don’t mention their names. We may not mention all
of them because they are so many, but at least we should mention some of
them.

Siyababongela omama abanjengo ... [We thank women like ...]

... Ellen Sirleaf, who is the Liberian president. I think she is the first
woman president on the African continent.

Ungowokuqala, baningi abanye abazolandela. Uhlahle indlela ... [She is the
first; many more are to follow. She led the way ...]

... and I want to believe that it was not easy for her to reach the stage
where she is, but women are learning from that and are going to assume
those positions very soon. We are not making threats, but we are going to
assume what is rightfully ours because we have the gift of leadership.

We do want to applaud the progress that has been made by the democratic
South African government ever since its inception.

Siyababona omama ... [We thank the women ...]

... in the decision-making bodies of government and the parastatals.

Siyababona oNgqongqoshe abakhona kuzwelonke. Kodwa, ikakhulukazi kwisifunda
sakwaZulu-Natali, siyakuthanda lokhu esikubona kwenzeka khona. IsiGungu
sakhona esiPhezulu sinabesifazane abayisihlanu kanye nabesilisa
abayisihlanu. [We thank the MECs throughout this country, especially in the
province of KwaZulu-Natal — we like what we see happening there.]

In the legislature we have struck the 50% balance. In the chairpersonship
of portfolio committees we have struck a balance of 50-50. So, there is
progress.

Kodwa-ke, kuyasixaka ukuthi kunezifundazwe ... [But then, it is surprising
that there is a province ...]
... where there is only one female in a sea of males, yet those provinces
hope to govern the country. The ANC still has a lot of work to do in terms
of educating and giving lessons to other parties in order to reach where
the ANC is today.

KwaZulu-Natali sibe nePhalamende labesiFazane elibe yimpumelelo, ... [In
KwaZulu-Natal we had a women’s parliament, which was a success ...]

... where we created a platform through the Office of the Speaker, Ms Peggy
Nkonyeni, and brought women from rural areas.

IPhalamende labesifazane laKwaZulu-Natali kulo nyaka beliseMkhanyakude, ...
[This year the KwaZulu-Natal women’s parliament was in Mkhanyakude ...]

... right in the deep rural areas ...

... lapho bakhale khona ngogesi namanzi, bengenalutho [... where they
complained about electricity and water, because they have none]

We promised that we will see to it that the government of the day, be it
nationally, provincially, or locally, addresses those issues because if you
address the issue of electricity ...

... uthinta umuntu wesifazane nokuhlupheka kwakhe, angavuki ekuseni aye
ehlathini. Uma ukhuluma ngodaba lwamanzi wenza ukuthi angayi kowasha
emfuleni ashaywe yizinyoka. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... you are relieving women from the hardship of waking up in the morning
to go to the forest. If you address the issue of water, you are saving
women from going to do laundry in the river and being subjected to
snakebites.]

Many other issues were addressed at that platform. So, we really are
celebrating this month and the office of the premier — as hon Magadla said
— is full of a series of activities that are taking care of women in
various sectors of the community. Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Dr H E MATEME (Limpopo): Deputy Chairperson, Ministers present here, ...

... bahlomphegi ba Ntlo ye kgolo ye, ke lethabo le legolo go rena lehono go
tla ka mo re tlo abelana le lena ditaba tša go tšwa go basadi Palamenteng
ya basadi ya Limpopo ... [... hon members in this august House, it is a
great joy that we are gathered here today to share with you matters arising
from the women’s parliament in Limpopo ...]

... the only province of peace in the country. [Applause.]

Chairperson, before I get to the issues of the day, I would like to remind
this august House, particularly the opposition benches, that the ruling
party has an age-old slogan that says: “The people shall govern”. It isn’t
saying members of the party shall govern, but the people shall govern,
meaning all people in the country.

Secondly, whoever defies a mirror? When one stands in front of a mirror in
the morning and the mirror reflects that his or her tie or skirt needs to
be adjusted in a certain manner, one complies; when one goes out, one wants
to impress. This is to say that we, as the ruling party, are capable of
listening. Opposition for us is but a mirror. We hear what is being said.

In September we will be converging in Durban to introspect and to blend all
that we have heard. The whole country and the whole world will be watching
– they will be paying attention. When we come back and go to the
communities, we are going to impress.

I have heard, in this august House this afternoon, some people expressing
some dreams of some new majority. When people dream during the day, what do
we say? We say they are daydreaming! [Interjections.]

Mokgatlo wo o bušago naga ya Afrika Borwa ... [The ruling party in South
Africa ...]

... the only organisation that is almost a century old — not only on the
continent, but in the whole world - is listening.

Ons gaan regmaak, mense. [We are readying ourselves, people.]

Watch this space.

Chairperson, thank you very much for allowing us this opportunity to relay
to this august House issues raised in our provincial women’s parliament
that was held recently. Sixteen years on since our democratic dispensation,
and 55 years on since the gallant women marched to the Union Buildings, we
are not here only to lament and to characterise problems. We are here to
propose solutions as well.

Political liberation without economic liberation does not count for much.
On behalf of the rural women in Limpopo and other provinces, we would wish
to share some experiences with this august House. Also, just to remind the
House that, when one listens critically to what opposition benches are
saying, they are saying, “ANC, implement your policies and stick to your
programmes correctly.” And that’s what we are going to do.

Opportunities and economic progress for women are closely linked to service
delivery in general. Demographic statistics of our country indicate that
women are a majority. Due to the labour system of the past, this majority
is in the rural areas. The fact is that services like electricity and water
provisioning are still very much in short supply in the rural areas. For
women to participate in economic activities of the country, electricity and
water are critical.

It is commendable that this administration of hon President Jacob Zuma has
identified rural development as one of its focal areas. For women to
participate more meaningfully in the economy of the country, we still have
some hurdles that need to be removed.

Over and above the issue of electricity and water is the question of
language. The language used in government programmes and in documents is
not always user-friendly to the majority of women in rural areas. We
therefore suggest that information for opportunities be given in local
languages of rural areas. Radio can also be utilised as a means of
disseminating information because the majority of households in rural areas
do listen to radios.

An added burden is that some concepts are expressed in an unfriendly
language. I am referring to concepts like “per cent”, and concepts like
“compound interest”. These are some of the subtle hurdles which women have
to grapple with before they can meaningfully participate in the economic
activity of the country.
For those women who, due to no fault of their own, are not conversant with
these concepts, it is very difficult to participate meaningfully in
economic activities. We, therefore, propose that those who craft modules
for adult basic education and training, Abet, should find a way of
packaging these concepts in such a way that women are able to utilise them
and, therefore, enter the mainstream of economic activity in South Africa.

To add insult to injury, commercial banks call for collateral - a very tall
order, indeed, for women in rural areas. One of the former first ladies in
our country used to preach the gospel of a community or village bank.
Bangladesh has proved that a properly managed community or village bank
does work.

Therefore, we appeal to the relevant departments in this administration to
facilitate the establishment of village banks where rural women can access
affordable loans for their businesses. Other than making less costly loans
available, a village bank will not only liberate rural women from the
moneylenders, but will also create jobs in the villages. The foundation for
these village banks already exists. A lot of money is circulating in these
villages in the form of stokvels, burial societies, megodisano [informal
community financial empowerment schemes], etc. We propose that the state,
with all its expertise, should facilitate the establishment of the
community or village banks in rural areas.

We do have good policies but the implementation falls short. Some
scorecards in some companies may not be quite honest with regard to gender
equity. Policies intended to uplift women do not always have the intended
results because sometimes women are used as fronts. We therefore propose
that a mechanism to verify actual and meaningful participation by women in
some of the economic activities in the country is necessary.

In conclusion, it’s not only doom and gloom in the lives of women in rural
areas. Those women in rural areas who have access to water and electricity,
as well as some land, do produce food for their families. Some of these
women, as evidenced by awards such as the Female Farmer of the Year, are
already farming commercially.

The message is, for the majority in rural areas, participation in the
economic activity of the country is still pie in the sky, and impatience is
growing each day. Some creative intervention would be most welcome.

Services are not being delivered, and this must be made clear. It is not
because of a lack of money. Our country, South Africa, has enough resources
for all its people; it’s a matter of management. The probe announced by our
President, we hope, is going to help the delivery of services to arrive
speedily in the rural areas. I thank you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo weNdlu, amalungu ahloniphekile, uNgqongqoshe
obhekene noMnyango wezabesiFazane, iNtsha, iziNgane nabantu abaPhila
nokuKhubazeka, ngithi iNingizimu Afrika kufuneka ibabongele omama ukuthi
bakwazi babhekane nemisebenzi enzima.

Babhekane nemisebenzi kuyo yonke indlela njengoba eseshilo udadewethu.
INkosazana yesizwe samaZulu, uMkabayi kaJama wayekwazi ukuphephisa isizwe
ebunzimeni ngoba nesikhundla esihlezi kuso uma ngabe uMkabayi kaJama
wayengekho uyise uJama wayengeke asakwazi ukuthola ukusithola. Yingakho
waze wazala indodana yakhe okuthiwa nguSenzangakhona. Lokho
kwakungumcabango kaMkabayi kaJama.

Akuqala-ke nangaye uMkabayi kaJama kuqale ngoMthaniya uqobo. UMthaniya
wabusa njengenkosi yomZulu, waphatha izwe. Kwaye kwalandela iNdlovukazi
uNgqumbazi, naye wabusa njengenkosi yomZulu eshayela amadoda umthetho
kuleliya likaMthaniya. Indlovukazi yokugcina unina kaDinizulu lapho
aphendula khona isidwaba wasibuyisa ngangxanye, amaBhunu namaNgisi
sebezothatha uDinizulu okokugcina bemyisa le e-St Helena.

Nguyena owaphaka amabutho, waphinde wabutha ibutho “UDakwa Ukusutha”,
yiNdlovukazi-ke leyo. Angeke ngikuphike mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ukuthi
kukhona okhalweni lwethu lapho omama siyaye sibabukele phansi khona. Kodwa
indoda ebukela phansi umuntu wesifazane iyinkinga ngoba phela ebusuku uma
ngizohlaba inkomo ngixoxa naye ngaphambi kokuba ngiye kubafowethu. Ngoba
uma ngingexoxe naye ngizohamba ngiyohlaba inkomo esibayeni engazi; ayikho
leyo nto.

Ngithi lapho sengikhulile sengimdala iNkosazane kaDinizulu iyona eyafika
yazobeka iNdlu. Ubabomkhulu uSolomoni wahamba emhlabeni engazilamaniselanga
ukuthi izindlu zakhe ziphathe kanjani. Kodwa ngoba kubalulekile noma
bekhona obaba bengamadoda, nabafowabo, noyise kepha balanda iNkosazana.
Inkosazana yafike yasho ukuthi le Ndlu imi kanje nakanje, ibeka umthetho.

Ngithi omama besizwe bayisizwe, ngithi asikho isizwe ngaphandle komama
ngoba masingathi siyisizwe ngaphandle komama singakhuluma imfeketho; into
engekho. Okukahle uhulumeni wentando yeningi usekwenze kwaba ngumthetho
ukuthi bathathwe njengabantu ababalulekile ezintweni zonke, iminikelo
eseyenziwe ngosopolotiki ngeminyaka yawo-60 kanye nama-50. Kodwa kusukela
le babenezwi abalishayayo emthethweni. Ngazi lo mlando ngoba ngawuthola
kogogo ababegane inkosi yasoSuthu, iNkosi uDinizulu.

Yizinto esizaziyo lezi, ngithi ngibonga kakhulu ukuthi bonke odadewethu
nabafowethu abakhulumile, abakakhulumi okutshekile ngesifazane sesizwe
ngoba yilapho esiphumula khona, esincenga khona futhi yilapho esibonelelwa
khona. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson of this House, hon members, the Minister of
Women, Children and People with Disabilities, South Africa should commend
women for their ability to perform difficult tasks.

They are faced with duties all the way, as the hon Minister has said. The
heiress of the Zulu nation, Princess Mkabayi kaJama, could keep the nation
safe during difficult times. The position that I am occupying would not be
available if Mkabayi kaJama’s father, Jama, had not existed. That is why he
had to bear a son named Senzangakhona. And this was Mkabayi kaJama’s idea.

This caretaking of the Zulu Kingdom by women did not begin with Mkabayi
kaJama, but started with Mthaniya herself. Mthaniya reigned as the ruler of
the Zulus and ruled the land. Then followed Queen Ngqumbazi – she also
reigned as the ruler of the Zulus, giving orders to men in the land of
Mthaniya. The last queen to rule was King Dinizulu’s mother, who turned her
traditional hide skirt, or isidwaba, inside out when the Afrikaners and the
English soldiers came to take Dinizulu to St Helena for the last time.

She is the one who commanded regiments and also founded a regiment called
Udakwa Ukusutha. These are the queen’s credentials. I will not deny the
fact, hon Minister, that somewhere in our nature there is a tendency to
undermine women. But a man who undermines a woman is a problem because as a
man, when I want to slaughter a cow, I first discuss it with her during the
night before I tell my brothers. Because if I don’t talk to her and just
slaughter a cow without telling her, that is not acceptable.

When I was old enough, it was Dinizulu’s princess who gave a ruling as to
which royal house should rule because my grandfather, King Solomon, did not
give a ruling as to which house should rule in terms of their seniority.
And although other male relatives, like his brothers, were available, they
consulted the princess. She came and gave directives as to which house
should do what – she gave them directives.

The women of a nation are the nation — a nation does not exist without
women because if we said we were a nation without women, we would be
talking nonsense. And what is good is that the democratic government has
entrenched it into law that they be regarded as important people in every
aspect — these are the contributions of the politicians of the 1960s and
the 1950s. And as from then they had something to say about the law. I know
this history because I got it from my grandmothers, who were married to the
king of Osuthu, King Dinizulu.

We know these things.  I am very grateful to all my colleagues — my sisters
and brothers who have spoken here — because they have not spoken ill of the
nation’s women for they help us to relax, breastfeed our young and take
care of us. Thank you.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Deputy Chair, hon Minister, special
delegates from the provinces, of course, it is true that the theme is
directing us to a particular point in understanding exactly what it is that
we need to do, namely work together for equal opportunities and progress
for all women. But, perhaps, the fundamental question that we need to ask
is: To what extent are we or can we be in the position to work together for
equal opportunities and progress for women without a proper understanding
of the challenges that women have been confronted with in our country?

For instance, it is easy to talk about an open society and equal
opportunities, and simplistically think or assume that once you declare
that there are open or equal opportunities, women will be free and equal to
men. Therefore, it is important for all of us to understand, including our
colleagues from the DA, that once we talk of equal opportunities, we also
need to appreciate the historical oppression that women faced. That
particular historical oppression was characterised as triple oppression.

Firstly, women were oppressed because of their gender. Secondly, they were
oppressed because they were black, and, thirdly, they were oppressed
because of the class orientation or characterisation of the economy that we
were faced with. So, to what extent can we then begin to talk about equal
opportunities for women now, if we do not address those three things?
The first fundamental question for me with regard to triple oppression is:
Has the males’ attitude towards females changed? How do we see women today?
Do we see women as equal to men in terms of their capacity and ability to
do certain things in our society?

With regard to issues of race, to what extent have African women, in
particular, been able to be positioned in society to play the strategic
role that they are supposed to play? In class terms, where do we place
women within the realm of our economy? How do we ensure that we locate
their role in such a way that they are playing a very significant and
constructive role in growing the economy of our country?

Therefore, it is important that we also caution our colleagues from the DA
that they cannot speak of opportunities in class terms when, in actual
fact, their liberal policies are walking against the very same objectives
of creating equal opportunity. [Applause.]

If one has to reflect, as a result of the very same liberal or neoliberal
economic policies that are espoused so aggressively by the DA, let us not
forget that it is these policies that, in actual fact, led to a situation
in which our country’s economy was opened up. It is the liberalisation of
the South African economy which led to a situation where the import
barriers or the restrictions were lowered or even removed. As a result, the
South African economy was then undermined by the external economies.
What was the result of that? It resulted in key industrial sectors in our
economy suffering greatly, such as your textile industries. Who were the
people who were most affected in the textile industry with the closing of
factories, and so forth? It was women. Therefore, it would be quite
disingenuous and dishonest to begin to speak about equal opportunities,
whilst in your policy framework you vigorously and aggressively advance
policies that – and you know that very well — will undermine the very same
progression of women in the economy as a whole.

It is within that understanding that it is important that all of us must
begin to appreciate the struggles and challenges those women are faced
with. Equally so, as the prince has said — and this is the first time that
I have spoken after him and agree with him - the history of the struggle of
women and how women have progressively played a strategic and important
role in our liberation does not necessarily start in the 1930s or 1940s,
but way before that.

Let us look at the Anglo-Boer War and the role of women in it, in
particular how our African women were used to support the two imperialist
factions that were fighting for our own economy, land and resources. Our
very own African women were used to feed the soldiers who were fighting
against each other.
What happened immediately after the Anglo-Boer War? They were again
subjected to the very same conditions, hence their political consciousness
and their capacity to rise led them to mobilise and organise themselves to
a point where they rose against the declaration of the 1910 Union of South
Africa. It is through that process that we could see the mobilisation of
women and their progression in fighting against the injustice system at
that particular stage.

In the 1930s and 1940s, there were many instances of mass protest,
demonstrations and passive resistance campaigns which women participated
in. Of course, we can also reflect on the First World War and the Second
World War, during which the imperialists on our land fought for our land,
resources, and the little that we had. Women were again used to feed the
imperialists, as well as look after them and their kids. They were even
used for medical supplies.

It is now on record that during the Anglo-Boer War some African women were
used as spies for the benefit of the imperialists. That is the extent to
which women have played a very important role. However, some of the women,
those who were more intelligent than the imperialists, fed the imperialists
wrong information. [Applause.]

The main movements through which women expressed their growing political
awareness in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s were greatly influenced by the then
Communist Party of South Africa and the ANC.

We would remember, comrades, that with the gradual transition of the South
African economy from a predominantly mining and agricultural economy to the
flourishing industrialised economy and our secondary industries, women
played a very strategic and important role. Black trade unions grew rapidly
and were influenced by the growing numbers of urban workers. They became
increasingly dissatisfied with the status quo and a number of major strikes
and boycotts were held in the 1940s, notably the strike of African
mineworkers.

Women were not slow to play their part in this climate of unrest. Within
the trade union movement, one can mention the names of militant workers,
women in particular, such as Frances Baard whom today ... I do not know how
many members of this august House have seen her statue in the centre of
Kimberley in the Northern Cape. Kimberley, as part of the Northern Cape
province, honoured Frances Baard, who hailed from there. You must go to
Kimberley to see the big statue there of our fellow revolutionary, Frances
Baard. These are some of the women, like Lilian Ngoyi and Bertha Mashaba,
who played that particular and important role.

In Cape Town, food committees that had links with the trade unions and the
Communist Party of South Africa were formed and they demonstrated in
Parliament against the inadequate food supplies. In Johannesburg women
formed the People’s Food Council in 1943 in an effort to improve ...

The 1956 march - this is the point I’m trying to make — was the culmination
of a process that began long before and was led by women in South Africa.
We know of the role played by the Federation of South African Woman,
Fedsaw, and so forth.

Today we can ... but, Chair, I still have seconds left.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Your time has expired.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In conclusion, may I put a challenge to
all of us as Members of Parliament, MPs, and say that we should not only
fight for equal opportunities concerning this theme, but we must fight or
develop a campaign that is aggressively biased in favour of women.
[Applause.]

It should not be about equal opportunities; it should be about bias
onfavour of the upliftment of women. It doesn’t matter whether this would
be in the form of co-operatives or construction co-operatives or co-
operatives in mining, agriculture, etc. As we do our oversight, the first
and last question should be: How has this benefited women or how will this
be of benefit to women? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon Deputy
Chairperson, I wish to thank the members for the vibrant debate that has
taken place this afternoon in this august House. Furthermore, I also want
to appreciate the historical context that was given in terms of tracing
back the struggles of women, thereby proving that women can do it. I
believe that, in this particular era, all of us as women — together with
men — must unite to address the challenges that members have spoken about;
challenges of poverty, unemployment, HIV, etc. We also need to ensure that
women access opportunities, and so on.

However, I just want to make one point. The hon Chen made an input about
the challenges faced by women. I would wish that the input that was given
here should be given to the leader of the DA, who is also the Premier of
the Western Cape, so that they too recognise that women have got a role to
play in decision-making structures of political parties, organisations, and
so on.

What we saw in the provincial government of the Western Cape was a reversal
of the gains that were made by women in this particular province. So I just
wanted to make that point and ask hon Chen to make this input to her own
party so that we can see a conscious effort by all of us in our resolve to
ensure that women are empowered, participate in all respects, and also make
their input with respect to the challenges that are facing us.

What has also come out is the fact that we need to focus on rural areas.
That has come out in different ways in terms of inputs made by different
speakers today. Rural development remains a priority of our government.
Whatever we do in the next four years of this administration, if we don’t
make a difference in the lives of our people then we would not have
achieved much in rural areas. So all of us have got to unite and ensure
that women in the rural areas are empowered. I have also noted the
suggestions that members have made. We will look into those suggestions.

As I step down, hon Deputy Chairperson, I would like to say that we are
going to have izimbizo, and I invite the NCOP to join us in that regard. We
will be interacting, first and foremost, with women on day one, children
and their representatives on the second day, people with disabilities on
the third day and the communities on the fourth day.

So we are going to be crisscrossing the country, going to rural areas as
government and as this new department. We will be doing this in order to
interact and also ensure that we listen so that we empower ourselves in
terms of responding to the needs of our people. We are going to be
embarking on that programme. We will start with KwaZulu-Natal and then move
to other provinces. I just wanted to let the House know that there is such
a programme which will take us to provinces.

In October we would like to have a national conference or indaba of women
where women of all political persuasions – women from all backgrounds of
our country – will come together under one roof to deliberate on the
challenges and receive reports from the UN, the Commonwealth, and SADC. We
will also be talking about how far we have come as a country in the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals.

All I am saying is, let us work together for equal opportunities and
progress for all women. Let’s make the period from 2010 to 2020 truly a
decade for all women of our country and Africa. South Africa cannot be
truly free if the rest of the continent and its women are facing serious
challenges. We’ve got to lead this process to ensure that whatever we do
impacts positively on the lives of women on the continent as well. Thank
you very much, hon Chairperson and hon members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

             TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE PROGRAMME: LIMPOPO

                          (Consideration of Report)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Malibongwe! [Praise!] Hon Deputy Chairperson,
I would like to welcome back members after a wonderful break that we had,
which coincided with the successful hosting of the 2010 Soccer World Cup.
Having experienced the success of this tournament, to which all South
Africans contributed, I am sure we are all proud of what our country can
do.

I am not too sure how many people went to the stadia.
An HON MEMBER: I’m one of them.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, are you one of them? Are you
telling me that the rest of you did not buy tickets to watch matches at the
stadia? Oh! Only three people went to the stadia? You have missed a lot, I
am telling you. You were sitting in front of televisions? Okay.

From 23 to 26 March 2010, as you all know, we visited the Greater
Sekhukhune District Municipality as part of the “Taking Parliament to the
People” programme. As you are all aware, this programme assists us to
promote public participation in line with the constitutional injunction of
providing a national forum for public consideration of issues affecting
provinces.

The important element of this programme, hon members, is that it provides
an opportunity for different spheres of government to act together. It also
epitomises co-operative government, whereby the three spheres of our
government co-operate with one another in bringing service delivery to our
own people.

It is important, however, to ensure that this co-operation becomes a daily
practice. Our biggest challenge is to ensure that while our government is
constituted as three spheres, it must also, at all times, work together as
one. Now, I want to emphasise this point. We will be having a debate on 26
August in this very House, and you would remember that we called that
debate. I once more want to emphasise that I was in the Free State
yesterday and we debated this issue with the local government sphere. We
emphasised and asked all three spheres of government – national, provincial
and local government – to co-operate to avoid frustrating service delivery
on the ground.

Working together within the three spheres of government will assist us to
speed up service delivery because one hand will know what the other hand is
doing. It does not matter in which field we co-operate — whether it is the
financial field or working together to provide services — let us try to co-
operate. From this year and onwards, we need to work on that and make sure
that we are successful in bringing co-operative government together. This,
of course, depends on the collaboration of the public representatives and
administrators who are located in these different spheres and how they
interrelate.

All of us, for example, in the legislative sector, have now created the
Speakers’ Forum level and the legislative level to say that we have formed
a sector. We are no longer just calling ourselves a Parliament or
provincial legislatures; we are a sector of legislators that can sit down
and discuss things which affect us and be able to address them on the
ground together and co-operate with each other. Through this programme, we
have an opportunity to educate our people about the work of Parliament, and
we also conduct hearings under the site visits in order to check the
quality of the work that is done there.

As you know, this programme also brings together poor communities with a
view to facilitating and uplifting in order to realise a better quality of
life.  This has also been the approach in the programme since its
inception. We do not want to leave the seats of Parliament only to go and
meet people who could easily interact with Parliament. We want to go to
those people who do not have resources so that we afford them the
opportunity to come to talk to us in Parliament.

In this regard, our choice of the Greater Sekhukhune District Municipality
was informed by the fact that 97% of the people in the district live in
rural areas. Poor service delivery in that area was confirmed by the recent
report of the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
on the delivery of basic services. The report shows that the level of
delivery of basic services in that province is at 15%. You can imagine;
that’s what the report says!

That’s where we have got to concentrate our efforts. That’s where our
efforts have to be, all of us as public representatives, and we must make
sure that we assist those structures that deliver services. You and I don’t
deliver services because we don’t have the money. But you and I give or
allocate the money to government to deliver services. That’s why we’ve got
to come back and account for the money used.

The workshop which was held on 10 August 2010 – and I’m happy the provinces
were there — painted the picture on how the provinces spend their monies
and how their municipalities are actually co-operating with the Auditor-
General on money expenditure. Another workshop will be held in October to
look at the expenditure trends in all the provinces so that we give you
information that you can basically use on the ground to deal with those
issues.

This is a true reflection of the effect of the pre-1994 policies and laws
that we have passed to assist those small communities on the ground.
Unfortunately, reversing such a negative legacy will take longer than we
would like. But we have to move with speed to do that.

Members will be aware that the visit to Limpopo, under the NCOP “Taking
Parliament to the People” programme, was the first since we assessed the
impact of this programme and strengthened it. Evidence of this is that we
started engaging with service delivery challenges in the area long before
our visit in March. This gave us an opportunity to engage the executive in
the period leading up to the visit.

The results of this were that some interventions were made even before our
visit. We want to strengthen the programme by improving on this approach
because we see that it has the potential to instil confidence in the people
that indeed we are taking the issues they are raising very seriously.

During the visit, as you know, people raised a number of issues, which are
captured in detail in the report that we are considering today. These
issues, to mention just a few, include the backlogs in service delivery,
the difficulty for local communities in accessing jobs, the shortage of
water and lack of sanitation, backlogs in the land claims, poor road
conditions, etc.

As you will recall, I committed myself to returning to the province in May
to meet the leadership there to put up the small plan so that when you go
there as committees, you will have a plan that you can follow; not just at
the national level, but also at the council and provincial levels. We’ve
not yet held that meeting because of the commitment of the leadership in
the province. However, we have all agreed that early next month we will be
in a position to put up that plan so that we can all work together and make
sure that service delivery takes place as we want.

I am happy to inform you that, actually, the work has been started in that
area of Sekhukhuneland. Since we left there, there is what we call the true
reflection of our work that follows after we have left. For example, the
construction of the Sekhukhune one-stop development centres in Schoonoord,
Mphanama, Saaiplaas and Mohlaletsi have already commenced.

Addressing the issue of houses that are of poor quality has also commenced
in that area. There is 90% progress in the construction of the Madibeng
dairy. What I have done in the meantime is to send officials to go and
check some of the projects that we visited. There is also progress with
regard to road construction and maintenance, and some of the mines have
already started with the social investment initiatives they had promised.

Inevitably, there are still many challenges that are facing the province
and the district as regards attending to the needs of the people. This
requires that we work together and see how, as this House, we can assist by
facilitating the resolution of all service delivery challenges.

I am happy that a delegation led by the House Chairperson for Committees
and Oversight, hon Tau, with counterparts from the province and district
and everybody including the local municipalities, is planning to visit the
area soon. The plan is already there and it will take place very soon, and
they will report on some of the things when they come back. This will help
us to bolster our follow-up mechanism that we agreed on in this House.

Oversight does not only entail identifying problematic areas, it also
entails making the process of delivering services by government easier. I
have noticed on many occasions that by merely providing space for the three
spheres of government to come together to raise issues and find solutions,
we succeed in facilitating the unlocking of service delivery bottlenecks.

Further, the Constitution states in section 154(1) that the national and
provincial governments, by legislative and other measures, must support and
strengthen the capacity of municipalities to manage their own affairs, to
execute their powers and to perform their functions.

Now, that’s where all of you, together with me, play a vital role in making
sure that these other two spheres assist the third sphere of government
with respect to service delivery. For that reason, the NCOP has the
responsibility to ensure that the local government sphere is supported. It
is within this context that we would like to work with the different
spheres to facilitate co-operation in the manner in which government
responds to the needs of our people.

Where is Mr Mokgobi? Thank you that you are here. The reason why I touched
on Maluti-a-Phofung in Qwaqwa maabane [yesterday] is that that municipality
is also under section 139 as I speak. We are not going to leave the
committee to do the work alone.

From the senior level, where I am, a delegation will also assist you to go
and sit down with the senior politicians there and discuss the issues and
find out what has been done about the issues mentioned under section 139
interventions. I had a very wonderful discussion with the senior
politicians there and they have already put plans in place. We are going to
monitor those plans and make sure that they come out of section 139 very
quickly. By the way, I am very impressed by the work that you are doing in
terms of the municipalities. Wherever I go, people tell me about the work
that you are doing and I hope you can continue doing that. [Applause.]

In presenting the report of the NCOP’s visit to Limpopo for a debate, I
must thank all members who participated in the programme. At times,
conditions were not easy for you, particularly in Sekhukhuneland. For some
of you it was your first time to climb those mountains, deal with bad roads
and all those things. But I am happy that you have seen that the people who
elected you to come here live in such conditions. I hope you will represent
them and raise their voice all the time when we are in these Houses. I will
repeat again that the conditions were not easy, but these are the
conditions that our people are facing every day, which, unfortunately, we
have to improve. That is our job to do.

We will always welcome inputs from you, hon members, on how we can make
sure that the programme continues to improve on a day-to-day basis so that
our people can benefit from this programme. I thank you very much. I
present the report to you. [Applause.]

Mr R A LEES: Sihlalo ngiyathemba ukuthi nami uzongipha isikhathi
esingaphezu kwaleso esibekwe ngokomthetho. [Chairperson, I hope you will
also give me more time than is applicable by law.]

Madam Deputy Chairperson, “Taking Parliament to the People” during March
2010 was an event where there was nothing to celebrate. Nothing enabled us
to say what wonderful progress we have made to undo the injustices of
apartheid. If anything, our people in Limpopo suffer more from poverty and
are more disadvantaged today than ever before. The report which is before
us today is an indictment on the failure of government on service delivery
over the past 16 years. Throughout the report, I recorded the failures of
all spheres of government in the Greater Sekhukhune District Municipality.

People were literally in tears as they told Parliament about the lack of
basic services; corruption; maladministration; pipes with no water, years
after they were installed; schools with no roofs; schools with very few
teachers; schools with underqualified or unqualified teachers; schools with
452 learners who share 250 desks; schools with ablution blocks built years
before but never finished; hundreds of hectares of valuable arable and
developed land lying idle because of community disputes and dismal support
from state departments; a lack of clinics; and traditional leaders who only
look after their own interests.

The unemployment rate in that district is a staggering 69,4%, yet the ANC
has still not implemented the wage subsidy for school-leavers, which the
Minister of Finance announced some six months ago. This community is
desperate to benefit from this policy that the DA has championed for many
years. However, the ANC is held to ransom by its partner, Cosatu.
[Interjections.]

During the Limpopo Parliament, the various government speakers rolled out
the usual platitudes and promises. The people present saw through this,
and, indeed, they gave little or no applause for the repeated promises from
government speakers. Contrast this very reserved response to government
speakers — including the Deputy President — with the roars of applause
given to hon Harris and hon Bloem when they addressed the House.
[Interjections.]

There is clearly a groundswell of support for an alternative government
that will meet the needs of our desperate people. While the Limpopo
government arrogantly ignores its citizens, it certainly knows how to treat
MPs well. The ANC regime in Limpopo shows the signs of a shell state with
the arrogant trappings of a government, like titles, blue lights and lavish
dinners, but without service delivery. [Interjections.]

Despite the passage of four months since we took Parliament to Limpopo, the
hon Chair informs us that the meeting scheduled for May has still not
happened. I have little doubt that there has been little or no firm
delivery on the promises made.

The DA supports the principles and directives of the Constitution, which
dictates that Parliament must go to the people. However, we certainly do
not support it as a smokescreen to bluff our people. You cannot promise
people attention to their service delivery needs if you do not record those
needs properly in detail, as well as ensure that they are followed up
properly.

The proposed return visit is simply not enough. What is required is a real
commitment from all spheres of government and officials to deal swiftly and
thoroughly with the problems identified and the promises made. If the
promises made are unachievable, then the people must be told this. It is
irresponsible and dishonest to make promises which are patently
unachievable.

The ANC cannot divert attention from the cries of the people by playing the
apartheid card yet again. For the sake of our people, the ANC must accept
responsibility for the service delivery failure and for the enrichment of
well-based ANC cadres and cronies. The ANC should be asking for forgiveness
rather than trying to muzzle its opponents and the press with apartheid-
type censorship laws. As the writer in yesterday’s Business Day wrote:
“Ordinary people can see and smell the failures of the postapartheid
state.”

The people have clearly lost hope in the ANC government and are ready to
place their hopes in the hands of an alternative government — a government
which is committed to service delivery, even where the ANC has failed; a DA-
led government to create an open-opportunity society for all the people. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Deputy Chair, one thing about the ANC is that it is not so
desperate that it would take a dying party to come and join it.
[Interjections.] I just want to say to the hon Lees that we can see the
desperation that you are daydreaming. I don’t think the ANC wants to wake
you from your daydream. Hon Watson was daydreaming as well.

Mining is one of the leading South African industries in sustaining
communities. The mining houses are as dependant on the communities as the
communities are on them. They understand that growth can only be maintained
by uplifting and empowering the communities that support them. These issues
must pave the way towards long-term sustainability and success of the
communities and mining houses.

Historically, mining houses have always been important contributors to the
country’s gross domestic product, GDP, and growth in the communities that
they serve by providing employment and, very often, roads and schools. They
are supposed to do all of this and more to make a sustainable impact on the
future of these communities and South Africa as a whole, reaching far
beyond the world of mining and its direct employees.

While it has become a South African franchise for adversarial groupings to
find common ground for mutual benefit, this has been one of the initiatives
of the NCOP during “Taking Parliament to the People”. The programme was
aimed at ensuring that our people benefit from our national wealth and
resources.

On the said programme and the prior visits that we have undertaken, we
heard the cries of the communities with regard to the mining houses not
fulfilling their obligations which they have set out in their mineral
rights applications and with regard to the social and labour
responsibilities towards the communities.

Recently, a joint declaration between the ANC-led South African government
— hon Lees — labour unions big and small mining businesses has clinched a
historic 13-commitment accord to grow and transform South Africa’s still
well-endowed mining industry. This is a joint mining declaration which the
Minister of Mineral Resources observes as a very important first step in
the right direction.

A few of the commitments which I want to mention are sustainable
development; acknowledging the importance of balancing economic benefits
with social and environmental concerns without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their needs; supporting local beneficiation in
order to unlock the intrinsic value of South Africa’s minerals — that is
what the ANC government does, hon Lees — considering the establishment of
the national beneficiation agency to drive downstream, upstream and side-
stream beneficiation, as well as all industries associated with mining; and
enlisting the support of strategic international partners to facilitate
skills and technology transfer for the benefit of local beneficiation.

Recognising that mining communities form an integral part of mining
development, the parties have committed to developing guidelines and
adhering to community consultation processes, developing a partnership
approach towards mine community development and considering the
establishment of regional social development funds for effective
implementation of social and labour plans. You see, hon Lees, the ANC
listens and acts, not like the DA, which doesn’t have any alternative for
that.

During our site visits, we witnessed that mine communities include both the
surrounding mine host communities and major labour-sending areas, and that
mining operations are in most cases located in remote areas often with less
than salubrious facilities for the workforce. Realising that equity
ownership provides an effective means of incorporating historically
disadvantaged South Africans into the mainstream economy, ownership can
afford historically disadvantaged South Africans an opportunity to
influence the direction of the mining business in their area.

The Select Committee on Economic Development will vigorously embark on
assisting the communities, as part of our oversight, in monitoring the
mining houses’ commitments to reach a minimum target of 26% ownership by
2014 to enable meaningful economic participation of historically
disadvantaged South Africans, which includes black economic empowerment,
BEE, transactions being concluded with clearly identifiable beneficiaries
in the form of BEE entrepreneurs – hon Watson — workers and communities;
ensuring that some of the cash flow accrues to the BEE partner throughout
the term of the investment, barring any unfavourable market conditions;
ensuring that BEEs have full shareholder rights such as being entitled to
full participation at annual general meetings and exercising of voting
rights; and ensuring ownership vesting within the agreed timeframes of the
BEE structure, taking into account the prevailing market conditions.

In conclusion, South Africa is a land endowed with incredible
possibilities, and through the collaborative efforts of all relevant
stakeholders, it is contended that much more can be done for our
communities. I thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chair, on a point of order: It is a little late, Madam.
I was making a point of order on the speech that hon Adams was delivering.
It had everything to do with the Department of Mineral Resources and
nothing to do with “Taking Parliament to the People”. I suggest that it be
scratched from the record. [Laughter.]

Mr Z MLENZANA: Chairperson, I don’t want us to be confused. I am referring
to those of us who were never part of the triple-N or the National Party,
when they fight about their own things and then bring them to this august
House. [Laughter.]

Cope appreciated the warm welcome by the community of greater
Sekhukhuneland despite poor and nondelivery of services. Cope agrees with
the analysis reflected in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee
Reports, ATCs. If one looks at both education and health issues, there is
nothing to indicate that these are the two priorities of the government of
the day. Here one talks of insufficient clinics; a shortage of doctors and
medicine; poor or no school infrastructure; education officials who do not
support schools that require support; low or totally no morale among
teachers; and no co-operation from parents.

Furthermore, we fully agree that the fraud and corruption that is mentioned
in the ATCs is endemic in that province. Hence we found poor-quality
infrastructure and many projects left unfinished, some not done, while the
contractors responsible were paid in full. One wonders what informs this
push for the nationalisation of mines only in that particular province. Is
it not informed or driven by personal interests?

Furthermore, the amount of money that Parliament committed to that
particular programme demands that the NCOP should go back to Limpopo. I
fully support the hon Chairperson of this House when he said that we should
go back to Limpopo, to the same sites we visited before, for a follow-up
programme. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, Cope is warning the government of the day. I always insist
on referring to “the government of the day” as it should be borne in mind
that this government won’t be here forever. It is the government of the
day.

Let us tell you, the electorate is always sober and watching with interest.
[Interjections.] So, they should not be taken for granted. If you consider
the massive walkout on that day, 26 March 2010, it was a clear indication
that people are tired of empty promises and should no longer be taken for
granted. You said people were hungry when, in fact, they were tired of
hearing promise after promise. So they decided to walk out and leave you.
[Interjections.] The only person in that big tent who made sense to the
people of that district was hon Bloem. That’s why he had a standing
ovation, after which people felt that all was said and done. I thank you.

Mr E S MAAKE (Limpopo): Hon House Chairperson, I firstly would want to
remind members of Cope that when this House arrived in Sekhukhune, the
people stood to welcome members of the ANC. Secondly, in Limpopo, the
majority has always voted for the ANC. Thirdly, you should also remember
that the people of Limpopo have been engaged in the struggle for the
liberation of South Africa.

Fourthly, I also want to remind members of Cope that there is no endemic
fraud and corruption in Limpopo as they do not have any evidence thereof.
The only time we learned about fraud and corruption was when the
constituency money of this particular Parliament was taken to newspapers by
the leadership of Cope. Even today they are still fighting over that.

We must indicate to the DA that the tears they were crying are crocodile
tears in the sense that we are very much aware that we have been put under
oppression for decades by the same people who are now today pretending to
be divine people.

On the question of land, we are saying that we have been subjected to 13%
landownership over time, and that the DA cannot talk about our chiefs and
kings, as they beheaded some of our kings, including Kgosi Makhoba, King
Bambatha, Sekhukhune himself ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon member, there is a point of order;
can you take it?
Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: The speaker at the podium
said that the DA beheaded some of their leaders. That is a fallacy and a
lie, and he must withdraw it.

Mr E S MAAKE (Limpopo): I am not going to withdraw, but I’m going to
continue and indicate that apartheid was declared a crime against humanity
by the UN, and that the DA cannot proudly come and stand today to say
apartheid was a better ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon member, are you confirming that you
are saying the DA beheaded those people? Are you reiterating that the DA
beheaded those people?

Mr E S MAAKE (Limpopo): I am indicating that the apartheid regime, in which
the DA participated, was part of that process.

Mr D A WORTH: Hon Chairperson, on a point of order: The DA was never a part
of the apartheid government. I was never a part of it and, therefore, I ask
... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, order! May I make a ruling
on this particular matter? Of course it will be misleading to say the DA
was part of the apartheid government or Parliament. The Democratic Party
was part of the apartheid ... [Interjections.]

Hon members, order! The Democratic Party was part of the apartheid
Parliament; therefore, hon member, will you withdraw the word “DA” and, if
I may advise, instead say “the Democratic Party”?

Mr E S MAAKE (Limpopo): I am withdrawing but amending that the Democratic
Party was part of the process ... [Applause.] ... and that those members of
the DA today were also members of the Democratic Party that participated
...

Mr A WATSON: Will the speaker take a question? He is so brave ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, the member is asking me
whether the speaker is prepared to take a question. It is therefore my
responsibility to confer with the speaker whether he is prepared to take a
question.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Are you prepared to take a question,
hon member?

Mr E S MAAKE (Limpopo): No, I am not prepared, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): The member is not prepared. Please
proceed, hon member.

Mr E S MAAKE: Thank you, Chair. It seems as if there is a very serious
issue about my time. However, I must indicate that during the 1976
uprisings around Bantu education, our students were killed by the then
apartheid regime. I don’t believe that certain leaders can today attempt to
say that they are talking on behalf of the students in our area.

True to the clarion call by the people of South Africa who gathered in
Kliptown, Soweto, in 1955, that the people shall govern, the NCOP, the
Limpopo provincial legislature and Limpopo municipalities gathered at
Tubatse in the Sekhukhune area from 23 to 26 March 2010. This gathering
culminated in serious interactions with the ordinary masses of our people
under the theme: “Taking Parliament to the People.”

We are confident in Limpopo that, had the warrior-king, King Sekhukhune,
been around during this particular event, he would have retorted that the
blood and sweat spilt by his people in their uprising against their
colonial masters was not in vain. It was at this event that we witnessed
the people’s power and people’s government in motion. The people are indeed
in governance in the Republic. Our people have been voting and have been
voted into governance in this country, our beloved Republic of South
Africa, which is presently under the able leadership of President Jacob
Zuma of the ANC.

We are all aware that as we say that the people shall govern, the statement
in itself bestows rights and obligations upon us all. More importantly, it
brings with it the right to vote and the right to be voted into office.
This brings with it the right of choice and the right to be chosen.

Unmistakably, the people of South Africa in general, and those of Limpopo
in particular, have chosen and voted the ANC to be the ruling party of this
country. We are confident that, through our deeds, this trend of choice
shall continue whenever elections are called in this country, despite
lesbian marriages which are being witnessed. [Interjections.]

We are prompted to say that the democratic dispensation in South Africa is
very sweet and progressive, hence the kind of choices in relation to
marriages, lest we witness domestic violence and the abuse of one partner
by the other.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: I think the reference to
lesbian marriages should be withdrawn. It is totally unparliamentary, and I
do not see its relevance in the context of Taking Parliament to the People.
I ask that you rule on that.

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: House Chair, the member who is at the podium never
referred to any person. He just referred to the marriage so he is not out
of order. Thank you.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Let me put it this way: If the member
is still unsatisfied, I think we can check with Hansard and maybe give a
ruling at the next sitting of the House in reference to the use of the word
“lesbian”.

Mr E S MAAKE (Limpopo): Hon House Chairperson, Africans in this country
have been subjected to degradation that has spanned centuries and this has
had negative impacts on our people, even to this day. The then government
turned us into owls. By that I mean that we have been turned into nocturnal
animals. Thanks to the government of the ANC, we are today witnessing
communities that have electricity. We are saying this well aware that we
have not as yet arrived in this regard, but we have drawn up a realistic
programme that is achievable. While our people continue to complain about
electricity, we believe that in the end this will be a complaint of the
past.

One of the most important aspects and challenges facing our country is
economic development. In Sekhukhune this challenge faces us in the wake of
the emergence of platinum mining after the discovery of large tracks of
platinum. This development is a good indicator for all South Africans.

On the other hand, we cannot continue to see our people suffering whilst
they are witnessing tons and tons of riches extracted from their soil for
the benefit of the few. It is high time that, as South Africans, we balance
the interests of our communities with the interests of the few.

We have had the opportunity to revisit the area of Sekhukhune and, in
particular, the Leolo Mountains, where it was indicated during the Taking
Parliament to the People visit that mothers die in community hands because
the roads are not navigable and people cannot access health facilities such
as ambulances. The community spoke the truth as the Mercedes Benz Vito, our
allocated transport, could not ascend the mountains and we had to exercise
our muscles going up the mountain to witness first-hand what is happening
there.

Upon reaching the area, we found that the only visible marks of our
government in the area are some RDP houses. The schools that are found in
the area are dilapidated, the clinic is a tin house donated by community
individuals, and the paypoint is a kraal which is the result of a community
initiative.

We are therefore appealing to the national government to ensure that we
turn this situation around as soon as possible. Since we have confidence in
the ANC, we are thanking you in advance for ensuring that the plan is
carried out.

Jane Furse in Makhuduthamaga must, as a matter of urgency, be turned into a
rural development node. The area has the potential to develop into one of
the first rural towns under the democratic dispensation.
“The doors of learning and culture shall be opened.” Sekhukhune needs a
university and the community is continually asking for one. Let us turn
this into a reality so that we can turn our people there into better
persons, equipped with the knowledge to manage and produce their own
wealth.

As Limpopo, we therefore move for the adoption of the report on the “Taking
Parliament to the People” programme undertaken in Limpopo from 23 to 26
March 2010. I thank you. [Applause.]

Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon members, the IFP supports the
initiative of Taking Parliament to the People. It is very important that
South Africans are able to engage on all matters that they are confronted
with in their cities, towns, and rural areas on a daily basis. As
Parliament, we are bound to make sure that we listen to the voices of the
people out there.

I-IFP ikweseka ngokuphelele ukuhanjiswa kwePhalamende kubantu, ngoba
noMthethosisekelo wezwe uyakubalula ukuthi njengezisebenzi zomphakathi,
kufanele lokhu kwenzeke sihambe siye kubona abantu.

Kodwa-ke, Mhlonishwa Sihlalo, uMnu Mahlangu, ukhuluma into enkulu uma
ekhuluma ngokuthi wonke amazinga kahulumeni kufanele abambisane. Kuyisicelo
sami esikhulu njengendoda yakwaZulu, uMuntukaphiwana Zulu, uMbongiseni
uMilton, ukuba ukubhekisise kahle ukuthi ezifundazweni zethu
eziyisishiyagalolunye, kukhona ukubukela phansi omasipala ngendlela
engakaze ibonwe okudala ukuthi kube nokuncintisana, kanti akukho
ukuncintisana emnyangweni kahulumeni.

Ngokufunda kwami uMthethosisekelo wezwe, angazi noma ngisuke ngiwubhekise
phansi yini, umhlonishwa uSomlomo WoMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe
noweNdlu kaZwelonke, basezingeni elilinganayo. Isicelo sami sisodwa-ke
mhlonishwa kuyofanele ukuthi niyihlalele phansi le ndaba niyixoxe.

Indlu Yesishayamthetho Sikazwelonke iyodwa ayisilo iPhalamende, naleNdlu
Yomkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ayisilo iPhalamende iyodwa,
siyiphalamende sihlangene sisonke. Bese nifundisana kahle ukuthi amandla
okusebenza nabelana kanjani, ngoba leNdlu ingaphezu kwazo zonke izindlu
eNingizumu Afrika uma ngibuka, ngoba zonke izifundazwe zimelwe la. Izindaba
ziqala la ngaphambi kokuba ziyi laphaya kobhuti abadala.

Ngaleyo ndlela kufanele nihlale phansi nibonisane ukuthi lezo zinto
ningazenza kanjani, ngoba ukuthatha iPhalamende niliyise kubantu, yilapho
abantu bezokwazi khona ukubeka izimvo zabo, banihlabe njengamalungu
ephalamende bathi anisebenzi, uma kunjalo. Nikwazi ukubona ukuthi
nizokwenzanjani ukuze kube nenqubekela phambili. Njengabantu
ababegqilazekile mhlonishwa, kufanele abantu bakithi bazuze ezweni lethu.
Kuwo wonke amaqembu ezepolitiki. Ngiyazi ukuthi intando yeningi ithi
kufanele kuphikiswane ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)
[The IFP fully supports the initiative of Taking Parliament to the People,
because even the country’s Constitution states that we must do this as
public servants. We need to go to the people.

However, hon Chairperson, Mr Mahlangu says all the spheres of government
must work together. It is my humble request as Mr Muntukaphiwana Mbongiseni
Milton Zulu that you pay the same amount of attention to all our nine
provinces. The municipalities are looked down upon like never before, which
leads to competition, whereas there is no competition between government
departments.

When I read the Constitution — I don’t know if I read it facing down — the
hon Speaker of the National Council of Provinces and the Speaker of the
National Assembly are at the same level. My only request, hon member, is
that you must sit down and discuss this matter.

The House of the National Assembly alone is not Parliament, and the House
of the National Council of Provinces alone is not Parliament either;
together we make Parliament. You must also influence each other on how to
separate and share powers, because I think this House is above all the
Houses in South Africa, because all the provinces are represented here. The
discussion starts here, after which it is forwarded to the big brothers.

In that way, you must sit down and discuss how you are going to do things,
because the Taking Parliament to the People programme is where people can
have their say, criticising you as the Members of Parliament by, for
example, saying that you do not deliver, if that is the case. So that you
can see what you need to do so that there can be some progress. We were
oppressed. Our people from all political parties must benefit in our
country. I know that democracy means that there must be debates ...]

... debating is part of a democratic process ...

... kodwa ukuphikisana kwethu makube ngokwakhayo. Abantu bakithi balambile,
bacindezelwa ubandlululo iminyaka, baboshwa, baba yizigqila zombusazwe,
kodwa akumele sithi akufanele iPhalamende lihambele kubantu, ngoba kufanele
sakhe thina iphrojekthi yethu, ibe iphrojekthi eqondile kwazeke ukuthi,
sizokwenzanjani ukufeza izidingo zabantu, sazi ukuthi siyaqala ukuba
kuhulumeni, kule minyaka engu 16 nje sikuhulumeni, kufanele sibone ukuthi
sizokwenza njani ukufundisisa umthetho sibe nemihlangano yokucobelela
ulwazi, ukuze sikwazi ukubheka izinto zakithi. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... but our debates must be constructive. Our people are hungry, they were
oppressed by apartheid for years; they were arrested and became political
slaves. We must not say that Parliament must not be taken to the people,
because we have to make our project a straightforward one so that we know
what needs to be done to take care of people’s needs. We must know that we
are in government for the first time. In these 16 years in government we
must know what to do to understand the law and have workshops, so that we
are able to attend to our duties. Thank you.]

Mna T A MASHAMAITE: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, ke leboga go fiwa sebaka se
sa gore le nna ke tšee karolo dipoledišanong tša pego ya Taking Parliament
to the People. Re tla be re šola ge re ka re re kgethilwe ke batho ra se ye
go bona.

Eupša pele ke tsena polelong ya ka - tše ntši di šetše di boletšwe - ke
rata go laetša gore ga re a swanela gore ge re etla mo pele mo re tle go
bolela le setšhaba ka mo Ngwakong ra apara matlalo a dinku goba a dinkwe
mola re le dipudi. Re swanetše go bolela dinnete. Leloko le lengwe le
boletše mo gore mmušo wa ANC o thwetše barutiši bao ba sa rutegago; bao ba
sa tsebego go ruta bana dikolong. Setatamente se ga se sa maleba ebile ga
se sa nnete. Se ke go foraforetša Ngwako wo le setšhaba. Ga ke kgolwe gore
go na le mmušo wo o lego gona wa go tšea gabotse go swana le wa ANC wo o ka
kgonago go thwala batho bao ba sa kgonego go ruta bana. [Tšhwahlelo.]
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Hon Chairperson, thank you for affording me the
opportunity to take part in the debate about the report on the Taking
Parliament to the People programme. It will be unfair to the people who
elected us if we do not go visit them.

A lot has been said already but let me indicate that we must not claim to
be smart when we speak in the House. We have to tell the facts. One of the
members indicated that the ANC government employed unqualified teachers who
are not even competent in teaching. This statement is not true and again
the member lied to both the House and the gallery. I do not believe that
the ANC government can employ teachers who are not competent in teaching.
[Interjections.]]

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, on a point of order: If the interpretation is
correct, the member is accusing another member of lying to the House. He
did not specify which member. So, I would like to ask you to rule on
whether it is parliamentary to accuse another member of lying. And, if he
did accuse him of that, which member was he referring to?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Which member did he accuse of lying?

Mr T D HARRIS: He said another member in this debate said these things and
that he was lying.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I didn’t pick that up. It’s going to be
difficult if you say that he said “a member” without any specific reference
to a particular member. [Interjections.]

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, he is speaking about a member and he said that member
is lying. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Can I satisfy myself and refer to
Hansard? We can then make a ruling after that because I didn’t pick it up.

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Ke a leboga, Morena Modulasetulo. Ke akanya gore ntlha
ya ka ke e boletše gomme e kwagetše.

Ke boela tabeng ye e boletšwego ke Modulasetulo gore go ya ga rena Ga-
Sekhukhune go šetše go laetša go tliša dikenywa ka ge go šetše go na le
tšeo di dirwago ka ga dillo tšeo di tšweleditšwego ke batho mabapi le
ditirelo. Ke gopola gore lenaneo le la Taking Parliament to the People le
bohlokwa kudu ka moo e lego gore re swanetše go le tiiša le go le
kaonafatša gore le tle le kgone go tlišetša batho ba gaborena ditirelo ka
mo go nyakegago ka gona.

Modulasetulo o boletše mo gore go šetše go dirilwe mananeo a mangwe a
thušo. Re leboga mananeo ao, le ge e le gore pego ka ga wona ga se ešo e
tle semmušo mo Ngwakong.

Ke nnete gore naga ya Ga-Sekhukhune ke naga yeo e nago le bodiidi - bodiidi
bjo bo bonagalago le ge o sepela gona. Mmušo le Palamente di swanetše go
bona gore di fokotša bodiidi bjo - maloko a mangwe a šetše a boletše ka ga
se. Eupša ke rata go šupetša gore mogongwe nako ye re e fago lenaneo le la
Taking Parliament to the People ga e a lekana gore batho ba ka bolela dilo
tšeo di ba tshwenyago mabapi le ditirelo ka moka ga tšona. Mogongwe re ka
oketša matšatši a lona gomme la ba matšatši a mahlano a go tlala. Ke bolela
se ka lebaka la gore ke bone re kopana le batho matšatšing a mararo – go
tloga ka di 23 go fihla ka di 26. Nako ye ke ye nnyane kudu kudu bathong ba
gaborena go ya ka nna. Ke gopola gore re lebelele gore na re ka se kgone go
oketša nako ye. Se se tla fa le batho bao ba šomago sebaka sa go ba gona
lenaneong le ka gore le bona ba na le mathata. Bona ba tla be ba sa ile
mešomong ge re bolela le batho mosegare. Ke kgopela gore re e le lebedišiše
taba ye ya go okeletša batho ba gaborena nako.

Bjalo ka ge ke šetše ke boletše, lenaneo le le swanetše go tšwela pele gore
setšhaba se humane monyetla wa go bolela le baemedi ba sona go laetša
matshwenyego a sona mabapi le ditirelo gore maphelo a sona a kaonafale. Go
tšea Palamente gomme ra e iša bathong go kopanya dikgoro ka moka tša mmušo
go tee gore di tlo kwa batho gore ba lla ka ditirelo tša mohuta mang. Se
sengwe seo ke bonego se ntshwenya ke gore o tla humana kgoro e bolela gore
ga e na ditekanyetšo tša selo se itšego gomme e ka se sa kgona go se dira
selo seo. Ka mantšu a mangwe, go iša ga rena Palamente bathong go ba gona
morago ga ge ditekanyetšo di šetše di fetile. Ka gona, Bomokhuduthamaga
goba dikgoro di na le go khuta ka taba ya gore ga go na ditekanyetšo tša
selo se itšego. Eupša o humana e le gore batho ba bolela ka selo seo se ba
sokotšago gomme ba se nyaka ka yona nako yeo. Re swanetše re e lebelele
taba ye ya gore dikgoro di tšhirele ka taba ya gore ga go na tšhelete ya go
dira dilo tše itšego.

Sa mafelelo se ke ratago go se bolela ke gore ke nnete re swanetše go boela
Ga-Sekhukhune bjalo ka dikomiti tša Palamente. Re swanetše go boela gore
batho ba Ga-Sekhukhune ba se feletše go re bona letšatšing lela re išitše
Palamente go bona. Re swanetše go boela go bona re yo dira ditekolo.

Ke šikinya gore Ngwako wo o amogele pego ye gore re tle re kgone go šoma ka
yona go lekola gore na mafapha a šomela ditšhaba tša gaborena.

Ke a leboga [Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Thank you, hon Chairperson. I think I presented my
facts clearly.

I am back to the statement made by the Chairperson about our oversight
visit to Ga-Sekhukhune. The oversight visit is already bearing fruit
because the people’s concerns on service delivery are already being
responded to. The programme of Taking Parliament to the People is very
important. We have to enhance it so that it benefits the people in terms of
service delivery.

The Chairperson indicated that there are other support programmes in place.
We appreciate that, even though a report on those programmes has not yet
been formally brought to the House.

It is true that Ga-Sekhukhune has been hard hit by poverty. The government,
together with Parliament, have to intervene to reduce poverty in that area
- this has already been said by other members. I would like to indicate
that the total number of days allocated for the programme of Taking
Parliament to the People is not enough for people to state all their
concerns. We can maybe increase the number of days to five because we only
met with the people from 23-26 March. I suggest that we look into this
because people who are working will also be accommodated. We usually talk
to the people during the day when the workers are at their respective
workplaces.

This programme must be continued for the public to get a chance to voice
their concerns with regard to service delivery in order to improve their
lives. The Taking Parliament to the People programme enables the different
government departments to meet and listen to people’s concerns. I sometimes
get disturbed when the government department indicates that there is no
budget for something and therefore that very thing will not be done. We
take Parliament to the people after budget allocations. Government
departments have a tendency of using a lack of budget as an excuse for not
delivering on services that are urgently needed by the people. This matter
needs serious attention.

Lastly, we have to organise another oversight visit to Ga-Sekhukhune. I
suggest that the House accepts this report so that we can use it to
evaluate delivery by government departments.

Thank you. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, it has been brought to my
attention that there seems to be a problem with the interpreting system,
which could have also led to some misinterpretation or which can lead to
misinterpretation of what members are saying. So, just bear with the
system. I think they are working on it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): House Chairperson, hon
M J Mahlangu, and all hon members, our visit to the Greater Sekhukhune
District Municipality took place within a particular context. Apart from
pursuing our objectives for this term of Parliament, there was a strong
human rights element, given that this visit took place in March.

Interestingly, International Women’s Day falls on 8 March, while our
National Women’s Day falls on 9 August, the month we chose for the
consideration of this report. In line with the struggle for women’s rights,
I have picked up one particular concern in the report that relates to
women, children and people with disabilities.

The report notes that the needs of these groups are often not met,
especially in relation to jobs, education, housing and access to transport,
as well as access to buildings by people with disabilities. It states that
women are vulnerable to violence, human trafficking and harmful cultural
practices such as ukuthwala, which is the kidnapping of young women –
girls, to be specific – who are forced into marriages, often with much
older men.

The questions that we must ask ourselves are: How can this happen in the
age of human rights? What can we do, especially in this Women’s Month, to
ensure that these violations of human rights and women’s rights are
stopped? Our commitment to addressing these challenges is not in question.
In fact, we have a progressive Constitution that enshrines the rights of
all groups in society. Perhaps the challenge we must tackle is the pace at
which we are moving towards addressing them.

As part of our oversight function, we have to ensure that people’s lives
are improved and get better. Our strategic document notes that:
   In the performance of oversight over the above-mentioned areas there is
   a need to look at the impact on vulnerable groups, including women and
   children. Oversight work should take into consideration government’s
   commitments to job creation and the improvement of the living and
   working conditions of the people.

We know that we have inadequate resources to tackle the challenges, but we
need to check, especially through our committees, whether our priorities in
the area of social transformation are in line with our aspirations.

One of the core functions of Parliament is to facilitate public
participation, hence the NCOP embarked on this programme to meet the people
in Limpopo. Public participation is the key to ensuring that government
understands the needs of the people, to make decisions that will meet those
needs in the best way possible. There is no better way to understand the
needs of the people than to go to them to see, feel, listen to and be part
of their daily struggles.

Now that we have engaged in dialogue with the people of Limpopo, the next
logical step is to forge ways to find the desired solutions. The report
makes some recommendations which we must consider as we reflect on the
outcome of this exercise. For example, the report recommends that the NCOP
should support government’s commitment to assist vulnerable groups to
enhance their quality of life through the provision of a full range of
services, including access to transport, bursaries and the inclusive
approach to education which would integrate the needs of those with
disabilities.

The NCOP’s commitment in this regard is not in doubt. We must remember that
the Constitution strategically places us, as the NCOP, within our
intergovernmental relations system. The Constitution states that all
spheres of government – national, provincial and local – have to make it
easy for people to participate in government.

However, government alone cannot build a better life. It is important that
communities and all stakeholders become partners of government. So, it is
us, Parliament, as the voice of the people, who must encourage them to
participate in government programmes and in influencing decisions, as we
have done in Limpopo.

The issues raised by the people of Burgersfort are still indelible in our
minds. And it makes one proud that our democracy is able to promote and
sustain rigorous discussion on serious service delivery challenges in
trying to reconstruct our country. Section 72(1) of the Constitution
provides that the National Council of Provinces must facilitate public
involvement in the legislative and other processes of the Council and its
committees. It must conduct its business in an open manner and hold its
sittings, and those of its committees, in public.

The Taking Parliament to the People programme in Limpopo underscored the
importance of people’s involvement in their own governance. It communicated
a clear message to our people that nothing about them can ever be done
without their presence and full participation. The report itself leaves no
doubt that we have to do a follow-up. This is explicit in some of the
recommendations made in the report, and we have already started engaging
the legislature in Limpopo on the same issues.

Committees that are following up on the various issues raised in the report
must pay particular attention to the integrated development plans, IDPs, of
the various municipalities. I say this because most of the complaints and
issues raised by the people relate to issues that are reflected, in some
way, in the IDP. IDPs are important to us, as we are the overseers of
intergovernmental relations and co-operative governance. They are an
important part of our oversight work, and I am pleading with everybody in
this House that, if we work together, we are bound to overcome quite a lot
of hurdles.

Let us forget about different affiliations when we deal with the very
destitute people in rural areas. Let us tell ourselves that we are part of
the African community, and pledge ourselves to see to it that we pull them
out of those ruts and enable them to live a better life. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: House Chairperson, once more, to respond to
the debate, allow me to start with this quote, which I remembered when
people were debating here. This reminded me of Rev Martin Luther King, Jr.
He said:

   I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of
   former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit
   down together at the table of brotherhood ... I have a dream that my
   four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not
   be judged by the colour of their skin but by the content of their
   character ... I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted,
   every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made
   plain, and the crooked places will be made straight; “and the glory of
   the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.”

That is what Martin Luther King, Jr said and he was addressing thousands of
Americans when he wanted them to be delivered from slavery in the United
States of America in those days, young as he was. I think we are very
fortunate in South Africa that we have achieved the dream that we always
wanted to achieve. We have it, and we are lucky that we did it without
shedding a lot of blood. We did it by ourselves, without actually tearing
each other into pieces although there have been casualties along the way.

What I want to say today is that I, as long as I am in this leadership
position, and other people of the NCOP will commit ourselves to work
tirelessly for the people of South Africa, who have worked with us on the
ground for their benefit and to make their lives much better. In leadership
positions such as we hold, the significant problems we have today cannot be
solved at the same level of thinking as some people created them in the
past. We have to have different thinking today. We need a generation that
can think differently. We need a generation that can channel things
differently. We need a generation that can say: Here are the communities of
South Africa; they are looking to us.

The hope of the Christians is Jesus Christ, that one day they will be in
heaven. The hope of the communities of South Africa are the politicians who
are seated here, that one day they will benefit from what they are doing,
the laws they are making, the service delivery that is taking place; and
nothing else. [Applause.]

Therefore, hon members, we cannot come into the House like this and be
negative all together as MPs and throw the table and say there is nothing
we can do; everything is bad, and everything is above our shoulders, and
all we can do is stand here and lament and cry like small babies and
children, without coming with new thinking, new objectives and goals, that
our people can achieve in this country, South Africa, that we all so love.
I think I should say again that we are blessed.
When you want to improve in this world, never be negative in your life.
When you want to improve this world, change your attitude and associate
yourself with those people who can think better and make life better for
other people. You are not here because you are very important, but you are
here because the people thought you can make their lives better.

That is the reason we are here, and that is why we have to do this job.
Never mind the workload that we have; we have to carry it. Never mind how
heavy it is; we have to carry it until such time as we can say that we have
achieved what we wanted to achieve. We will work for the people of South
Africa, whether they are in KwaZulu-Natal, Free State, North West, Gauteng,
or Mpumalanga. The commitment should be: We will achieve those things;
nothing is above our shoulders.

Therefore, I want to say to you all today that we shouldn’t be lamenting,
but we should come with the problems and stand here and say what it is that
the NCOP can do to change things in terms of co-operative governance, like
Umntwana [Prince] Zulu has said. What can we do to work together? Colour
doesn’t matter in this case. [Applause.] Sexism does not matter in this
case.

When you are hungry, you are hungry. When you are sick, you are sick. When
you have to travel, you need the road. It does not matter who you are. All
those things need us, as politicians, to address them and one day stand
tall and be proud and say that during the term of our service, we have been
in a position to achieve these things. I thank you all for contributing
during this debate, and we will continue to lead and lead and lead until we
achieve the results that we want. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, that concludes the debate.
I shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted or
agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the House. Are all delegation heads present in the House?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In accordance with Rule 71, I shall
first allow provinces the opportunity to make a declaration of vote. Is
there any province that wishes to make a declaration?

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please ... Because
of the problem with the system, I don’t know whether it is working.

An HON MEMBER: It is working.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is it working? I guess by now we know
how the system works. All delegation heads are to insert their cards and to
press number one for their presence and so forth. We now come to the
voting. When I call the name of the province, the delegation head will
press the relevant button to vote.

It would be wise, hon members, in future, to avoid creating confusion for
the presiding officer and for the delegation heads to sit where they should
sit because I am looking at the chairs now - but it is fine. Have all
provinces voted now? You have an opportunity now if by any chance you have
voted wrongly. Voting shall therefore be closed. May I be assisted with the
results?

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report  accordingly  adopted  in  accordance  with   section   65   of   the
Constitution.

Council adjourned at 17:11.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             MONDAY, 7 JUNE 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

           a) Defence Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec
              75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Consolidated General Report of the Auditor-General on Local
        Government Audit Outcomes for 2008-09 [RP 89-2010].

    (b)     Consolidated General Report of the Auditor-General on
        Provincial Audit Outcomes for 2008-09 [RP 74-2010].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     2009 UNICEF South Africa Annual Report.


         Referred to the Select Committee on Women, Children and People with
         Disabilities for consideration.

         Referred to the Select Committee on Social Services for
         consideration.

                            MONDAY, 14 JUNE 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Mineral Resources


          a) Geoscience Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 33014
             of 12 March 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Mining
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Labour

    (1)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service Sector
        Education Training Authority (PSETA) for 2008-2009, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 100-2009].

2. The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

    (1)     Draft Regulations on the participation of municipal staff
        members as candidates for National, Provincial and Local Elections.
National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (1)     Responses of the Minister of Finance to the Report of the
        Select Committee on Appropriations on the Division of Revenue Bill,
        2010 [B 4 - 2010].

        Referred to the Select Committee on Appropriations for
        consideration.

                            MONDAY, 21 JUNE 2010
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2010] – Act No 3 of 2010 (assented to and
         signed by President on 15 June 2010).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Deeds Registries Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister
         of Rural Development and Land Reform.
    (2)    Sectional Titles Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister
         of Rural Development and Land Reform.


    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land
    Reform and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

                            MONDAY, 28 JUNE 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform


          a) Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 13 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33316 of 21 June 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
             Development and Land Reform of the National Assembly, as well
             as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


          b) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 14 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33316 of 21 June 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
             Development and Land Reform of the National Assembly, as well
             as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Annual report of the Judicial Service Commission for the
        financial year ended 30 June 2009.

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Republic of Uganda regarding Co-
        operation and Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement regarding Co-operation and
        Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Republic of Uganda.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Small Enterprise Development Agency
        (SEDA) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (b)     Corporate Plan of the South African Bureau of Standards (SABS)
        for 2010 - 2013.


    (c)     Business Plan and Budget of the National Lotteries Board for
        2010/11 – 2012.


    (d)     Strategic Plan of the National Gambling Board (NGB) for 2010 -
        2013.


    (e)     Strategic Plan of the National Metrology Institute of South
        Africa (NMISA) for 2010 - 2013.


    (f)     Strategic Plan of the National Credit Regulator (NCR) for
        2010/11 - 2015.


    (g)     Strategic Plan of the National Regulator for Compulsory
        Specifications (NRCS) for 2010 - 2013.


    (h)     Corporate Strategic Plan of the Estate Agency Affairs Board of
        South Africa for 2010/11 - 2012/13.
    (i)     Strategic Plan of the National Consumer Tribunal for 2011 -
        2013.


    (j)     Corporate Strategic Plan of the Export Credit Insurance
        Corporation of   South Africa Limited for 2010/11 - 2012/13.


    (k)     Strategic Plan of the South African National Accreditation
        System (SANAS) for 2010/11 - 2012/13 [RP 63-2010].


    (l)     Consolidated Strategic Plan of the National Empowerment Fund
        for 2010/11 – 2012/13 and Business Plan for 2010 - 11.

                             MONDAY, 5 JULY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (1)    Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill, 2010,
         submitted by the Minister of Police.

    (2)    Civilian Secretariat of Police Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Police.
    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Police and the Select Committee
    on Security and Constitutional Development.

                            MONDAY, 12 JULY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Police


          a) Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill [B 15 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 33357 of 5 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Police
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.
          b) Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill [B 16 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 33357 of 5 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Police
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on an investigation into certain
        alleged procurement irregularities at the Department of Water
        Affairs [RP 120-2010].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Draft Regulations on the participation of municipal staff
        members as candidates for National, Provincial and Local Elections.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


                           THURSDAY, 15 JULY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    South African Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Home Affairs.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select
         Committee on Social Services.

    (2)    Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted
         by the Minister of Home Affairs.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select
         Committee on Social Services.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 33356 of 5 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
             Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


          b) Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 33356 of 5 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
             Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


                            FRIDAY, 16 JULY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Higher Education and Training.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and
         Training and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.
    (2)    Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill, 2010,
         submitted by the Minister of Higher Education and Training.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and
         Training and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

    (3)    Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Higher Education and Training.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and
         Training and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Geoscience Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No R. 25 published in Government Gazette No 33254
        dated 28 May 2010: Commencement of the Judicial Service Commission
        Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 20 of 2008).


     b) Proclamation No R. 21 published in Government Gazette No 33190
        dated 14 May 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).
     c) Government Notice No 423 published in Government Gazette No 33208
        dated 21 May 2010: Annexure of certain districts to other districts
        for the duration of the 2010 FIFA World Cup Tournament, in terms of
        the Magistrate’s Courts Act, 1944 (Act No 32 of 1944).


     d) Government Notice No 424 published in Government Gazette No 33209
        dated 21 May 2010: Determination of maximum amount of fine, in
        terms of the Sheriffs Act, 1986 (Act No 90 of 1986).


      e) Government Notice No 356 published in Government Gazette No 33164
         dated 7 May 2010: Regulation on exhumation, reburial or symbolic
         burial of deceased victims, in terms of the Promotion of National
         Unity and Reconciliation Act, 1995 (Act No 34 of 1995).


      f) Government Notice No R.198 published in Government Gazette No 33021
         dated 19 March 2010: Notice in terms of section 31 of the
         Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
         Communication-Related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002):
         Postal Service Providers.


      g) Government Notice No R.250 published in Government Gazette No 33067
         dated 31 March 2010: Regulations relating to children’s courts and
         international child abduction, in terms of the Children’s Act, 2005
         (Act No 38 of 2005): Postal Service Providers.


      h) Government Notice No R.251 published in Government Gazette No 33067
         dated 31 March 2010: Regulations relating to child justice, in
         terms of the Child Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of 2008).
      i) Government Notice No R.252 published in Government Gazette No 33067
         dated 31 March 2010: Directives in terms of section 97(4) of the
         Child Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of 2008).


      j) Government Notice No R.273 published in Government Gazette No 33092
         dated 1 April 2010: Determination of persons or category or class
         of persons competent to conduct the evaluation of criminal capacity
         of a child and the allowances and remuneration, in terms of the
         Child Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of 2008).

   2. The Minister of Finance


      a) Government Notice No 560 published in Government Gazette No 33309
         dated 25 June 2010: Exemption in terms of section 74 of the
         Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


      b) Government Notice No 472 published in Government Gazette No 33241
         dated 4 June 2010: Borrowing powers of water boards listed under
         Schedule 3 Part B of the Act, Public Finance Management Act, 2001
         (Act No 38 of 2001).

      c) Government Notice No 473 published in Government Gazette No 33241
         dated 4 June 2010: Borrowing powers of water boards listed under
         Schedule 3 Part B of the Act, Public Finance Management Act, 2001
         (Act No 38 of 2001).

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs

      a) Employment Equity Report of the Department of Home Affairs for 2008-
         2009, in terms of section 22(2) of the Employment Equity Act, 1998
         (Act No 55 of 1998).

                            MONDAY, 19 JULY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Transport Laws Repeal Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Transport.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport and the Select
         Committee on Public Services.

    (2)    Local Government: Municipal Systems Amendment Bill, 2010,
         submitted by the Minister for Cooperative Governance and
         Traditional Affairs.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and
         Traditional Affairs and the Select Committee on Cooperative
         Governance and Traditional Affairs.

2.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Transport Laws Repeal Bill [B 19 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 33328
             of 2 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


                            TUESDAY, 20 JULY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Calling of Joint Sitting

    CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
    COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
    In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
    South Africa, 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(b) of the Joint Rules of
    Parliament, the President of the Republic of South Africa has called a
    joint sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
    Provinces on Wednesday, 18 August 2010 at 14:00, in order to debate the
    successful hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup.

                           WEDNESDAY, 21 JULY 2010


TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 7 July 2010 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Central African Republic:

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE CENTRAL AFRICAN
        REPUBLIC


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        extended the employment of Seventy (70) South African National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to the Central African Republic
        (CAR), for a service in fulfilment of the international obligations
        of the Republic of South Africa towards the Central African
        Republic (CAR) to assist with capacity building of the CAR Defence
        Force.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996.


        Members of the SANDF were employed to assist the CAR with capacity
        building of the CAR Defence Force. The employment of these members
        expired on 31 March 2010.


        The SANDF’s mission in the CAR is not yet completed. The employment
        of 70 SANDF members is now extended from 01 April 2010 until 31
        March 2011.
        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and wish to request
        that you bring the contents hereof to the attention of the National
        Council of Provinces.


        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA


        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development.

    (b)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 7 July 2010 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the SA National Defence Force for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the Democratic Republic of Congo, viz to train
        the DRC Armed Forces’ (FARDC) Rapid Reaction Force (RRF):

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
        CONGO, TO TRAIN THE DRC ARMED FORCES (FARDC) RAPID REACTION FORCE


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        extended the employment of One Hundred and Twenty (120) South
        African National Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic
        Republic of Congo (DRC), for a service in fulfilment of the
        international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), to train the DRC Armed
        Forces Rapid Reaction Force.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996.


        Members of the SANDF were employed to train the DRC Armed Forces
        Rapid Reaction Forces. The employment of these members expired on
        31 March 2010.
        The SANDF’s mission in the DRC is not yet completed. The employment
        of 120 SANDF members is now extended from 01 April 2010 until 31
        March 2011.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence and wish to request
        that you bring the contents hereof to the attention of the National
        Council of Provinces.


        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA


        Referred to the Select Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
        Development.


                           THURSDAY, 22 JULY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Sectional Titles Schemes Management Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Human Settlements.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements and the
        Select Committee on Public Services.

    (2)    Community Schemes Ombud Service Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Human Settlements.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements and the
         Select Committee on Public Services.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Human Settlements


          a) Sectional Titles Schemes Management Bill [B 20 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 33366 of 9 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Human
             Settlements of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


          b) Community Schemes Ombud Service Bill [B 21 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33366 of 9 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Human
             Settlements of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of maladministration and serious  malpractice involving
        the possibility of fraud and corruption within Indaka Municipality,
        Kwazulu-Natal.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (b)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of maladministration and serious  malpractice involving
        the possibility of fraud and corruption within Mandeni
        Municipality, Kwazulu-Natal.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


                            MONDAY, 26 JULY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Development.


                            TUESDAY, 27 JULY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs


          a) Local Government: Municipal Systems Amendment Bill [B 22 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 33189 of 14 May 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.
     (2)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill [B 23 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33362 of 6 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


        2) The Minister of Higher Education and Training


          a) Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33393 of 19 July 2010.]


          b) Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 33393 of 19 July 2010.]


          c) Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B 26 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 33393 of 19 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Higher
             Education and Training of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Labour


    (1)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service Sector
        Education Training Authority (PSETA) for 2007-2008, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 83-2008].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Mafikeng Local Municipal Council (North
        West).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

                           WEDNESDAY, 28 JULY 2010


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Protocol amending the Convention between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of Ireland for the
        avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion
        with respect to taxes on income and capital gains, with protocol,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol amending the double
        taxation Convention with protocol between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of Ireland.


    (c)     Protocol amending the Convention between the Republic of South
        Africa and the Kingdom of Sweden for the avoidance of double
        taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes
        on income, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol amending the double
        taxation Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Kingdom of Sweden.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1. Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the third quarter
conditional grants spending patterns on Devolution of Property Rate Funds
Grant for the 2009/10 financial year, dated 01 June 2010:

1. Introduction

The Select Committee on Appropriations (the Committee) invited identified
provincial departments of Public Works, who were either under-spending or
over-spending on the Devolution of Property Rate Funds Grant, to come and
make a presentation on their third quarter spending in the 2009/10
financial year. The statistics on spending patterns were published by the
National Treasury in March 2010.

The Committee meeting took place on Friday, 7 May 2010. Meetings were held
at Committee Room S12A in Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.

2. Terms of reference

The public hearings formed part of the Committee’s ongoing interaction with
provinces to monitor their spending patterns on conditional grants
allocated to them. A framework for the grant sets out, among other things,
the purpose of the grant, measurable objectives, conditions, allocation
criteria, and past performance.

Provincial departments of public works were requested to make presentations
on the Devolution of Rate Funds Grant and to take into consideration the
following:
    • Data trends in allocations, transfers and actual expenditure of
      conditional grants of the provincial department;
    • Assessment of provincial department’s monitoring capacity for the
      2009/10 financial year and, indicate under-/over-spending and what
      capacity constraints have impacted on these outcomes;
    • Report whether monthly reports are received from receiving departments
      or municipalities, and if not, what the departments are doing in order
      to ensure compliance with monthly reporting; and
    • Medium-term strategic plans.

The provincial departments of public works of Western Cape, Limpopo,
Eastern Cape, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and Northern Cape were identified and
invited. All provincial departments honoured the invitation.

The National Treasury was invited to brief the Committee on the third
quarter spending by the above-mentioned provincial departments.


3 Presentations

3.1 National Treasury

The National Treasury reported that the adjusted budget for the 2009/10
financial year was R1 486 billion, with a projected outcome of R1.5
billion. The National Treasury added that actual payments as at 31 December
2009 was R841 million or 57 per cent of the adjusted budget. The National
Treasury presented that the budget for this grant was adjusted upwards by
R353.2 million in the 2009/10 financial year. Furthermore, the National
Treasury added that at the end of the third quarter two provinces, Free
State (R20 million) and Western Cape (R80 million), had projected to over-
spent by R100 million. However, the National Treasury warned that over-
spending in schedule 5 grants was not allowed. The National Treasury
further reported that three provinces, namely: Gauteng (R17 million)
Limpopo (R19 million) and Mpumalanga (R9 million), had projected to under-
spent by R45 million.

The National Treasury outlined that provincial departments of Public Works
are responsible for the payment of municipal property rates for all
departments in a province and that the failure to perform such function may
lead to termination or disruption of services such as water and electricity
in schools and hospitals. The National Treasury reported that outcomes for
this grant have deteriorated since the 2008/09 financial year, where under-
spending was approximately R202 million. However, the National Treasury
commented that spending on this grant is highly reliant on the rating and
billing capacities of municipalities. The National Treasury commented that
poor municipal property management, poor billing systems, and late billing
negatively affect the province’s ability to meet its obligations.
Furthermore, the National Treasury said that provinces with former
“homeland” government structures within their jurisdiction are particularly
negatively affected due to the incomplete rating of properties in these
areas. The National Treasury concluded that reasonably accurate baselines
going forward are essential before the devolution process can be completed.

3.2 The Province of Western Cape

The Western Cape’s Provincial Department of Public Works (PoWC) reported
that during the 2009/10 financial year its main budget was R165 million.
The PoWC informed the Committee that in the 2008/09 financial year there
was a shortfall of R38 million and in the 2009/10 financial year it had a
shortfall of R66 million. The PoWC further reported that the total budget
for the 2009/10 financial year was R269 million, whereas the total amount
that was transferred was R250 million. The PoWC added that it had accrued
R7 million and above that it had a surplus of R12 million.

The PoWC reported that during the 2008/09 financial year a total of 1 881
accounts payable to the value of R185 million were earned from
municipalities, but only R147 million was paid, resulting in a shortfall of
R38 million. The PoWC reported that the provincial Government of Western
Cape was currently in the process of acquiring additional sites for health
and educational purposes and that this will result in additional property
rates expenditure.

The PoWC presented that no funding was transferred to it to create the
additional administrative capacity to manage the devolution of property
rates payments. The function was performed by 2 permanent staff members and
4 contract personnel.

On why the PoWC under-spent, the PoWC explained that there was late
submission of accounts by the City of Cape Town (CoCT) due to the process
of splitting rates and utility accounts. The PoWC added that late payments
of accounts and accrual of interest led to under-spending. As a way of
trying to address the situation, the PoWC reported that it added more hours
in work to avert potential late payments and under-spending. Furthermore,
the PoWC said that monthly meetings with the CoCT on outstanding accounts
were held. The PoWC further reported that there was a potential to under-
spend due to late billing by municipalities. The PoWC emphasized that there
was a regular follow-up procedure with municipalities on outstanding
accounts. The PoWC further reported that it liaised timeously with the
Provincial Treasury and the National Department of Public Works on
potential allocation shortfall.

The PoWC emphasized that delays in finalisation of transfer of new sites
for education and health purposes have a potential to influence under-
spending for the 2010/11 allocation. However, the PoWC said that timeously
follow-ups with various role-players to ascertain status of these transfers
will be done.

3.3 The Province of Limpopo

The Limpopo’s Provincial Department of Public Works (PoL) reported that it
received a grant of R12 million to pay for the devolved rates and taxes
from the National Treasury for the 2008/2009 financial and R14 million for
the 2009/2010 financial year. The total number of devolved properties was 3
557.

The PoL reported that the provincial Government of Limpopo through
Executive Council decision number 59 of 2001, decided that payments of
rent, water, electricity and rates be paid for by individual departments
for the buildings they occupied. Therefore, the PoL said that, since 2001,
the National Department of Public Works did not pay for rates to
municipalities on land parcels where respective provincial departments
resided. The National Treasury said that the National Department of Public
Works only paid for rates to municipalities on state buildings jointly
occupied by provincial departments and where the provincial department of
Public Works wholly occupied the building.

With respect to data trends, transfers and actual spending, the PoL
reported that the 2010/2011 financial year marks the third year for the PoL
to manage the payment of rates and taxes for devolved properties. The PoL
said that the previous two financial years did not provide it with the
confidence to determine patterns and trends in funds allocation and
spending. The PoL added that the collection of data in the coming years
will afford the PoL with the means to determine trends that will assist
with projecting allocations and spending. The PoL added that efforts that
were put in place for improvement were both administrative and political
initiatives.

With respect to monitoring, the PoL reported that, at political level, the
Member of Executive Council (MEC) engaged councilors and mayors including
fellow Members of the Provincial Legislature (in Limpopo) on various
occasions like the Premier/Mayors’ Forum, Inter-governmental Forum and some
ad-hoc meetings.

With respect to administration, the PoL said that officials interacted with
officials responsible for municipalities at the provincial level and, at
district level, individual municipalities were met with to reconcile their
accounts. The PoL reported that figures indicated that the change in
approach resulted in increased spending from 54 per cent to 59 per cent
over the two-year period. The PoL said that the 4 per cent improvement was
encouraging and it led to intensification of aggressive turnaround
strategy.

Furthermore, the PoL reported that it experienced many challenges since the
inception of the devolution of property rate funds grant. The PoL’s
reported challenges included:
    • The identification of devolved properties per region per
      municipality; collection of bills from municipalities;
    • The exclusion of consumption and arrears from municipality bills;
    • The Interfacing Bass system and the iE-Works System;
    • The Reduction of system errors on iE-Works;
    • The Lack of Real Estate Human Resources capacity;
    • Bills had opening balances from previous years;
    • High interests charged due to late payments; and
    • The monitoring capacity of the department for the 2009/2010 financial
      year was not adequate in terms of warm bodies.

The PoL reported that these challenges presented the following risks:
    • Properties not valuated;
    • Properties sharing the same ERF number but in different plots;
    • Wrong rebates and tariffs in the system;
    • Double payments;
    • Wrong bills from municipalities;
    • Properties without account numbers; and
    • Cross-boarder properties.

The PoL reported that, due to these challenges and risks, a new initiative
had been undertaken to document, plan and execute a Devolution of Rates and
Taxes Project. The PoL said that the scope of this project was limited to
the 3 557 properties devolved from the National Department of Public Works.
The PoL added that the project involves real estate and finance users at
head office and regions. The PoL informed the Committee that the Government
Information Technology Officers’ (GITO) directorate will manage the project
and provide the Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
infrastructure support. The PoL said the project scope covers, amongst
other things, the devolution of rates and taxes properties limited to 3 557
as provided. The PoL reported that the district will continue identifying
and verifying properties in the devolution list. The PoL said that payment
of rates and taxes in the devolution list will be prioritized. The PoL
added that real estate managers at the regional level will champion the
project. Furthermore, the PoL reported that the finance directorate’s
resources will be available to authorize payments in the iE-Works system in
each region/district and the ICT resources will be available to support
users.

The PoL reported that, whilst it was busy restructuring to ensure that
capacity was increased to address the shortcomings, the interim project
structure was being established with key roles and responsibility.  The PoL
presented that the project structure was not the organizational structure
of its department and that the ranks and responsibilities of the officials
on the organization structure of the department remained the same as
authorized by the accounting officer (the Head of Department) and human
resources section. The PoL reported that monthly meetings and quarterly
meetings were held with the South African Local Government Association
(SALGA) as part of the turn around plan. The PoL added that it anticipated
that the project will be successfully implemented. The PoL added that one
of the critical success factors was that the 2001 Executive Council
decision had been rescinded and that that enabled the PoL to be fully
responsible for the payments of rates and taxes for the entire provincial
property portfolio. Furthermore, the PoL commented that it hoped that
interaction with other stakeholders will improve and lead to good
governance.

3.4 The Province of the Eastern Cape

The Eastern Cape’s Provincial Department of Public Works (PoEC) reported
that factors contributing to under-spending included incorrect invoicing by
municipalities; invoicing by municipalities on properties not owned by the
province; the municipal financial year (1 July to 30 June) differs from
that of the province (1 April to 31 March) as a result municipalities
submit bills late; and the late transfer of conditional grant funds to the
Province.

The PoEC reported that the first transfer of the conditional grant for the
2009/10 financial year was received in the last week of September 2009 and
the last transfer in February 2010. The PoEC presented that the financial
management capacity in the municipalities of the Eastern Cape remains a
challenge. The PoEC added that the conditional grant did not provide for
operational or administrative costs for the implementation of the grant.
The PoEC reported that confirmation of the roll-over approval and
additional allocations per the adjustments budget process reached the
provincial department late (that is December 2009) in the 2009/10 financial
year.

The PoEC reported that payments made in the 2008/2009 financial year have
not been credited to the PoEC’s accounts. The PoEC further reported that it
was invoiced on private properties, properties owned by the National
Department of Public Works, and property owned by the municipalities. The
PoEC further reported that there were differences between schedules and
actual invoices submitted. The PoEC explained that schedules from
municipalities reflect amounts owed to be R83 million and invoices
submitted amounted to R99 million in the 2008/09 financial year. The PoEC
said that amounts still outstanding amounted to R6 million and amount paid
was R79 million.

The PoEC alleged that it was being charged for the municipal services of
the tenants in the properties and that these services are reflected on the
rates and taxes invoices and municipalities have still not rectified these
errors. The PoEC said that the municipalities are charging rates and taxes
on un-surveyed land; municipalities can not provide supporting evidence for
amounts reflected as outstanding but do not write off these amounts and
then raise interest on the same amounts; the Devolution of Property Rates
and Taxes Grant became effective on the 1 April 2008 for rates and taxes
charged in the municipal financial year 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009. The
PoEC added that this transition from national to provincial was not
effectively managed by municipalities as invoices were still sent to
national. Furthermore, the PoEC reported that the outstanding balances due
by the National Department of Public Works as at 1 July 2008 were not
transferred to a separate account by municipalities but were charged to the
PoEC. The PoEC reported that it was being charged interest on the
outstanding balances of the National Department of Public Works at 1 July
2008.

The PoEC reported that municipalities continued to reflect R13 million as
amount owed by the PoEC whereas it was an amount that is owed by the
National Department of Public Works and that that included in this amount
was an interest of R252 289 charged to the PoEC. The PoEC explained that
these amounts had been excluded from the total outstanding by the PoL and
the correct outstanding amounts for the 2009/10 financial year was R6
million. The PoEC said that this was subject to title deed verification and
invoicing by municipalities and that excluded the municipalities for which
no invoices had been received. The PoEC said that a further R12 million
from the 2008/2009 financial year was to be spent, reducing the figure from
R39 million to R28 million (or 23 per cent of unspent grant).

Furthermore, the PoEC reported that the total amount that was to be spent
for the 2009/10 financial year was R32 million and R10 million for
operational costs. The PoEC said that that was going to reduce the unspent
figure from R117 million to R74 million (or 36 per cent of the unspent
grant). However, the PoEC said that was subject to title deed verification
and invoicing by municipalities.  The PoEC further reported that a request
to rollover R96.7 million had been submitted.
The PoEC reported that the two interventions which seek to address the
devolution of rate funds grant challenges are the Rates and Taxes project
which seeks to address the backlogs and the Municipal Finance Unit which
will work close with municipalities. The PoEC said that the Municipal
Finance Unit will sustain the intervention in municipalities. The PoEC said
that job advertisements were placed and recruitment of the deputy managers
was complete and these managers will further staff the unit. The PoEC
assured the Committee that the unit will be fully functional by the 30
September 2010.

The PoEC reported that, through the Municipal Finance Unit, it intends to
facilitate the payment of rates and taxes for the 2008/2009 and 2009/2010
financial years through preparing invoices for payment; assisting
municipalities in the preparation of invoices and supporting valuation
certificates where municipalities were experiencing difficulty with
resources; clearing outstanding reconciling items between the PoEC and the
municipality concerned; and to establish the substantiated value of the
amounts outstanding prior to the 1 July 2008. The PoEC added that
supporting documentation for the value of the amount outstanding that
relates to this period shall be obtained, verified and reconciled and that
the PoEC was firm that where the amounts are unsubstantiated, agreement for
write offs must be reached. Furthermore, the PoEC reported that it was
intending to establish a new verified provincial immovable assets baseline
for municipalities to charge rates and taxes.

The PoEC anticipates that the future benefits due to the above-mentioned
interventions will include:
    • updated debtors’ information with the correct owner of the property;
      paid-up valid outstanding debtors’ balances for the period 2008/09 and
      2009/10;
    • increased revenue base of municipalities with previously unknown
      provincial properties as per Pubic land data;
    • improved capacity at the municipality; improved communication channels
      between municipalities and Provincial Public Works Department;
    • corrected financial records that relate to rates and taxes of the
      provincial government;
    • transferral of knowledge and skill to municipal officials working with
      the project teams; and
    • acquisition of skills and experience by unemployed graduate working
      with consulting teams making them employable by municipalities.

3.5 The Province of KwaZulu Natal

The KwaZulu-Natal’s Provincial Department of Public Works (PoKZN) reported
that its total budget for the 2009/10 financial year was R237 million, this
amount included the budget allocation of R236 million and the roll-over
from the 2008/2009 financial year of R1 million. The PoKZN reported that
invoices received and payments made were to the amount of R237 million.
However, the PoKZN reported that the invoices received totalled R459
million resulting in a shortfall of R221 million and that the unpaid
invoices had to be held over for the 2010/11 financial year due to
insufficient funds in the 2009/10 financial year. The implication was that
the first charge for the 2010/11 financial year was R221 million, leaving a
balance of R39 million out of R260 million which was allocated for the
2010/11 financial year.

The PoKZN reported that it had been confronted with service delivery
challenges as municipalities had been threatening to cut services on
accounts of the non-payment of property rates. The PoKZN asked for an
advice from the Committee as to who is liable for the interest that has
been charged on the overdue rates. The PoKZN was of the view that it should
be the National Department of Public Works (NDPW) since the interest charge
was as a consequence of insufficient funding. The PoKZN argued that, that
was due to the fact that the PoKZN assumed the responsibility of the
payment of property rates from 1 April 2008; all outstanding debt prior to
that date should be the responsibility of the NDPW. The PoKZN reported that
this was brought to the attention of the NDPW and an indication with
respect to the payment of all outstanding debt to municipalities prior to
the devolution (1 April 2008) was awaited from the NDPW. However, the PoKZN
said that, in the mean time, the debt was likely to accumulate interest
expense. The PoKZN reported that an additional funding of R221 million has
been requested from the National Department of Public Works and the
National Treasury, but no response had been received as yet. Furthermore,
the PoKZN reported that the issue of new properties remains a challenge as
the current model does not provide for new properties.

The PoKZN reported that many challenges have been experienced and that
these challenges included:
    • provincial properties that are carrying arrears from the years prior
      to devolution of the property rates payment function to provinces;
    • properties where the ownership was unclear and had to be established
      between municipality, provincial and national custodians;
    • some municipalities disconnect services if rates are not paid or not
      fully paid;
    • property rates in a number of municipalities increased by between 300%
      to 1000% and more, for example in uMngeni, Umsunduzi, Richmond,
      KwaSani and Kokstad municipalities; and
    • the Ingonyama Trust Land properties have large tracts with numerous
      facilities on the parent property to which the municipality would
      attach a market value but the PoKZN is only responsible for the
      payment of property rates on state domestic facilities.

With respect to monitoring and capacity, the PoKZN reported that, when the
payment of property rates was devolved to the provinces, the staff from the
NDPW was not shifted together with this function and that that left a gap
on how the conditional grant was to be implemented as this was a new
function. Furthermore, the PoKZN reported that there was no funding
provided for additional capacity to implement this function. Provincial
asset management staff is currently performing the function.

The PoKZN reported that, in the 2009/10 financial year, the National
Department of Public Works introduced a prescribed reporting format for
provinces for monthly reporting. The PoKZN said that it submitted these
reports every month to report progress on spending. The PoKZN reported
that, while payments were happening at the four regional offices, there is
central monitoring at head office to ensure that there was no over-spending
or under-spending.

The PoKZN argued that it required additional funding because, if the first
tranche was to be used to pay outstanding amounts, the remaining balance
for the 2010/11 financial year will be R39 million which is too little
compared to the budget required. The PoKZN reported that a number of
municipalities had not been apportioned rate payments due to insufficient
funding. However, the PoKZN added that all (except for two) municipalities
were billing the PoKZN. The PoKZN stressed that, without additional
funding, it will not be able to fulfil its mandatory obligations.

3.6 The Province of Northern Cape

The Northern Cape’s Provincial Department of Public Works (PoNC) reported
that it had spent 99 per cent of its allocation for the 2009/10 financial
year. The PoNC reported that the budget for the 2009/10 financial year was
R27 million and that there was an additional amount of R10 million that was
received during the adjustment budget period. The PoNC reported that, for
the 2008/09 financial year, it had a shortfall of R4.7 million and that
that had a negative impact on the departments’ spending. The PoNC added
that it paid all municipalities except the R222 000 payable to the
Thembelihle Municipality and that that amount was payable to the
municipality but it was returned and the PoNC was investigating the matter
as to why the money had been returned. The PoNC claimed that, after paying
this amount, the PoNC will reflect 100 per cent spending.

With respect to monitoring, the PoNC reported that no funding was received
to employ officials to perform devolution of rates function. The PoNC
reported that it had no choice but to budget for three positions, Assistant
Director; Senior Administration Officer; and Administration Officer. The
PoNC said that that has assisted and strengthened its capacity to perform
the function and produce reports. Monthly spending reports were submitted
to National Department of Public Works. But, according to the PoNC, only
capacitated municipalities submit monthly statements reflecting payments
received.

The PoNC reported that they are experiencing challenges including that
there were properties which are built on land that is owned by the
municipality but the buildings, on the other hand, is owned by government.
Once these properties were vested, the arrears and the recurrent costs for
rates and taxes would be paid. The PoNC reported that ‘sister’ departments
are not budgeting for rates and taxes for all new infrastructure
developments. The PoNC reported that it was of the view that ‘sister’
departments should pay for new infrastructure. There are properties that
were transferred from North West province that must also be vested. The
PoNC concluded that, due to budget under-allocation, municipalities are
charging interest on arrear accounts.

3.7 The Province of Gauteng

The Gauteng’s Provincial Department of Public Works (PoG) reported that its
2009/10 adjusted budget was R401 million, and that, at the end of the
financial year, the department had spent R231 million and had a difference
R170 million.

The PoG argued that its under-spending emanated from a number of
challenges, i.e. ten municipalities had sent their invoices except for
Emfuleni and Kungwini municipalities; some properties were continually
moving from one Council to another; municipalities themselves did not have
all the information and town planners had to be consulted to get the
correct information; there was a challenge regarding personnel capacity;
municipalities were unable to identify ownership due to properties
belonging to other provinces, different Institutions and the national
government; municipal valuation roll out was not completed; and there was
no automatic interfacing between Basic Accounting System and iE-works
system. However, training of staff on utilization of iE-works system was a
continuous exercise. The POG reported that service level agreements were
being developed to enhance relationship management.

With respect to monitoring capacity, the PoG said that all payments to
municipalities were based on asset register’s verified data; and joint
payment allocation and reconciliation with municipalities. The PoG further
reported that the Debt Committee’s meetings were held with Provincial
Treasury and Municipalities in attendance.

The PoG reported that monthly spending report meetings were held between
programme managers and the finance branch. The PoG further reported that
quarterly senior management meetings were used to discuss performance of
the various programmes. The PoG informed the Committee that the Executive
Management committee also received monthly spending report from the Chief
Financial Officer. The PoG said that the Head of the Department and Deputy
Director-General of National Department of Public Works held an one-on-one
meetings with individual managers from time-to-time to ensure
accountability for service-delivery purposes. The PoG said that, at unit
level, performance is monitored against operational plans. The PoG assured
the Committee that monthly and quarterly infrastructure reports were sent
to the Provincial and National Treasury. Furthermore, the PoG said that
Project Management Resource Groups assisted in ensuring that performance
happened at site level.

4. Observations

The Committee notes that certain provinces are struggling to settle the
outstanding amount and the municipalities were owed by National Department
of Public Works before the devolution of property rates function to
provinces.

The Committee ascertained that conditional grant did not provide for
provinces to employ people who are responsible for this function.
Furthermore, the National Department of Public Works did not release
officials who were responsible for this function to provinces. As a result,
there is a challenge in most provincial departments when it comes to
managing this function.

The Committee observed that PoKZN was allocated insufficient funds and it
was unable to pay municipal rates and taxes.

The Committee notes that poor municipal property management, poor billing
systems, and late billing negatively affect the province’s ability to meet
its obligations.

5. Recommendations

Having considered the presentations on the spending on the Community
Library Services grant by the National Treasury and the afore-mentioned
provincial departments, the Select Committee on Appropriations recommends
that the National Council of Provinces considers the following:

1. That the National Department of Public Works should assist provincial
   departments of Public Works in settling the accounts they are owing to
   municipalities.

2. That National Department of Public Works should explain to the House why
   it could not attend the hearing on the third quarter spending by the
   provincial departments of Public Works. This explanation should reach the
   House within 15 working days after the adoption of this report by the
   House.


3. That the National Treasury should discuss the possible assistance that
   can be given to the Province of KwaZulu Natal with respect to the
   devolution of property rates grant.


4. That provinces should assist less capacitated municipalities to improve
   on property management, and on their billing system.


Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the third quarter
conditional grants spending patterns on Comprehensive HIV and AIDS,
Hospital Revitalisation, and Forensic Pathology for the 2009/10 financial
year, dated 01 June 2010.

1. Introduction
1.1 Background
The Select Committee on Appropriations (the Committee) invited identified
provincial departments of health, who were either under-spending or over-
spending on the Comprehensive HIV and AIDS, Hospital Revitalisation, and
Forensic Pathology Grants, to come and make a presentation on their third
quarter spending for the 2009/10 financial year. The statistics on spending
patterns were published by the National Treasury in March 2010.

The Committee meeting took place on Tuesday, 4 May 2010. Meetings were held
at Committee Room 3 in Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.


1.2 Terms of reference
The public hearings formed part of the Committee’s ongoing interaction with
provinces to monitor their spending patterns on conditional grants
allocated to them. A framework for each grant sets out, amongst other
things, the purpose of the grant, measurable objectives, conditions,
allocation criteria, and past performance.

Provincial departments of health were requested to make presentations on
Comprehensive HIV and AIDS Grant, Hospital Revitalisation Grant, and
Forensic Pathology Grant and to take into consideration the following:
    • Data trends in allocations, transfers and actual expenditure of
      conditional grants of the department;
    • Assessment of department’s monitoring capacity for the 2009/10
      financial year  and indicate under-/over-spending and what capacity
      constraints had impacted on these outcomes;
    • Report on whether monthly reports were received from receiving
      departments or municipalities, and if not, what the departments are
      doing in order to ensure compliance with monthly reporting; and
    • Medium-term strategic plans.

The provincial departments of health of Free State, Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-
Natal, Limpopo and Northern Cape were identified and invited. All invited
provinces honoured the invitations.

The National Treasury was invited to brief the Committee on the third
quarter spending of the above-mentioned provincial departments.

2 Presentations
2.1 National Treasury
The National Treasury outlined an overview of provincial departments of
health’s spending as at 31 December 2009. The National Treasury reported
that the overall spending was R66.5 billion as at the end of the third
quarter of the 2009/10 financial year out of a total of R86.2 billion of
the total adjusted budget. The National Treasury further reported that
there was a projected over-spending of R5.8 billion, mostly on personnel
expenditure. Furthermore, the National Treasury reported that the
provincial departments of Health of Mpumalanga and Free State had under-
spent. In addition, the National Treasury reported that the provincial
health sector had been under pressure as a result of compensation of
employees. The provincial departments of health which experienced the
biggest pressures were Eastern Cape (the worst affected), Gauteng and
KwaZulu Natal.

The National Treasury reported that Comprehensive HIV and AIDS Grant had
been adjusted upwards by R9 million to an adjusted budget of R4.3 billion.
At the end of the third quarter, provincial departments had spent 62 per
cent of the adjusted budget. The National Treasury further reported that
the Provincial Department of Health of Free State had an adjusted budget of
R299 million. On year-on-year growth comparison, the Provincial Department
of Health of Free State had spent 20.6 per cent less compared to the same
period in the 2008/9 financial year. With respect to the Provincial
Department of Health of Mpumalanga, the National Treasury reported that
this provincial department had an adjusted budget of R296 million, but the
actual spending was 52 per cent as a percentage of adjusted budget. The
National Treasury reported that the Provincial Department of Health of
Mpumalanga had under-spent by R96 million as at 31 December 2009. The
National Treasury further reported that, on a year-on-year comparison, this
is 32 per cent less compared to the same period in the 2008/09 financial
year. Furthermore, the National Treasury reported that overall spending of
provincial departments was 32 per cent less compared to the same period in
the 2008/9 financial year.

With respect to Forensic Pathology, the National Treasury reported that the
total adjusted budget for all provincial department was R527 billion and
the projected outcome was R628 billion. The National Treasury further
reported that the total adjusted budget for the Provincial Department of
Health of Northern Cape was R31 million with a projected outcome of R21
million as at 31 December 2009. However, the Provincial Department of
Health of Northern Cape had under-spent by R10 million and that, on a year-
on-year comparison, this spending is less by 9.2 per cent compared to the
same period in the 2008/9 financial year.

With respect to the Hospital Revitalization Grant, the National Treasury
reported that an adjusted estimate of the grant was at R3.5 billion and
provincial departments of health were projected to under-spent by R535
million. The National Treasury further reported that the under-spending by
provincial departments of health was as follows: R7.9 million in Free
State; R200 million in KwaZulu-Natal; R40 million in Limpopo; R194 million
in Mpumalanga; R86 million in Northern Cape and R8 million in Western Cape.
Furthermore, the National Treasury reported that, on a year-on-year
comparison, provincial departments of health over-spent by 1.2 per cent.

The National Treasury advised the Committee that one of the issues to pay
attention to was improved budgeting for the health sector. The National
Treasury recommended that provincial departments of health should
prioritise within limited financial resources, especially with respect to
personnel spending in the KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape; and on goods and
services spending in Gauteng. The National Treasury further recommended
that processes for determining salary adjustments, including the
occupational specific dispensation (OSD), should be tied to available
resources. The National Treasury stated that the National Department of
Health should fully support and guide provincial departments of health
during the implementation of major policy initiatives. The National
Treasury proposed that the process used for determining salary adjustments
should involve provincial departments of health and be in line with
available funds. The National Treasury reported that the Hospital
Revitalization Programme was the least spent grant amongst conditional
grants (for example, the total projected under-expenditure is over R813
million as at 31 March 2010). Furthermore, the National Treasury indicated
that the Provincial Department of Health of Mpumalanga showed continuous
poor financial performance in most conditional grants.

The National Treasury revealed that there had been numerous instances of
violation of the Division of Revenue Act within the health sector in
comparison to other government sectors; including poor cash management; and
supply chain management policy challenges. The National Treasury advised
that proper planning should improve performance of grants in this sector.

2.2   The Province of KwaZulu-Natal
The KwaZulu-Natal’s Provincial Department of Health (PoKZN) reported that
it was allocated R450 million for the Hospital Revitalization Grant and
that the PoKZN had managed to spend R128 million (28 per cent) at the end
of the third quarter of the 2009/10 financial year. The PoKZN reported that
it had under-spent by R200 million at the end of the third quarter because
the majority of its projects were delayed as a result of the inability to
monitor projects owing to capacity constraints. The PoKZN further reported
that it was the responsibility of the provincial department of Public Works
to monitor these projects. The PoKZN added that if phase 1 of the project
was delayed as argued above, the following phases are also delayed because
they are dependent on the successful implementation of the initial phases.
The PoKZN reported that the major contributing factors to under-spending
were the lack of cooperation from the provincial department of Public Works
and the slow services provided by the contractors. The example of the King
George V Hospital was used by the PoKZB where the completion of this
hospital was delayed due to a slow progress on the work done by a
contractor. Furthermore, the PoKZN reported that the provincial department
of Public Works had tender procurement delays for some projects which led
to the delay of subsequent phases of the same project. The PoKZN cited the
failure to adequately monitor the consultancy work during designs and
documentation as the main reason for the delay of many projects and the
resultant under-spending. The PoKZN admitted that it did not react to
building defects timeously, and did not have dedicated project managers to
follow up on tender documentation delays and variation orders.

The PoKZN reported that the Lower Umfolozi Hospital project led the PoKZN
to under-spend by R52 million because there were tender procurement delays
by the provincial department of Public Works. Furthermore, the New Mother
and Child Hospital budgeted for R365 million had been delayed for 16 months
due to the inability by the provincial department of Public Works to
finalise tender processes timeously. The PoKZN said it did not have
monitoring capacity to detect inaccuracies with tender documents.

The PoKZN reported spending was not in line with budget due to the
following reasons: delays on construction as a result of earlier delays in
the acquisition of health technology for the King George V hospital; the
overspending for the Lower Umfolozi, Hlabisa and Rietvlei hospitals due to
spill-over of purchases that had been scheduled for the previous years; the
inavailability of dedicated resource to drive the aspect of Hospital
Revitalization; Hospital Revitalization Planning was not aligned to Supply
Chain Management processes and timeframes.

The PoKZN reported that it under-spent due to: non-approval of filling of
critical posts due to the concerns that these additional staff costs are
sustainable over the longer term  when the Revitalization grant is no
longer available; the delay in the implementation of Hospital Information
System due to late finalization of the Service Level Agreement and,
subsequently, due to the moratorium imposed by the National Department of
Health; and delays in the implementation of the Digital Radiography Picture
Archiving Communication System / Radiography Information System.

The PoKZN argued that factors contributing to under spending came from the
implementing agents. The PoKZN reported that it had no or very little
control over implementing agents who prove to be inflexible and/or
unwilling to change and speed things up. The implementing agents appointed
consultants who were not qualified to do the work to the standard required
or within the timeframes provided. Hospital design was complex and requires
inputs from a group of specialists; however health specialist were not
consulted. The PoKZN added that there was lack of capacity in the Hospital
Revitalization Office; for example, there were no dedicated project
managers for various categories of Health Technology, Quality Assurance and
Organizational Development. Furthermore, Supply Chain Management was not
properly managed and implemented resulting in project delays, cancellation
and appeals; over and above there was weak project management and planning
due to lack of capacity.

The PoKZN reported that, in the past, formal reporting from implementing
agents was erratic and often inaccurate; and, Revitalization Project
Managers, at the time of reporting, were attending contractor and
consultant meetings so that they are updated about on-site progress and can
act timeously. The PoKZN reported that a joint task team comprising the
Department of Health, the Department of Public Works and other implementing
agencies was in place, but could not meet regularly. The Joint Task Team
was replaced by monthly Infrastructure Programme Management Committee
meetings.
The PoKZN assured the Committee that, in the 2010/11 financial year, it
plans to re-organize its infrastructure management unit in line with
Project Management principles and to fill key management posts by
appropriately qualified persons with formal training in built environment.
The PoKZN further reported that the quality assurance process was being
developed and improvements are expected during the 2010/11 financial year.

2.3 The Province of Limpopo
The Limpopo’s Provincial Department of Health (PoL) reported that Hospital
Revitalization Grant for 2009/10 was R212 million and the province spent
R117.8 million (56 per cent) and the balance was R94.4 million.

The PoL reported that a number of its projects were delayed due to various
contributing factors. These contributing factors included: slow
construction progress on sites by contractors which resulted in certain
contracts being terminated; civil and building contracts were delayed due
to finalization of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA); project
dependencies within sites had a ripple effect on all other projects to
follow; late appointment of contractors by the Provincial Department of
Public Works (DPW); and some contractors did not comply to specifications
as outlined in the contracts.

With respect to performance monitoring and evaluation, the PoL reported
that resident clerks of works have been appointed to assist in ensuring
performance of contractors per site on a daily basis. The PoL said that, in
future, measurement of construction works would be undertaken and paid for
twice per month and projects will be monitored closely by DPW, Health
Performance Monitoring Unit, and professional teams.

The PoL acknowledged that the Hospital Revitalization grant had under-
performed in terms of spending. As a result, a Hospital Revitalization
Programme Improvement Plan, supported at provincial level by Premier’s
office, provincial treasury, DPW and implementing agents, was implemented
in September 2009. The PoL stated that projects’ dependencies and slow
performance of contractors delayed its spending plan and that forced the
provincial department to project under spending of R40 million.

2.4 The Province of Mpumalanga
The Mpumalanga’s Provincial Department of Health (PoMPU) reported that the
Comprehensive HIV and AIDS grant’s budget allocation was R200 million plus
an adjustment of R96 million resulting to a total adjusted budget of R296
million. The PoMPU presented that it projected an under spending of R96
million at the end of the third quarter and the actual payments of adjusted
budget was 52 per cent.

The PoMPU reported that under spending on HIV and AIDS conditional grant
was due to the system that was used in the province which entailed delivery
of service by the department and payments processed utilizing the equitable
share budget. Thereafter the department claims the amount spent from
Provincial Treasury. Secondly one invoice was received after the cut of
date of payment.

The PoMPU reported that monitoring and evaluation officials monitor and
support the implementation of the grant on a quarterly basis. The
monitoring and evaluation officials monitor the implementation by visiting
the accredited facilities and submitting reports to the provincial office
in order to ensure effective monitoring and adequate support for all the
facilities. Furthermore, compliance to reporting procedures was observed at
all times and this, in turn, ensures that monthly, quarterly and annual
reports, with both financial and non-financial indicators, are compiled and
submitted to the National Department of Health, National Treasury and
Provincial Treasury.
The PoMPU reported that the Comprehensive HIV and AIDS grant’s
implementation experienced some challenges due to the increase in number of
patients from an average of 1 800 to 2 000 new intake monthly whereas the
PoMPU had projected a monthly intake of 1 600. The PoMPU added that the
budget increase was not aligned to demands for these services. Furthermore,
staff shortage affected the monitoring and evaluation of the service
delivery. The PoMPU informed the Committee that poor infrastructure was
hindering increase in the number of accredited facilities that are
available in the Mpumalanga province. The PoMPU argued that the
accreditation of facilities, which is the competency of National Department
of Health, should be fast-tracked.

The PoMPU informed the Committee that it has identified a number of
solutions to the challenges that it is experiencing with respect to
spending on conditional grant. The PoMPU said that budget allocation should
be aligned to the demand of services. The PoMPU further said that it
intends to strengthen its monitoring and evaluation unit. The PoMPU added
that it intended to rehabilitate and upgrade a number of facilities in the
province. The PoMPU said that more health care workers will be trained and
that continuous support to home care givers in respect of stipend and care
kits will be provided. Furthermore, non-medical voluntary counseling and
testing sites will be increased.

With respect to Hospital Revitalization Grant, PoMPU reported that its
adjusted budget was R498 million (R304 million plus a roll over of R194
million), the projected accumulative outcome was R304 million and its
actual expenditure at the third quarter was R222 million. The PoMPU
reported that a number of projects were behind schedule and that was
negatively affecting the total costs of these projects as prices for
material were increasing. The PoMPU reported total spending, at Rob
Ferreira Hospital, of R217 million and the budget allocation was R159
million. At Ermelo Hospital, the budget allocation was R42 million and the
total accumulative spending was R70 million. The Themba Hospital’s budget
allocation was R62 million and the total accumulative spending was R80
million.
The PoMPU reported that Hospital Revitalization grant’s confirmation of the
roll-over R154 million was conditionally approved in November 2009, which
was subject to an audit of utilisations of funds. The required audit was
conducted in January 2010; hence the office was still awaiting a final
audit report. The PoMPU reported that R154 million has since been withheld
by National Treasury and an application for rollover of funds based on
existing commitments incurred in the 2009/10 financial year has been made.

The PoMPU reported that it relies on the Department of Public Works, Roads
and Transport (DPW) as an implementing agent to ensure that there were site
project managers in each hospital, and technical support was provided at
all times to ensure that construction projects were completed on schedule.
Furthermore, PoMPU said that, although it is the responsibility of
Provincial Department of Public Works to monitor projects, PoMPU conducts
quarterly reviews and site visits.

The PoMPU reported that it had submitted a total of 17 reports to the
National               Department of Health, namely: 12 monthly reports, 4
quarterly reports and an annual report. The PoMPU reported that it
conducted monthly site visits which were led by Hospital Revitalization
Programme; the National Treasury conducted some site visits; and the
National Department of Health conducted support visits.  The PoMPU further
reported that there were visits by the Executive (namely, the Premier, the
Provincial Portfolio Committee, and the Members of the Executive Council).
Furthermore, the PoMPU reported that it held Steering Committee meetings
and Site and technical meetings with consultants, monthly.

The PoMPU reported that there was a limited capacity to deliver health
infrastructure by appointed contractors and consultants. The PoMPU
acknowledged that it was unable to recruit and retain professional staff
and that it had limited project management and planning skills. With
respect to retainment of professionals, the PoMPU reported that it had
motivated to pay market-related packages for these professionals. With
respect to poor performance, the PoMPU recommended that it shall charge
penalties on non-performing contractors and consultants. Furthermore, the
PoMPU committed itself to the strengthening of its capacity in respect of
contract management and planning.

2.5 The Province of Free State
The Free State’s Provincial Department of Health (PoFS) reported that its
adjusted budget for Comprehensive HIV and AIDS grant was R299 million and
it had spent R165 million (55 per cent) at the end of the third quarter of
the 2009/10 financial year. The PoFS reported that under-spending was due
to late allocation of R63 million adjusted budget which was mainly for the
purchase of antiretroviral medication, consumables and laboratory tests.

The PoFS reported that the management of the grants was strengthened since
managerial accountants were attached to each conditional grant. These
managerial accountants produce and table monthly and quarterly reports to
senior management which, in turn, produces annual reports.

For Hospital Revitalisation grant, the PoFS reported that its adjusted
budget was R282 million and it had spent R129 million (46 per cent) at the
end of the third quarter of the 2009/10 financial year.  The PoFS explained
that under-spending was due to a number of challenges including: the poor
performance by the implementing agents and lack of capacity in planning and
technical expertise in project management. The PoFS reported that there was
lack of managerial capacity to manage infrastructure projects. Furthermore,
the PoFS further reported that under-spending was caused by none
appointment of contractors leading to delays in the execution of projects,
and poor contractor performance which led to termination of certain
contracts.  Furthermore, the PoFS reported that the rollover of R34 million
allocated through adjustment budget when there were spending bottle-necks
worsen the spending level, and that the funds allocated for planning were
not used.

The PoFS reported that it had put in place different measure to improve
under expenditure in the Hospital Revitalization Grant. The PoFS further
reported that it was reviewing its organizational structure and functions.
And that technical expects who would be responsible for planning,
implementation and monitoring of infrastructure projects will be appointed
in the near future. Furthermore, the PoFS reported that it was working on
improving relations with the implementing agents, through holding regular
meetings, and that it intended to strengthen reporting mechanisms, with
early warning systems in place. To strengthen its bidding processes, the
PoFS revealed that a Provincial Infrastructure Bid Management Committee for
efficient bid management had been established.

2.6 The Province of the Northern Cape
The Northern Cape’s Provincial Department of Health (PoNC) reported that,
for Forensic Pathology Grant, its original grants budget allocation was R20
million and it had received an additional adjustment of R11 million.
Therefore, its total allocation for Forensic Pathology Grant was R31
million. The PoNC reported that it had spent only R13 million at the end of
the third quarter and R21 million was the projected outcome at the end of
that period. The amount of R11 million rolled-over was meant for building
of mortuaries (R10 million) and for goods and services (R1 million), and
these were commitments made prior to the end of the 2008/09 financial year
period.

The PoNC reported that the contributing factor to under-spending on the
grant was the dispute between the department and a service provider. For
example, a service provider alleged that it was owed for services performed
and the PoNC disputed that services were rendered. The PoNC reported that
it had requested a roll over to the amount of R13 million, which will be
utilized for 2010/11 financial year.

2.7 National Department of Health
The National Department of Health (DoH) reported that it was aware of the
challenges that the sector was faced with regarding capital expenditure. As
a result, the DoH had initiated a programme whereby engineers shall be
appointed for all provincial departments of health. These engineers were
expected to protect the interests of the health sector in order to ensure
that it had the necessary internal capacity and technical knowledge, and to
advise on the awarding of tenders.

3. Observations
The Committee is of the view that the provincial departments of public
works, as custodians of infrastructure development, needs to improve on
monitoring of the health sector’s projects and to ensure that they are
carried out as per schedule of the project plans. Furthermore, there are
continuous challenges with respect to project management and lack of
support from the National Department of Public Works.

The Committee notes that some provincial departments of health had
performed much better than others in relation to the Hospital
Revitalisation grant and some are in violation of the Division of Revenue
Act.

The Committee notes that capital budgets in the health sector had under-
spent by R1.3 billion.

The Hospital revitalisation grant is the worst-spent grant in Government.

4. Recommendations
Having considered the presentations by the National Treasury and identified
provincial departments of health on the third quarter spending for the
2009/10 financial year, the Select Committee on Appropriations recommends
that the National Council of Provinces considers the following:

4.1   That the provincial departments of public works should investigate
   track records of contractors and examine them before awarding them with
   tenders in order to determine the ability of these contractors to
   successfully implement projects before them.

2. That all provincial departments of health should comply the annual
   Division of Revenue Act.


3. That the provincial departments of health should work with department of
   Public Works to improve spending on capital budgets and ensure they are
   spent fully.


4. That the provincial departments of health should improve the management
   of the Hospital Revitalisation grant.


Report to be considered.


                            FRIDAY, 30 JULY 2010


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
    (a)     Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No 33279
        dated 8 June 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act , 1974 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


2.    The Minister of Finance

    Correction: The following two entries replaces items 2(b) and (c)
    published under Tablings in the name of the Minister of Finance in the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 16 July 2010, on page
    2193.

    (b)     Government Notice No 472 published in Government Gazette No
        33241 dated 4 June 2010: Borrowing powers of water boards listed
        under Schedule 3 Part B of the Act, Public Finance Management Act,
        2001 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     c) Government Notice No 473 published in Government Gazette No 33241
        dated 4 June 2010: Borrowing powers of water boards listed under
        Schedule 3 Part B of the Act, Public Finance Management Act, 2001
        (Act No 1 of 1999).


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(4) of the
        Constitution, 1996, to Overberg District Municipality (Western
        Cape).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.The Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the third quarter
conditional grants spending patterns on HIV and AIDS (Life Skills
Education) for the 2009/10 financial year dated 01 June 2010.

1. Introduction
1.1 Background
The Select Committee on Appropriations (the Committee) invited identified
provincial departments of education, who were either under-spending or over-
spending on the HIV and AIDS Grant, to come and make a presentation on
their third quarter spending on 2009/10 financial year. The statistics on
spending patterns were published by National Treasury in March 2010.

The Committee meetings took place on 20 and 21 April 2010.

1.2 Terms of reference
The public hearings formed part of the Committee’s ongoing interaction with
provinces to monitor their spending on conditional grants allocated to
them. A framework for each grant sets out the purpose of the grant,
measurable objectives, conditions, allocation criteria, and past
performance among other things.
Provincial departments of education were requested to make presentations on
HIV and AIDS Grant and to take into consideration the following:
    • Data trends in allocations, transfers and actual expenditure of
      conditional grants of the department;
    • Assessment of department’s monitoring capacity for the 2009/2010
      financial year and indicate under/overspending and what capacity
      constraints that impacted on these outcomes;
    • Report whether monthly reports are received from receiving departments
      and or municipalities, and if not, what the departments are doing in
      order to ensure compliance with monthly reporting; and
    • Medium-term strategic plans.

The provincial departments of Education of Eastern Cape, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape and KwaZulu Natal were
identified and invited. However, the provincial departments of Education of
Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal did not attend, and there were no
notifications that they were unable to attend.

The National Treasury was invited to brief the Committee on the third
quarter spending of the above-mentioned provincial departments.


2 Presentations
2.1 National Treasury
The National Treasury reported that the total expenditure for all
provincial departments of education is R94.7 billion (or 79 per cent) of
the R124.8 billion adjusted budget as at 31 December 2009. The R124.8
billion adjusted budget for education comprises 41 per cent of the total
provincial adjusted budgets. This spending shows an increase of R13 billion
compared to R81.7 billion that was spent over the same period in the
2008/09 financial year.

The National Treasury added that provincial departments of education that
had contributed to the spending increase of R13 billion (15.9 per cent) are
Eastern Cape (which has over-spent by 22.5 per cent); North West (which has
over-spent by 19.3 percent); Limpopo (which has over-spent by 18.7 per
cent) and Gauteng (which has over-spent by 18.1 per cent). On year-on-year
growth, the National Treasury said that provincial departments have spent
15.9 per cent of the projected over-spending of R1.7 billion in 7
provinces. The National Treasury further reported that Eastern Cape spent
R649 million on the compensation of employees. Current spending on
education personnel amounts to R72.7 billion (which is 74.5 per cent of the
education personnel adjusted budget of R97.6 billion). Furthermore,
spending by provincial departments of education, from lowest to the
highest, is 72.3 per cent for the Free State; 72.4 per cent for the North
West); 74.9 per cent for Gauteng and 77.6 per cent for the Eastern Cape.
With respect to total projected over-spending of R1.7 billion in 6
provinces Eastern Cape spent R559.4 million (which is the highest amount
spent by a single province) due to the implementation of Human Resource
Operational Project Team. KwaZulu-Natal spent R387.4 million (which is the
lowest amount spent by a province).

With respect to the conditional grants, the National Treasury reported that
the overall spending by provincial departments has declined by 10 per cent
compared to the same period in the previous year. The largest declines in
spending were identified in the provincial departments of education of
Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga and North West. The National Treasury concluded
that the spending on the HIV and AIDS grant indicates that national and
provincial departments of education need to manage cash flows more
prudently.

The National Treasury reported that the budget of the North West’s
Provincial Department of Education for the HIV/AIDS had been cut based on
the fact that this department had been spending grant funds on programmes
not meant for. The National Treasury added that this provincial department
had used the grant funds meant for administration purposes to purchase
capital asset like vehicles. The National Treasury said that was not
allowed. Furthermore, the National Treasury reported that the provincial
department of education of North West was identified as one of the
provincial departments with noticeable supply chain management challenges.

The National Treasury informed the Committee that the provincial
departments of education of Mpumalanga, Eastern Cape and North West were
spending lower than expected in comparison to the same period in the 2008/9
financial year. With respect to the Provincial Department of Education of
Northern Cape, the National Treasury said this provincial department was
improving on spending on the HIV/AIDS programme. But the National
Department of Basic Education disputed this and reported that the Northern
Cape’s Provincial Department of Education was the only provincial
department that had not submitted its performance reports as required by
the Division of Revenue Act (DORA). The Department of Basic Education said
this was in violation of Section 12 of the DORA.

2.2 The Province of the Eastern Cape
The Eastern Cape’s Provincial Department of Education (PoEC) reported that
they have been allocated R30.17 million for the HIV and Aids Grant and they
have planned to spend R22.63 million, but spent R22.63 million (or 59 per
cent) on this grant. Put differently, the PoEC have under-spent by R4.94
million.

The PoEC reported that 1 100 educators were trained on: the integration of
HIV and AIDS issues into curriculum; the coordination of all Life-skills
HIV and AIDS projects, seminars, conferences and campaigns; report writing
and monitoring and evaluation of the programme (Integration of HIV and AIDS
into curriculum). The PoEC added that 5 314 Early Childhood Development
practitioners were trained on HIV and AIDS broad games; and 10 000 learners
were trained in peer education. The PoEC further reported that the afore-
mentioned learners coordinated campaigns against teenage pregnancy and,
drug and substance abuse in 800 schools and its surrounding communities.
The PoEC further reported that Orphans and Vulnerable Children’s programme
in 300 schools was rolled out, and that these programmes provided academic
materials and psycho-social support to orphans and vulnerable learners with
an aim to promote access and retention of this category of learners in the
schooling system. The PoEC further reported that the Health Advisory
Committees in 300 schools were established and capacitated to ensure that
there are functional Life-skills HIV and AIDS programmes in schools.

The PoEC further reported that reasons for its under-expenditure are as
follows:
    • Fewer activities in the business plan were planned for the third
      quarter of the financial year because the emphasis is on examination
      preparations during October/November; this further affects the
      availability of the targeted groups (learners and educators) for the
      Life-skills HIV and AIDS programme; and
    • Transfer of conditional grant’s money was done in tranches. Some of
      these transfers are made in October and it is not appropriate to
      conduct training during this time of the year owing to the end-of-the-
      year examinations. Implication is that money that is transferred
      during this time remains unspent due time table priorities.

The PoEC informed the Committee that the mechanisms to deal with the under-
Expenditure on the HIV and AIDS conditional grant as reported by the
Eastern Cape are as follows:

    • To motivate for rollover from 2009/10 financial year to deal with the
      under-expenditure of R2.59 million; and
    • The under-expenditure will be off-set by the accruals of R2.52 million
      for the 2009/10 financial year.


With respect to reporting, the PoEC reported that:
    • The monthly in-year monitoring meetings were held and monthly reports
      were compiled and submitted to relevant stakeholders;
    • The reports were submitted to the National Department of Education (as
      the transferring Department);
    • All schools implementing the training programme have been monitored by
      district department of education; and
    • Annual evaluation for the 2009/10 financial year shall be conducted on
      03-07 May 2010 and a report will to be forwarded to National
      Department of Education.

Furthermore, the PoEC reported that irregularities were suspected on
spending HIV& AIDS Life-skills grant, and that the Special Investigation
Unit was to conduct investigation and charges against certain employees
have been formulated and a disciplinary hearing date has been scheduled for
19 April 2010.

2.3 The Province of Limpopo
The Limpopo’s Provincial Department of Education (PoL) reported that an
initial amount of R25.88 million was allocated for the financial year
2009/10 and that this amount has been spent. The PoL further reported that
the roll-over from the 2008/09 financial year was R3.9 million. This roll-
over, reported the PoL, has pushed the adjusted budget for the 2009/10
financial year to R29.79 million. Furthermore, the PoL reported that only
R0.6 million of the R3.9 million rollover was spent. And that this
insignificant spending level has resulted in the total expenditure for the
2009/10 financial year to amount to R26.51 million. The PoL reported that
it has under-spent by 11.2 per cent (or by R3.28 million). This amount
reduces to R2.8 million when taking into account commitments made.

The reasons for under-spending were reported as follow:
    • There was a delay in the appointment of home-based care givers and
      those care givers were appointed towards the end of the 2009/10
      financial year; and
    • The appointment of the service provider for the training of adult-
      based education and training coordinators and practitioners did not
      take place due to delay in the supply chain processes.

The PoL informed the Committee that there are spending intervention plans
for 2010/11 financial year in order to improve on spending. These
interventions include: assuring that all activities which involve supply
chain processes shall be conducted at the beginning of the financial year;
appointment of additional staff to coordinate HIV and AIDS (Life Skills)
grant at a district level to assist 3 officials at the head office who are
under-staffed.

2.4 The Province of Mpumalanga
The Mpumalanga’s Provincial Department of Education (PoM) reported that it
was allocated R14.63 million for the 2009/10 financial year and a roll-over
of R0.36 million. The PoM further reported that the actual expenditure was
R8 116 million as at 31 December 2009.

The PoM reported that it had planned to train 1 800 educators on sexuality
education and prevention of drugs and substance abuse, but trained 2 173
educators. The PoM further reported that it had planned to train 120 master
trainers but trained 118 master trainers. The PoM further reported that it
had planned to train 600 members of the school management teams on policy
development but it managed to train 450 members. Furthermore, the PoM
reported that it planned to convert 600 schools into nodes of care and
support for Orphaned and Vulnerable Children (OVC) but it managed to
convert 339 schools. And in addition, 1 692 educators and other support
staff were trained on OVC programmes against a target of 1 800, and one
coordinated service delivery campaign was held and it reached 43 schools.

The PoM reported that 1 680 grade ten learners were educated on a peer
support programme which intended to promote healthy living styles, the
initial target was to empower 3 000 Learners. The PoM further reported that
one Soul Buddyz Congress was hosted and 450 delegates attended the event,
and 637 Soul Buddyz clubs have been established.

The PoM reported that, with respect to Learner-Teacher Support Materials,
it had planned to train 5 000 educators and 3 600 learners, but it managed
to train 4666 and 3 000 respectively. In terms of advocacy, the PoM
reported that 9 open discussion workshops were conducted against a target
of 12 workshops. The PoM further reported that only 12 School Governing
Bodies (SGBs) were trained out of 48 clusters of SGBs. Furthermore, the PoM
reported that 3 workshops on Faith Based Organizations were conducted.


With respect to monitoring, evaluation and reporting, the PoM reported that
monitoring is done as per the requirements of the Division of Revenue Act
and the Public Finance Management Act. This is done, said the province,
within the broader monitoring process led by the Department of Basic
Education (DoE). The PoM further reported that 3 life skills officials
monitor and support the implementation of the programme on a quarterly
basis. The PoM said it has employed 10 life skills regional officials who
monitor the implementation of the programme by visiting the schools and
submitting reports to the provincial office. In addition, the PoM reported
that quarterly and annual reports are compiled and sent to the DoE and
National Treasury by the provincial officials reporting on financial and
non-financial indicators.

The PoM reported that a provincial evaluation team consisting of officials
responsible for the grants conducted pre-evaluation of 10 to 20 schools.
This was done before the final evaluation by the national department was
conducted at the end of the financial year. The PoM further reported that
the national coordinator of life skills and the Development Support
Directorate monitored the implementation of the programme twice a year as
per Grant Framework. Furthermore, the PoM reported that 12 monthly reports,
4 quarterly reports and annual reports were compiled and submitted to the
National Department of Basic Education and National Treasury, and that 4
regions submitted monthly, quarterly and annually reports to the Regional
Director and Provincial Officer.


The PoM reported that a number of issues have contributed to under-
spending, including a system used in the province which entailed delivery
of activities by the Education department and payments processed utilizing
the equitable shares budget. The province reported that it was allowed to
claim back amounts utilized from Provincial Treasury. Furthermore, the PoM
reported that it had cash flow challenges as a result there were delays in
effecting payments of service providers; and that payment schedule for the
third quarter was transferred at the end of October of the financial year
which had affected spending of the grants in the third quarter.

The PoM informed to the Committee that the proposed solutions to its
challenges include reviewing the provincial arrangement with Provincial
Treasury which should be relooked at to resolve the cash flow challenges.
In addition, the PoM reported that curriculum support staff is to be
invited to assist with the monitoring of the delivery of the programme at
schools.
2.5 The Province of Northern Cape
The Northern Cape’s Provincial Department of Education (PoNC) reported that
it was allocated R3.83 million, and it had spent R3.68 million (96 per
cent) as at 31 December 2009.

On achievements, the PoNC reported that a total of 4 485 learners were
reached through advocacy programmes to raise awareness on HIV and AIDS. The
PoNC presented that 84 schools, Adult-Based Education and Training, and
Further Education Training College sites are being monitored; 105 learners
were motivated through the Matric Intervention programme; 33 educators were
trained in Care and Support programme; 74 educators were trained as Lay
Counsellors; 25 educators were trained in Drug Abuse; and 196 learners were
trained as Peer Educators.

The PoNC further reported that an approved monitoring tool was utilised by
schools and district offices to monitor the implementation of the Life
Skills and HIV & AIDS Education programme. The PoNC reported that bi-
monthly meetings were held with districts to monitor progress and address
challenges. The PoNC added that monthly, quarterly and annual reports were
submitted by the district offices. However, the PoNC informed the Committee
that there were challenges that were experienced in districts due to,
mainly, inavailability of coordinators.

The PoNC informed the Committee that there are no Life Skills and HIV &
AIDS coordinators in the Siyanda and John Taolo Gaetsewe Districts and this
contributed to under spending. In addition, the PoEC reported that it did
not have clerical staff in the Life Skills and HIV & AIDS Unit to capture
data and process payments.

2.6 The Province of North West
The North West’s Provincial Department of Education (PoNW) reported that it
was allocated a total of R12.91 million and had a rollover of R1.21
million. Therefore, its adjusted budget amounted to R14.12 million.
Furthermore, the PoNW reported that it spent R10.41 million (73.7 per cent)
as at 31 December 2009 and that available funds amounted to R3.71 million.


The PoNW reported that the process of monitoring was undertaken by 36 life
orientation and life skills specialists. The PoNW added that the process of
monitoring was undertaken by 35 Child Care Coordinators. The PoNW noted
that, although it had the aforementioned coordinators and specialists,
there was still a shortage of vehicles which negatively impact on their
performance. Furthermore, the PoNW reported that the afore-mentioned
coordinators were allocated 8 schools each. However, these officials
extended their services to other schools. The PoNW reported that, in
addition to coordinators, the monitoring process is undertaken by the
provincial Internal Audit unit and regular meetings were convened with the
HIV/AIDS Life Skills unit.

On under spending, the PoNW reported that it had experienced problems in
procuring first aid kits which led to under spending. The PoNW explained
that although the procurement of First Aid Kits for schools was initiated
early in 2009 it was yet to be finalized. The PoNW said it had consulted
the Department of Health (DoH) and National Treasury and raised the issue
but the Icembe Medical Suppliers and Central Medical Suppliers failed to
deliver items to the value of R200 740. The PoNW reported that as a
corrective intervention, due to the delay, National Treasury was requested
to intervene and could not succeed and the order was cancelled.
Furthermore, the PoNW reported that the procurement of career guides to the
total value of R519 840 led to under spending because the service provider
was unable to produce a valid tax clearance certificate after it transpired
that the tax certificate had expired.

The PoNW reported that the tender for hygiene packs for orphans and
vulnerable children to the value of R4.52 million (35 per cent of the
HIV/Aids conditional grant) was awarded to the company called Industrimed.
And the first consignment of hygiene packs delivered to the PoNW did not
conform to contract specification and the matter was following a legal
process. The PoNW further reported that it had requested a rollover of R3.6
million to enable it to pay the service provider once the quality hygiene
packs had been addressed.

With respect to reporting, the PoNW argued that monthly and quarterly
reports are duly submitted to the life skills HIV/Aids coordinator at the
National Department of Basic Education; the Senior Management Team of the
North West Department of Education; and Provincial Treasury.

4. Observations

The Committee is of the view that there are challenges that persist within
the provincial departments of education with respect to supply chain
management processes.

The Committee ascertained that some provincial departments of education do
not comply with provisions of the Division of Revenue Act.

The Committee identified that some provincial departments of education do
not follow proper reporting procedures as stipulated in the Public Finance
Management Act.

The Committee observed that payment schedule of the third quarter is
transferred towards the end of October of each year. Implication is that
provincial departments must plan more activities during the first, second
and fourth quarters of the financial year. It is proposed that the National
Treasury should not transfer funds for the third quarter in October because
it is an examination time which is followed by holidays.

The Committee has identified that the provincial departments do not follow
their business plans and/or they spend their conditional grants for other
items other than the intended purposes of these conditional grants.

5 Recommendations

Having considered the presentations on the spending on the HIV/Aids (Life
Skills) conditional grant by the National Treasury and the afore-mentioned
provincial departments, the Select Committee on Appropriations recommends
that the National Council of Provinces considers the following:

5.1 That all provincial departments of education should formulate,
implement, monitor and evaluate proper tendering and tender-related payment
processes within three months after the adoption of this report by the
House.

5.2 That all provincial departments of education should ensure that
conditional grants are only spent as per provisions of the Division of
Revenue Act.

5.3 That all provincial departments of education should report to all
relevant stakeholders as per Public Finance Management Act.

5.4 That all provincial departments of education should improve the
management of compensation budgets and control their growth in line with
spending on other items.
5.5 That all provincial departments of education should ensure the full
payment for relevant services of relevant service providers out of HIV/AIDS
grant budget.

Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the third quarter
conditional grants’ spending patterns on Community Library Services Grant
for the 2009/10 financial year, dated 01 June 2010.

1. Introduction
The Select Committee on Appropriations (the Committee) invited nine
provincial departments of arts and culture that were either under-spending
or over-spending on the Community Library Services Grant to make a
presentation on their third quarter spending in the 2009/10 financial year.
The statistics on spending patterns were published by the National Treasury
in March 2010.

The Committee’s meeting took place on 19 May 2010 and was held in Committee
Room E249 at Parliament.

2. Terms of reference
The public hearings formed part of the Committee’s ongoing interaction with
provinces to monitor their spending patterns on conditional grants
allocated to them. A framework for the grant sets out, among other things,
the purpose of the grant, measurable objectives, conditions, allocation
criteria and past performance.

Provincial departments of arts and culture were requested to make a
presentation on the Community Library Services Grant and to take the
following into consideration:
    • Data trends in allocations, transfers and actual expenditure of
      conditional grants of the department;
    • Assessment of the department’s monitoring capacity for the financial
      year 2009/2010, indicating under/overspending and capacity constraints
      that impacted on these outcomes;
    • Report whether monthly reports are received from receiving departments
      or municipalities and, if not, what the departments are doing in order
      to ensure compliance with monthly reporting; and
    • Medium term strategic plans.

The provincial departments of arts and culture in the Western Cape,
Limpopo, Eastern Cape, Gauteng, KwaZulu Natal, North West, Free State and
Northern Cape were identified and invited to participate in the hearings.
All the provincial departments, except Mpumalanga, honoured the invitation.


The National Treasury was invited to brief the Committee on the third
quarter spending of the above-mentioned provincial departments.

3 Presentations

3.1 National Treasury

The National Treasury reported that the adjusted budget for the third
quarter of the 2009/10 financial year was R461 million and the total
projected outcome was R444 million. The National Treasury added that the
provincial departments of arts and culture had spent R281 million (61 %) at
the end of the third quarter. Only the Northern Cape’s Department of Arts
and Culture had a projected over-spending of R9 million. The National
Treasury further reported on two provincial departments of arts and culture
that had a  projected under-spending totalling R26.7 million (that is,
R25.3 million for the Eastern Cape and R1.4 million for Gauteng).

The National Treasury reported that the Community Library Services grant
had been increased by 30 per cent from R338 million in the 2008/09
financial year to R440.6 million in the 2009/10 financial year. The
National Treasury reported that some of the provincial departments of arts
and culture transferred a significant portion of their budgets to
municipalities (eg Gauteng transferred 84%). Some provincial departments of
arts and culture had spent significantly on capital assets such as library
buildings, information communication and technology (ICT) infrastructure
(namely 63% for Mpumalanga, 49% for Northern Cape and 46% for Limpopo). The
National Treasury commented that, in general, the most significant focus
area for spending was on goods and services (e.g. library books). However,
the National Treasury noted that co-ordinating municipal planning and
project execution appeared to be one of the challenges  facing the
provincial departments of arts and culture. The National Treasury
furthermore pointed out that the need for upgrading ICT infrastructure was
of significance  in many provinces, and that the provincial departments of
arts and culture were affected by supply chain management’s delays and
challenges and  only 77% or less of the capital budgets for any provincial
department of arts and culture had been spent as at 31 March 2010.

3.2 The Province of the Free State

The Free State’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoFS) reported
that it was allocated R40.3 million and the actual spending at the end of
the third quarter was R20.6 million (51%) at the end of the third quarter
of the 2009/10 financial year. The PoFS highlighted that ICT
infrastructure, equipment and networks were installed at 45 of the 59
targeted libraries. The PoFS presented that there was a delay with delivery
of equipment and the installation of networks in Philippolis due to the
failure of a contractor to deliver these services. The PoFS added that the
State Information Technology Agency (SITA) had to appoint a new contractor
to offer such services. The PoFS reported an under-spending by R8.9 million
because of the late installation of networks and delays by SITA in
invoicing for data lines. With regard to goods and services the PoFS
reported that underspending on furniture and equipment was due to over-
budgeting for maintenance and late invoicing.

The PoFS reported that underspending was caused, among other things, by the
following: delays in recruitment and appointment of librarians; procurement
challenges; the Free State’s Provincial Treasury directives on the
arrangement of new contracts; and the late or non-delivery of orders for
library materials. The PoFS informed the Committee that plans were in place
to address these shortcomings. These plans include obtaining approval to
amend the committee’s business plan in order to redirect underspent funds
to other projects and to obtain approval from the Free State’s Provincial
Treasury to deviate from directives. Furthermore, the PoFS reported that it
intended to appoint an infrastructure manager to assist the Department of
Public Works with infrastructure contracts and improve the monitoring of
infrastructure projects.

The PoFS further reported on its intention to enter into a Service Level
Agreement with the Department of Public Works and the Department of Rural
Development and Land Reform, to expand the database of suppliers of library
materials (to have alternative suppliers) and to strengthen the management
capacity in the Library Services Directorate by filling two vacant posts of
deputy directors.

With respect to monitoring capacity, the PoFS reported that it had a
Financial Control Committee and that spending was monitored by the Chief
Financial Officer. The PoFS further reported that finance, supply chain
management and human resources clerks were appointed in line with the
Community Library Services Grant to focus on grant commitments.

It was further reported that a good reporting system had been established
because quarterly reports were submitted to the National Treasury through
the Free State’s Provincial Treasury. In-year monthly reports, together
with monthly progress and evaluation reports, were also submitted.

3.3 The Province of the Eastern Cape

The Eastern Cape’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoEC)
reported that it had an approved budget of R55.5 million. The PoEC said
that, at the end of the third quarter, it had committed R6.3 million but
the actual spending was R30 million.

The PoEC argued that the major contributing factor to under-spending was
non-construction of a new library in Mount Ayliff due to challenges in the
capturing of an infrastructure budget in the National Treasury
infrastructure documents. It also reported on the non-appointment of 12
librarians as this action was dependent on the completion of renovations to
the library.  Procurement of ICT equipment was delayed; the purchasing of
container libraries was put on hold due to tender discrepancies; non-
payment of stipends to trainers who were responsible for literacy
programme; shifting of maintenance of the ICT budget to provide for
datalines in public libraries was delayed by the Premier’s Office and SITA.
Furthermore, the PoEC reported that there was a lack of credible service
providers for training library workers.

The PoEC reported a number of achievements that included the procurement of
a server that will link all libraries and the provincial office; the
installation of  CCTV security systems in 14 libraries; 35 libraries had
been cabled; 20 libraries had been installed with datalines; and all
library materials had been purchased (but were not yet received).

The PoEC explained that monitoring and administration of the grant was
centralized in one office. The PoEC explained that a project manager, core
staff and three network controllers were appointed.They work together with
SITA in all ICT projects based at the provincial office. The PoEC reported
that local municipalities supported the deployment of staff in community
libraries. The user and circulation statistics at community libraries were
monitored by both municipalities and district offices.

The PoEC reported challenges, namely delays in the implementation of
projects by SITA and the Department of Public Works’ and the classification
of  renovation projects as incubators and not priority projects by the
Department of Public Works.

The PoEC concluded that the Constitutional arrangements for delivery of
library services still remained a challenge. The PoEC said that its
spending was supposed to be at 75% of the adopted budget but the actual
spending was at 54%. When combining commitments and actual spending as in
the third quarter, the PoEC had spent 66% at the end of the third quarter
and projected spending of 91% at the end of the 2009/10 financial year.

3.4 The Province of Limpopo

The Limpopo’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoL) reported
that, for Community Library Services grants, it had spent R36.7 million
(60%) against a budget of R61.3 million as at the end of December 2009.

The PoL reported that its budget, as adopted, was increased from R23
million in the 2007/08 financial year to R43 million for the 2008/09
financial year. A  further increase from R43 million in the 2008/09
financial year to R55 million in the 2009/10 financial year had been
effected. This allocation had been increased to R63 million for the 2010/11
financial year. The PoL said that the difference of R5.4 million in 2008/09
and R5.4 million in 2009/10 was effected as a result of roll-overs received
from the National Department of Arts and Culture.

The PoL reported that spending in the Community Library grant increased
from R17 million in the 2007/08 financial year to R40 million in the
2008/09 financial year. The PoL reported that its Community Library grant
was further increased from R40 million in the 2008/09 financial year to a
projected R61.3 million in the 2009/10 financial year.  The PoL said that
the projected spending for the 2010/11 financial year is R63 million. The
PoL reported that spending was projected to increase by 53% between the
2008/09 and 2009/10 financial years and by 2% between the 2009/10 and
2010/11 financial years.

The PoL reported that the contributing factor to under-spending included
the incapacity of contractors to deliver on infrastructure projects, e.g. a
delay in the construction of Fetakgomo Library and the maintenance of
Marble Hall Library; a delay to build the Ga-Phahla Library due to
disputes; inadequate co-ordination of projects in collaboration with the
implementing agent and the Provincial Department of Public Works; the PoL’s
inadequate capacity for project management and monitoring, and the lack of
adequate technical skills which causes it to rely on third parties for the
implementation of its infrastructure projects.

The PoL reported that its intention to improve the monitoring of capacity
by acquiring technical assistance and improving communication with the
implementing agent. A Steering Committee and Library Forums were to be
established and co-ordinated by the provincial office.

3.5 The Province of Western Cape

The Western Cape’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoWC)
reported that it was in partnership with the local municipalities which
served as implementing agents for projects. Memoranda of agreement had been
signed with 28 municipalities for the implementation of projects that
include staffing of public libraries, literacy projects and maintenance or
the upgrading of projects. The PoWC added that it signed a memorandum of
understanding with municipalities with regard to the implementation of the
Rural Library Connectivity Project and Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) projects.

The PoWC reported that its total budget for the 2009/10 financial year was
R41 million. At the end of the third quarter its actual expenditure was
R21.1 million (51.6%) and the projected outcome was R41 million (100%) as
at the end of the third quarter. The PoWC presented that R31.4 million
(76.6%) of the provincial allocation was spent on the appointment of
additional staff, literacy programmes and the maintenance and upgrading of
projects. Furthermore, centrally-managed projects include the establishment
of mobile book trolleys, the purchasing of library material, a Rural
Library Connectivity Project and grant management.

The PoWC reported that reasons for under-spending included delays by
suppliers to deliver mobile book trolleys and library material; the cost of
ICT equipment and mobile book trolleys were less than budgeted for, and
cost savings were spent on books during the fourth quarter.
The PoWC reported that its monitoring function was performed through
scheduled official site visits and a total of 1 478 monitoring visits were
undertaken in the 2009/10 financial year. All the municipalities submitted
their costed business plans together with signed memoranda of agreement.
Monthly Finance Focus meetings were held to monitor spending on conditional
grants.

With regard to compliance with monthly reporting, the PoWC presented that
monthly expenditure reports were submitted on a standard template designed
to provide information that is required for analysis. The PoWC added that
standard follow-up procedures were used to ensure that reports had been
received. The PoWC reported that monitoring visits to non-compliant
municipalities, as well as those that requested assistance, were
undertaken. Formal requests were made to non-compliant municipalities when
these reports were not submitted. The PoWC also reported that it had spent
100% of its grant by the end of the financial year.

3.6 The Province of Northern Cape

The Northern Cape’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoNC)
reported that its final appropriation for the 2009/10 financial year was
R69.4 million and the actual amount spent was R57.5 million. The PoWC
reported a variance of R11.8 million and spending expenditure as a
percentage of final appropriation of 83%.

The PoNC reported that reasons for under-spending by R11.8 million included
current payments amounting to R1.8 million and library material that was
procured through tender processes but were not delivered in full. The PoNC
reported that a rollover of R1.5 million was requested. Furthermore, a
transfer of an amount of R106 000 was withheld from one municipality
because it did not comply with transfer’ requirements. A further amount of
R9.8 million was meant for the construction of two of the three new
libraries which could not be completed by the end of 2009. It was reported
that these projects would be completed in July 2010 and a rollover of R9.8
million was requested for the completion of  infrastructural development.

The PoNC reported that its 2009/10 business plan provided for service
delivery in rural areas; the implementation of a digital library service
system in six sites; promoting library usage and reading promotion
programmes; the construction of three new libraries; training staff on
library services symposium; transferring funds to municipalities; and for
the maintenance of information technology (IT) infrastructure at 86 points.


With respect to the monitoring of transfers, the PoNC reported that heads
of libraries at community level were trained on transfer requirements and
the monitoring of transfers. Municipalities were also expected to submit
monthly reports. These reports covered library usage and programmes,
business plan rollouts and the challenges that were experienced.

The PoNC reported that challenges in the supply chain management’s tender
process for the procurement of library material was, amongst other things,
contributing towards under-spending. It concluded that library material was
not delivered on time for distribution within the financial year.

3.7 The Province of Gauteng

The Gauteng’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoG) reported that
it was allocated R46 million plus a rollover of R1.7 million in the 2009/10
financial year. In total, its adjusted budget for the financial year was
R47,7 million. The PoG reported that it received R40.8 million from the
National Department of Arts and Culture and an amount of R45.5 million was
transferred to municipalities. The Province projected an under-spending of
R1.4 million by the end of the third quarter.

The PoG reported that a number of challenges had been experienced by
municipalities with the conditions of the grants.  These included, inter
alia, a service provider filing for voluntary liquidation; vacancies that
were not filled; slow procurement processes; unfurnished libraries;
unsuitable conditions for the provision of services (mainly in Sekokeng);
slow or no progress on certain projects; and instabilities in some of the
municipalities.

The PoG added that other challenges relating to implementation are tight
time-frames for spending of the grant whereas government and municipal
financial years are different. The PoG further reported that the turn-
around time for the application of amendments to business plans is lengthy
and delays the implementation of projects. Furthermore, the PoG said that
decision-making in municipalities was adversely affected due to the
suspension of municipal managers and/or other vacant management posts.

3.8 The Province of KwaZulu Natal

The KwaZulu-Natal’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoKZN)
reported that it was allocated R34.1 million for the 2009/10 financial
year. R3.5 million was under-spent on this project and R1.4 million had
been rolled over for the 2009/10 financial year. The PoKZN argued that
under-spending related to an infrastructural project, a combined public
library and regional library depot in Mbazwana. The PoKZN reported that 19
per cent of the annual allocation was transferred to municipalities.

The PoKZN reported that the reasons for under-spending an amount totaling
R28 million, include the infrastructural project in Mbazwana which was due
for completion by the end of the 2009/2010 financial year. The Mbazwana
project was delayed due to labour disputes. This had been closely monitored
and it is expected that the project be completed by  August 2010 and not by
January 2010 as initially estimated. The PoKZN commented that it was not
unusual for building contractors in KwaZulu-Natal to fail meeting deadline
targets and this was an alarming situation.

The PoKZN presented that monitoring of grant spending was conducted through
monthly and quarterly reports which were submitted to the National
Department of Arts and Culture and the Provincial Treasury. The Committee
was informed that the PoKZN held reviews’ meetings with the National
Department of Arts and Culture. The PoKZN reported that internal auditing
on conditional grant spending was ongoing. Performance management audits
were conducted by Manto Management Consultants as appointed by the National
Department of Arts and Culture as from 29 July 2009. Evaluation Committee
meetings and Provincial Treasury’s bi-lateral meetings were convened and
inspection of sites was the responsibility of a Provincial Co-ordinator
appointed by the National Department of Arts and Culture.

3.9 The Province of North West

The North West’s Provincial Department of Arts and Culture (PoNW) reported
that it had been allocated R52.9 million and had a rollover of R1.9 million
for the 2009/10 financial year. The PoNW said that the total allocation of
R54.8 million for the 2009/10 financial year was allocated according to
grant priorities. The grant priorities were reported by the PoNW as
follows: capacity building in community libraries (staffing and training);
construction, upgrading and maintenance of infrastructure; installing and
upgrading information and communication technologies (ICT) for public
access; procurement of books and other library materials; and promoting the
culture of reading by procuring mobile library buses and conducting reading
awareness campaigns through library promotion programmes. The PoNW reported
that it spent R41.1 million (75 per cent) as at the end of the 2009/10
financial year.

The PoNW reported a number of achievements, including the procurement of a
mobile library which was fully functional and was being used by five
villages; provision of public internet access to 16 community libraries;
procurement of 140 computers for community libraries; training of staff in
community libraries on project management, computer literacy, disaster
management and preservation; advanced toy library training and storytelling
workshops were attended by 198 community library staff; 53 899 books were
purchased and distributed to community libraries; R3 million had been
transferred to Moretele Local Municipality for planning and design of the
Dertig Community Library; Completion of Coligny Library extension in
Ditsobotla Local Municipality and the maintenance of Wedela, Alabama and
Welverdiend Community libraries.

The PoNW reported that a number of challenges contributed to under-
spending. These include a delay in the construction of Ipelegeng Community
Library valued at R2 million in Mamusa Local Municipality; a delayed
tendering process for the construction of Utlwanang Community Library
(valued at R2.5 million) in Lekwa-Teemane Local Municipality; late
finalization of the tendering process to design and construct Lebaleng
Community Library valued at R3.2 million in Maquassi-Hills Local
Municipality; and a delay in the tender adjudication of Letsopa Community
Library (valued at R0.9 million) in Tswaing Local municipality due to a
municipal strike; late finalization of tender adjudication for appointment
of consultants to construct Boikhutso Community Library in Ditsobotla Local
Municipality; a tendering process for the design and planning phase of
Mogwase Community Library (valued at R950 000) which was pending as at May
2010; and the disrupted extension of Koster Library in Ketleng-Rivier
Municipality due to heavy rains.

Reasons for under-spending reported by the PoNW included seven
infrastructural projects that were incomplete and the late appointment of
service providers to supply vehicles, mobile library buses and security for
community libraries. The PoNW reported that there was insufficient capacity
in the Supply Chain Management Unit which has resulted in tender processes
being delayed. As a remedial measure to this, the PoNW reported that a
tender committee was established, it started its operations in February
2010 and is functional.

With respect to compliance with reporting, the PoNW stated that it has
submitted monthly and quarterly reports to the National Department of Arts
and Culture. However, the PoNW was struggling to get monthly spending
reports from local municipalities.

The PoNW reported that intervention meetings with local municipalities that
were receiving grants for capital projects were scheduled for the second
week in May 2010 with the aim to address delays in the implementation of
capital projects.

4. Observations

The Committee noted that challenges regarding the tendering and payment
processes are ongoing in the provinces, and it recommended that this should
be expedited.  .

Most provincial departments of arts and culture reported that their
respective provincial departments of public works had contributed to their
under-spending because they appointed inexperienced contractors who failed
to complete the projects.

The Committee observed that the provincial departments of arts and culture
did not have a strategy to follow-up on funds transferred to municipalities
and to ensure that such funds were spent on conditional grants priorities
and, as a result, that had been the cause for misappropriation of
taxpayers’ money.

The Committee observed that under-spending was caused by poor supply chain
management processes.

The Committee noted that conditional grant funds that were transferred to
municipalities appear as if they had not been spent even though they were
reported as spent by provinces.

The Committee observed that some provincial departments of arts and culture
spent most of their grants funds on the compensation of employees rather
than on capital expenditure.

5. Recommendations

Having considered the presentations on the spending on the Community
Library Services grant by the National Treasury and the afore-mentioned
provincial departments, the Select Committee on Appropriations recommends
that the National Council of Provinces considers the following:

1. That the provincial departments of arts and culture should strengthen
   their supply chain management units to avoid delays in the tendering
   processes.

2. That the provincial departments of arts and culture should develop
   monitoring tools to be utilised when they are monitoring spending on
   conditional grants by municipalities.

3. That the National Treasury and provincial departments of arts and
   culture should discuss effective ways of reporting spending on funds that
   are actually spent by municipalities, separate from committed funds.

4. That the provincial departments of public works should appoint
   experienced contractors with a good and sustained track record.

5. That the reporting requirements by municipalities should be improved to
   ensure that conditional grant funds transferred to municipalities were
   spent adequately.

6. That the provincial departments of arts and culture should refrain from
   spending grant funds on compensation of employees rather than purposes
   they were created for.

Report to be considered.

                          WEDNESDAY, 4 AUGUST 2010


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Government Notice No R.348 published in Government Gazette No
        33152 dated 7 May 2010:  Introduction of a compulsory specification
        for Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFL’s), in terms of the National
        Regulator Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

    (b)     General Notice No 396 published in Government Gazette No 33197
        dated 17 May 2010:  Prohibition of the use of the Moses Mabhida
        Stadium and other stadiums intellectual property rights, in terms
        of the Merchandise Marks Act, 1941 (Act No 17 of 1941).

    (c)     General Notice No 409 published in Government Gazette No 33203
        dated 17 May 2010:  Consumer Affairs Committee: Report on the
        investigation conducted by the committee: Report No. 125, in terms
        of the Consumer Affairs (Unfair Business Practices) Act, 1988 (Act
        No 71 of 1988).

    (d)     Government Notice No 443 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010:  Amendment: Compulsory Specification for
        Replacement Brake Lining Assemblies for Road Vehicles, in terms of
        the National Regulator Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No
        5 of 2008).

    (e)     Government Notice No R.425 published in Government Gazette No
        33217 dated 24 May 2010:  2010 Soccer World Cup Liquor Regulations,
        in terms of the Liquor Act, 2003 (Act No 59 of 2003).

    (f)     Government Notice No 493 published in Government Gazette No
        33259 dated 3 June 2010:  Effective date of the Probity and
        Information Sharing Register, in terms of the National Gambling
        Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of 2004).

    (g)     Government Notice No 494 published in Government Gazette No
        33260 dated 3 June 2010:  Effective date of the National Register
        of Gambling Devices and Machines, in terms of the National Gambling
        Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of 2004).

     h) Government Notice No R.504 published in Government Gazette No 33265
        dated 11 June 2010:  Proposed introduction of a regulation for the
        environmental sustainability of buildings, in terms of the National
        Building Regulations and Building Standards Act, 1977 (Act No 103
        of 1977).


    (i)     General Notice No 612 published in Government Gazette No 33309
        dated 25 June 2010:  Proposed prohibition on the use of certain
        words together with an emblem, in terms of the Merchandise Marks
        Act, 1941 (Act No 17 of 1941).


    (j)     General Notice No 613 published in Government Gazette No 33309
        dated 25 June 2010:  Proposed prohibition on the use of certain
        words together with an emblem, in terms of the Merchandise Marks
        Act, 1941 (Act No 17 of 1941).


   2. The Minister of Public Enterprises

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited (Eskom)
         for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.



                           THURSDAY, 5 AUGUST 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


   1) The following changes to Committee membership have been made:


        Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation
        Appointed:          Dudley, Mrs C - ACDP


        Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training


        Discharged:    Dudley, Mrs C – ACDP


        Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation


        Appointed:          Lebenya-Ntanzi, Ms SP
        Discharged:    Sithole, Mr P


                            FRIDAY, 6 AUGUST 2010


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Economic Development

     a) Strategic Plan of the Competition Tribunal for 2010 – 2015 (Revised
        July 2010).

     b) Strategic Plan of the International Trade Administration Commission
        of South Africa (ITAC) for 2010 – 2013.

    (c)     Medium Term Strategic Plan for the Khula Enterprise Finance
        (Ltd) for 2011 – 2013 and Business Plan 2010 - 2011.


    (d)     Three Year Strategic Plan of the South African Micro-Finance
        Apex Fund (SAMAF) for 2010 – 2013.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces
1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
    the Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the
    World Wine Trade Group (WWTG), dated 05 August 2010:


       The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
       considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Agreement on
       Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the World Wine Trade
       Group (WWTG), referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms
       of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


    Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
    the Agreement on Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World Wine
    Trade Group (WWTG), dated 5 August 2010:


       The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
       considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Agreement
       on Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group
       (WWTG), referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of
       section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


    Report to be considered.


                           FRIDAY, 10 AUGUST 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 13 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          b) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 14 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          c) South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).
          d) Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bills as section 76 Bills:

          a) Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill [B 15 –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

          b) Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill [B 16 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
        on 10 August 2010:


        (a)      South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


        The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
        the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.

                          WEDNESDAY, 11 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Local Government: Municipal Systems Amendment Bill [B 22 –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).

          b) Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          c) Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bills as section 76 Bills:

          a) Sectional Titles Schemes Management Bill [B 20 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).
          b) Community Schemes Ombud Service Bill [B 21 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

          c) Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B 26 –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:
         (a)     Protocol amending the Convention between the Government of
             the Republic of South Africa and the Government of Ireland for
             the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal
             evasion with respect to taxes on income and capital gains,
             with protocol, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol amending the double
             taxation Convention with protocol between the Government of
             the Republic of South Africa and the Government of Ireland.


         (c)     Protocol amending the Convention between the Republic of
             South Africa and the Kingdom of Sweden for the avoidance of
             double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with
             respect to taxes on income, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
             of the Constitution, 1996.


         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol amending the double
             taxation Convention between the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa and the Kingdom of Sweden.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Report of the Auditor-General to Parliament on an investigation
        at the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
        (CCMA) – June 2010 [RP 193-2010].

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) General Notice No 654 published in Government Gazette No 33333
        dated 29 June 2010: Publication of Implementation Guidelines: For
        general public comments, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

     b) Government Notice No 579 published in Government Gazette No 33342
        dated 2 July 2010: Model Air Quality Management By-law, in terms of
        the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of
        1998).
     c) General Notice No 677 published in Government Gazette No 33348
        dated 2 July 2010: Bio-prospecting Benefit Sharing Agreement, in
        terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,
        2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

     d) Government Notice No 596 published in Government Gazette No 33361
        dated 7 July 2010: Bio-prospecting, Access and Benefit Sharing
        Regulations, 2008, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

    (e)     2009-2010 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1)
        of the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No
        107 of 1998).

   3. The Minister of Economic Development


     a) Strategic Plan of the Competition Commission for the period 1 April
        2010 to 31 March 2013.

     b) Strategic Plan of the Industrial Development Corporation of South
        Africa (Corporate Plan) for the period 1 April 2010 to 31 March
        2013.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 30 July 2010 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing members of the Council of the extension of the
        employment of the South African National Defence Force for a
        service in fulfilment of the international obligations of the
        Republic of South Africa towards the United Nations (UN) and
        African Union (AU) as part of the AU/UN Hybrid Operation in Darfur
        (UNAMID):

        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS (UN) AND
        AFRICAN UNION (AU) AS PART OF THE AU/UN HYBRID OPERATION IN DARFUR


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        extended the employment of eight hundred and fifty (850) members of
        the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) for service in
        fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the United Nations (UN) and African Union (AU)
        as part of the AU/UN Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996.


        Members of the SANDF were employed for service in fulfilment of the
        international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the UN and AU as part of UN/AU Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The
        employment of these members expired on 31 March 2010.


        The SANDF’s mission in the Darfur is not yet completed. The
        employment of 850 SANDF members is now extended from 01 April 2010
        until 31 March 2011.
        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
        attention of the National Council of Provinces.


        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA


    (b)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 30 July 2010 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing members of the Council of the employment of
        the SA National Defence Force in co-operation with the South
        African Police Services in the prevention and combating of crime
        and maintenance and preservation of law and order within the
        Republic of South Africa and to render support to government
        departments during the hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup:

        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICE
        IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICES IN THE
        PREVENTION AND COMBATING OF CRIME AND MAINTENANCE AND PRESERVATION
        OF LAW AND ORDER WITHIN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND TO RENDER
        SUPPORT TO GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS DURING THE HOSTING OF THE 201
        FIFA WORLD CUP

        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        employed seven thousand one hundred and twenty (7120) members of
        the South African National Defence Force (SANDF), to cooperate with
        the South African Police Services in the prevention and combating
        of crime and maintenance and preservation of law and order within
        the Republic of South Africa and to render support to government
        departments during the hosting of the 2010 FIFA world cup over the
        period of 26 May to 18 July 2010.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
        attention of the National Council of Provinces.


        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA

                          THURSDAY, 12 AUGUST 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
        Deposits for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010.

National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

     a) Submission of petition from the Residents of Chiawelo, Extension 5.



        Referred to the Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
        Proposals for consideration and report.

     b) Report on the Taking Parliament to the People Programme: Limpopo:
        23 - 26 March 2010:


CREDA INSERT - T100812e-insert1 – PAGES 2363 - 2405

                           FRIDAY, 13 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs for consideration:

          a) 2009-10 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1)
             of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107
             of 1998).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    Correction:  The following entry replaces item 1(d) published under
               Tablings in the name of the Minister of Trade and Industry
               in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of  4
               August 2010, on page 2286:


               (d)     Government Notice No R. 443 published in Government
                    Gazette No 33211 dated 28 May 2010:  Amendment:
                    Compulsory Specification for Replacement Brake Lining
                    Assemblies for Road Vehicles, in terms of the National
                    Regulator Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5
                    of 2008).

                           TUESDAY, 17 AUGUST 2010
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
    Development on the Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill [B
    2B - 2009], dated 17 August 2010:

       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development,
       having considered the Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment
       Bill [B 2B - 2009] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it,
       reports that it has agreed to the Bill without amendments.

    Report to be considered.


