---
title: 'National Assembly - 02 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-09-02
---

THURSDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the consequences of the rising costs of building
   materials and how this phenomenon impacts on the broader transformation
   agenda, especially on the acceleration of comprehensive and sustainable
   human settlements delivery.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House -


   (1)      debates the role of Parliament in the processing and
        ratification of international treaties; and


   (2)      determines whether our role is being effectively implemented.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates building an egalitarian traditional courts system
   that is aligned with the Constitution.

Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag van die Huis gaan voorstel:

   Dat hierdie Huis debat voer oor die volgehoue agteruitgang van Transnet
   se sylyn-netwerk en die uitwerking op die landelike ekonomie.

Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates the sustained deterioration of Transnet’s siding
   network and its impact on the rural economy.


Thank you.]

Mrs N M TWALA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates the mechanisms which are in place for the
   acceleration of the government’s commitment to land restitution and
   distribution within the agreed framework.

Thank you.

Ms F E KHUMALO: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates plans to strengthen and salvage state-owned
   enterprises so that they respond to our defined public mandate and act in
   terms of our overarching industrial policy and economic transformation
   objectives.
I thank you. [Applause.]

    CRIME LINE SCOOPS TOP MEDIA AWARDS FROM CRIME STOPPERS INTERNATIONAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

      1) notes that Crime Line was presented with  three  top  international
         media awards at the annual Crime Stoppers International  conference
         in Halifax, Canada, where over  300  delegates  from  20  countries
         attended  the  conference,  with  South  Africa  competing  against
         countries like the United States of America,  the  United  Kingdom,
         India, Australia, the Netherlands and others; and

      2) congratulates Crime Line for receiving the awards “for  effectively
         promoting and the powerful  messaging”  of  the  anonymous  tip-off
         service as they scooped the media awards in the  print,  radio  and
         television categories for communities of over five million people.

Agreed to.

          NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION HONOURS PROF PHILLIP TOBIAS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs H S MSWELI: Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the IFP, I move
without notice:

   That the House —

      1) notes that the  National  Research  Foundation  yesterday  honoured
         palaeoanthropologist Phillip Tobias  with  a  lifetime  achievement
         award;

      2) further notes that Prof Tobias is hailed by scientists  around  the
         world as a leading authority on the evolution of humankind; and

   (3)      congratulates him on this great achievement.

Agreed to.

        SOUTH AFRICA HOSTS 2010 AFRICAN WOMEN’S FOOTBALL CHAMPIONSHIP

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:
   That the House —


   (1)      notes that —

             a) South Africa  will  be  hosting  the  2010  African  Women’s
                Football Championship;


            b) “The  Girls”,  Banyana  Banyana,  will  be  representing  our
               nation in this prestigious event; and


            c) South Africa as a  nation  and  our  Constitution  stand  for
               gender equality and that this  tournament  may  well  be  the
               platform that propels women’s football, or soccer, forward in
               South Africa;


       1) acknowledges the role that the hosting of this event will play  in
          developing our future woman football stars; and


       2) wishes the national team all the best in the upcoming tournament.

Agreed to.

        PERFORMANCE OF SOUTH AFRICAN TEAM AT THE YOUTH OLYMPIC GAMES

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes that the South African team to the Youth  Olympic  Games  has
        represented their country with dignity and that South Africa can be
        proud of their achievements;


      2) further notes that the team brought back a  total  of  nine  medals
         that act as a reflection of their achievements;


     3)  acknowledges  the  contribution  that  such  an  event  plays   in
        developing our future sports stars and ambassadors; and


      4)  congratulates  the  team  and  their  various  coaches  on   their
         incredible performances and wishes them all  the  best  with  their
         future endeavours.

Agreed to.

       OPENING OF SINETHEMBA CHILD AND YOUTH CARE CENTRE IN NEWCASTLE

                             (Draft Resolution)
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without
notice:


   That the House —

     1) welcomes the opening of Sinethemba Child and Youth Care  Centre  in
        Newcastle, northern KwaZulu-Natal, on Tuesday 31 August 2010;


      2) notes that the centre, which is the first  of  its  kind  in  South
         Africa, is designed to cater for 39 awaiting-trial  male  juveniles
         between the ages of 10 and 18;


      3) further notes that the purpose  of  the  centre  is  to  avoid  the
         incarceration of  youths  who  are  awaiting  trial  with  hardened
         criminals; and


      4) encourages the building of these institutions in all  provinces  to
         assist in the process of rehabilitation of young juveniles.

Agreed to.

    Extension of deadline for report of AD HOC COMMITTEE ON CO-ORDINATED
                   OVERSIGHT ON SERVICE DELIVERY TO REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on
the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House, notwithstanding the resolution it adopted on 11
   May 2010, resolves to −


   (1)      extend the deadline  by  which  the  Ad  Hoc  Committee  on  Co-
         ordinated Oversight on Service Delivery under the Theme:  “Working
         together to ensure the delivery of quality service to communities”
         has to report, to 10 September 2010; and

   (2)      condone the work the committee has done since 30 July 2010.

Agreed to.

 HOTLINE FOR PUBLIC ACCESS TO CHRONIC MEDICATION DURING PUBLIC SECTOR STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T E KENYE (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC welcomes the announcement by the
Minister of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, that the national Department of
Health will set up a hotline for patients requiring chronic medication
while the public sector strike continues. The call centre has been
established by the Department of Health to provide assistance to patients
who are on chronic medication and are encountering difficulties in
accessing their treatment during the ongoing Public Service strike. The
Call centre agents will advise and direct callers to where they can access
their treatment.

We urge members of the public to use this facility to access their
medication while the strike continues. The call centre will operate from
07:00 in the morning to 17:00 in the afternoon daily. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                          Iraq Oil-for-Food Scandal

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Hon Speaker, the DA is fundamentally
opposed to President Jacob Zuma’s decision not to relaunch the
investigation into the Iraq oil-for-food scandal and to keep the full
findings of the initial investigation into this matter concealed from the
public. Despite regular protestations that his government is tough on
corruption, the President’s handling of this matter is indicative of the
ANC’s attitude towards executive misconduct and best democratic practice.

It has been four years since the original Oilgate investigation. The Donen
commission was established, and yet two successive ANC administrations have
failed to take any decisive action against a single individual. This is a
matter of public importance. South Africans have the right to know the
truth. The alleged involvement of top ANC officials, including the
President, means that the full details of yet another instance of power
abuse and gross misconduct by the ANC government will, in all likelihood,
be hidden indefinitely from public scrutiny.

The DA wishes to reiterate its call for the full report of the Donen
commission to be made public and for a new commission of investigation,
with the power of subpoena, to be launched into this scandal. The decision
not to further investigate the oil-for-food debacle has been made in the
interests of the ANC and not in the interests of the public. The DA will
use every available mechanism to oppose it. Thank you. [Applause.]

                            PUBLIC SECTOR STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Mr Speaker, South Africa is now in the grip of a
strike that has gone on for 15 days. The issue here is not only money and
benefits, but also very much South Africa becoming the predatory state that
it has now degenerated into. Educators, health workers and others have
witnessed conspicuous consumption, profligate expenditure and lavish
lifestyles in the upper echelons of the government inside this predatory
state. This is not without reason. They are unwilling to settle for
adjustments that, by contrast, are insignificant. If the envelope is
broken, it should be broken for everybody.

The very ANC which undertook to flatten the remuneration gap has made it
blatantly steeper. Self-enrichment of the political elite, their families
and their offspring has gone beyond the tolerance limit. There is an open
revolt now, not least within the structures that were key to electing this
government. The strike is therefore being dragged out because political,
ethical and economic issues have all been scrambled.

The education of our children is now thrown into total jeopardy. They may
have had the least amount of schooling in any year at any time. The matric
exams are now distinctly in danger of not being written.

This government is bringing the country to the brink of chaos. The conduct
of the President himself is also pushing the envelope too far. Even though
he has numerous wives ... [Interjections.] [Laughter.] [Time expired.]

                           DIYATALAWA AGRIVILLAGE
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D E DLAKUDE (ANC): Hon Speaker, on 23 July 2010, while on their
oversight visit to the Free State, the Portfolio Committee on Human
Settlements visited Diyatalawa, a concentration camp converted into an
agrivillage. Diyatalawa means “falling apples”, because this used be an
apple farm. The 36 families living in this area were farm labourers.

This is one of the best agrivillages in the country. Thank you to the
Department of Human Settlements, in partnership with the Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform, for ensuring that land is provided to
build homes for our people and for promoting local economic development by
providing our people with chicken barns, 2000 chickens and 240 cattle. One
hundred and twenty dairy cattle will be provided. Seven 75m² three- and
four-bedroomed houses with sanitation were completed. The rest of the
houses were still under construction and were be completed by the end of
August.

The construction of a creche and primary and secondary schools is under
way, and the road leading to this village is under construction. Both
departments are working together tirelessly to ensure that the dignity of
our people is restored by advancing and promoting the rural housing
programme and comprehensive rural development, and ensuring that our people
share in the wealth of the land they work on. Thank you, Speaker.
[Applause.]
                  NEW ROAD SAFETY CAMPAIGN IN WESTERN CAPE
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE (IFP): Mr Speaker, the IFP welcomes the new road
safety campaign in the Western Cape to name and shame convicted drunk
drivers. This campaign will see information on every conviction for drunk
driving from every magistrate’s court in the province being gathered and
released to the media. The transport department then aims to supply the
media with the names, addresses, dates, places of conviction and
photographs of those convicted.

The same plan of action was implemented in KwaZulu-Natal with great
success. These steps will hopefully curb drunken driving as over 2 000
citizens of the Western Cape have been convicted for driving under the
influence of liquor this year alone.

The IFP believes that this campaign will have a major positive effect on
road safety. We are therefore of the opinion that this programme should be
made a national programme as a matter of urgency. [Applause.]

  HANDING OUT OF 80 000 CELLPHONES BY THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS TO THE
                        POLICE AND HEALTH MINISTRIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mme S R TSEBE (ANC): Ke a leboga Semesegolo, ditlamo di le tharo tsa megala
ya letheka di neelane ka megala ya letheka e ka nna 80 000. Dikabelo tseno
ke bontlhabongwe jwa maitlamo a ditlamo tseno di a dirileng fa di ne di
abelwa tetla ya go dirisa mafaratlhatlha a bokgoni ba boraro ba bogokaganyi
... (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Ms S R TSEBE (ANC): Thank you, Chief Whip. Three cellphone companies
donated about 80 000 cellphones as part of the commitment they made when
they received permission to use ...]

... a third generation network licence.

Tona ya Ditlhaeletsano e abile megala eno go thusa gore sepodisi sa Aforika
Borwa se lwantshe bosenyi le go thusa Lefapha la Boitekanelo go gokaganya
badiri le baithuti ba ba gasagasaneng mo nageng kwa dikgaolong tse di
kgakala.

ANC e dumela gore tlhaeletsano kana bogokaganyi bo ka kgontsha puso go
fitlhisa ditirelo setšhaba go Maaforika Borwa, e bile e itumelela go
dirisiwa ka botlalo ga bokgoni ba bogokaganyi mo go fitlheleleng maitlhomo
a puso. ANC e akgola le bogatlhamela masisi ba Tona ya Ditlhaeletsano,
Mogenerala Siphiwe Nyanda, mo go fitlhiseng ditirelo go Maaforika Borwa ka
bophara. Ka go rialo, go bontsha gore:

Mmogo re ka dira go le gontsi.
Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The Minister of Communications donated these phones to assist the SA
Police to combat crime and the Department of Health to connect employees
and students in remote regions across the country.

The ANC believes that communication can enable government to bring social
services to South Africans and is pleased that these connections have been
utilised to achieve the intention of government. The ANC applauds the
courage of the Minister of Communications, Gen Siphiwe Nyanda, in bringing
services to South Africans in general. In saying that, we really confirm
that: Together, we can do more. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                        SUPPORT FOR THE CLASS OF 2010

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Hon Speaker, the ACDP commends the Minister of Basic
Education and her department on their efforts to minimise any damage as a
result of the strikes. We would like to encourage people to support schools
during this period of disrupted education and are pleased to note that
there have already been more than 2 300 responses from individuals and
organisations to the Let’s Support the Class of 2010 campaign nationally.

Experts in the subjects offered for matric are still needed, and parents
and community volunteers are required to keep younger learners in active
learning. The positive influnce of community and parent involvement at
schools is hugely beneficial at any time, and if nothing else, this crisis
has afforded an opportunity for this example to be modelled. Statistics
indicate that significantly higher pass rates in former model C schools are
directly linked to better resources and facilities due to parental
involvement.

The safety of our children is, of course, paramount, and the ACDP supports
the department’s commitment to screening volunteers and doing everything
possible to protect learners from exposure to people who pose any danger or
risk to their wellbeing. We remind volunteers that these checks are
important, and we urge volunteers to assist the department in this regard.

The ACDP regards the disruption of learners’ studies as a crisis which
could significantly impact on the ability of all 2010 learners to fulfil
their potential as leaders of tomorrow. We call on unions to urgently
consider new and more helpful ways of dealing with grievances and wage
demands and not to hold learners hostage in this manner. Thank you.
[Applause.]

         BLACKHEATH LEVEL CROSSING TAXI ACCIDENT KILLING 10 CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms H N MAKHUBA (IFP): Hon Speaker, last week 10 schoolchildren were killed
when a taxi collided with a train after the driver allegedly overtook nine
vehicles waiting at the half-boom railway gates at the Blackheath level
crossing in Cape Town. The taxi driver is currently facing 10 counts of
culpable homicide and was scheduled to appear at the Blue Downs
Magistrate’s Court yesterday.

He arrived at the court waving and smiling at journalists while shouting
and greeting those who were gathered outside the Blue Downs Magistrate’s
Court ahead of his scheduled appearance as if he had just committed a
heroic act.

The deaths of these 10 children, who range from 7 to 16 years of age, have
sparked outrage among families, residents and politicians. The IFP believes
far too many innocent people die at the hands of reckless drivers in South
Africa, and the penalty given to the perpetrators is sometimes far too
lenient. It’s about time that we, the lawmakers of this country, tighten
legislation to deal with such individuals and let justice be served to deal
with the criminal behaviour that many other lawless taxi drivers display on
a daily basis.

In addition, the IFP believes that the Passenger Rail Agency of South
Africa has to reconsider its safety measures at its level crossings,
particularly those that are half-boomed, and work hand in hand with law
enforcement to prevent these kinds of accidents from happening in the
future. Thank you. [Applause.]

     COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN CHINA AND SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G J SELAU (ANC): Speaker, President Zuma’s visit to China is part of the
ANC government’s aim of consolidating south-south relations and
strengthening political, economic and trade relations with the People’s
Republic of China. The two countries signed the Beijing Declaration. The
declaration outlined 38 bilateral co-operation agreements ranging from
political dialogues, trade, investment, mineral exploration and agriculture
to joint efforts in the global arena such as in the United Nations and the
Forum on China-Africa Co-operation.

The key element of this expanded partnership is the partnership for growth
and development, focusing on key issues such as beneficiation and value
addition to resources, infrastructure, market access and trade with regard
to the SADC region and Africa as a whole. This comprehensive strategic
partnership declaration will guide South Africa’s overall interaction with
China over the next 10 to 15 years. Thank you. [Applause.]

   COURT JUDGMENT ON FUNDING POLICY FOR FREE STATE NONPROFIT ORGANISATIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S P KOPANE (DA): Hon Speaker, the ANC government’s continual failure to
fulfil its constitutional obligation to children and the elderly has
resulted in both the national department and the Free State department of
social development being taken to court by the NGO sector to force the
government to honour its obligations to them.

Recent court findings highlighted the fact that skewed funding resulted in
the Free State department allocating between R5 000 and R6 750 per month
per child for a state-run children’s home while it paid only R2 000 per
month for homes run by nonprofit organisations, NPOs. The judgment by the
court orders the department to revise its funding policy within four months
and that the policy must have a fair, equitable and transparent method of
determining how much should be paid to NPOs.

It is an indictment on the department that, due to a lack of capacity and
leadership within the department, the court will supervise the
implementation of the judgment. It is a very sad day when organisations
that are at the coalface of protecting the most vulnerable in our society
are forced to go to court to get the government to do its job. This does
highlight, however, the hypocritical attitude that the ANC government has
towards children’s rights in South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

                     SITUATION AT SABC CAUSE FOR CONCERN















                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J D KILIAN (Cope): Speaker, Cope is very concerned that the SABC is
again suffering as a result of the clamour for control of financial
resources and the airwaves by feuding factions in the ANC alliance.
Elements in the executive management are flouting the rules and regulations
to have cronies appointed to take control of news and current affairs in
the run-up to the local government elections.

It is indefensible that within a mere four years a mink and manure elite
has been established at the SABC, whilst middle management and workers are
keeping programmes on the air. This is substantiated with hard facts and
figures, for example a 29% increase in the head count at the SABC, but a
128% increase in the wage bill. How do we explain to the poor that the head
of news earns a bigger salary than President Zuma?

Cope condemns the ANC’s political meddling, which undermines the efforts of
the SABC board to restore sound governance systems and financial propriety
to the public broadcaster. The SABC belongs to all South Africans, not to
the ANC! South Africans pay licence fees, and their taxes have bailed out a
bankrupt SABC. Cope insists that the board makes a presentation to the
portfolio committee within the next 10 days, in full view of the public and
the media.

The Minister cannot resolve the crisis. He is conflicted as a result of his
friendship with the group chief executive officer, the board chairperson
and the head of news and his close alliance with the MK veterans. Thank
you. [Interjections.] [Time expired.][Applause.]

                      WORLD YOUTH CONFERENCE IN MEXICO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P MADUNA (ANC): Hon Speaker, a South African delegation led by the
Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, Andries Nel,
participated in the World Youth Conference in Mexico hosted by the Mexican
government in collaboration with the UN Population Fund, UN Development
Fund for Women, UN Development Programme, UN Educational, Scienctific and
Cultural Organisation and the UN programme on youth.

The conference, which got under way on Monday, 23 August 2010, aims to put
youth development on the world agenda and identify priority actions for
2015 on youth issues to be included in the international agenda for
development beyond the Millennium Development Goals. Delegates were
expected to consider issues such as poverty, education, health, employment,
technology, culture, gender equalty and climate change, all of which are
considered key to youth development. The ANC views these challenges facing
the youth as common to most countries, continents and the world.
Siyabulela. [Thank you.]

                    ELECTRICITY CRISIS IN THE FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C ROSS (DA): Hon Speaker, the DA welcomes the announcement of a
special committee to investigate and monitor the electricity crisis in the
Free State. The Free State Premier, Ace Magashule, has realised the urgent
nature of this crisis that many municipalities in the Free State are
facing. Recently most municipalities received notices of disconnection from
Eskom due to massive outstanding debts owing to Eskom. About 90% of the
debt owed to Eskom by municipalities comes from the Free State
municipalities.

The DA has requested the premier and the special committee to invoke
section 27 of the Electricity Regulation Amendment Act of 2007, which
states that each municipality must perform its duty by preparing plans and
budgets and then report to the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, Cogta, the National Treasury, the Regulator and the
consumers of electricity. At the core of the problem is the fact that
government must ensure the implementation of Treasury regulations.

The provision of electricity is a core function of municipalities. Yet, so
many ANC municipalities fail to do this effectively. Voters in the Free
State in next year’s local government elections will clearly show their
dissatisfaction with the ANC, I presume. If the governing party of a
municipality cannot even get the most basic financial management and
budgeting right, then it should not be in government. Thank you, Speaker.
[Applause.]

             UNIVERSITY OF NORTH WEST SCIENCE CENTRE IN MAFIKENG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M T KUBAYI (ANC): Speaker, the ANC believes that the world in which we
live is highly dependent on science and technology to improve the social
and economic lives of South Africans, hence the opening of a science centre
at the University of North West Mafikeng Campus on Thursday, 30 August
2010, is crucial in strengthening grass-roots science awareness campaigns.

The science centre will benefit learners, students and the public in
Mafikeng and adjacent areas. It will play an important role in helping
people gain an understanding of how human activity is warming the climate,
what impact that will have on food and water security and, crucially, what
needs to be done to slow or reverse the warming trend.

Our lives are immeasurably improved by science and engineering. The opening
of the science centre marks an important milestone in the community
engagement programme of the North West University. The ANC supports this
initiative and believes that the task of taking science to all corners of
the country is a huge one that no single individual or organisation can
carry out alone. Thank you. [Applause.]

     APPOINTMENT OF MS MUTHAMBI AS MEMBER OF UNIVERSITY OF VENDA COUNCIL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof L B G NDABANDABA (ANC): Hon Speaker, I rise to state that the ANC
congratulates Ms Muthambi, a member of this hon House, on joining the
Deputy President at the University of Venda as a member of the university
council. [Applause.]

Ms Muthambi, only 36 years of age, has been appointed a member of the
council of the University of Venda with effect from 12 July 2010. The ANC
acknowledges that her achievement is an inspiration to the young people of
this country, as well as women of this country, and the ANC as an
organisation. Ms Muthambi is the first and youngest external member to
serve in such a high decision-making body of the university. The ANC
therefore wishes her success in her new appointment. Ngiyabonga, Somlomo.
[Thank you, Speaker.]

                  NEW ROAD SAFETY CAMPAIGN IN WESTERN CAPE
         BLACKHEATH LEVEL CROSSING TAXI ACCIDENT KILLING 10 CHILDREN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Hon Speaker, there were two matters
raised by two hon members from the IFP relating to transport and safety on
our roads. The hon Koos van der Merwe correctly commended the Western Cape
government for introducing a naming and shaming programme for those found
guilty of drunk driving or driving under the influence of one form of
substance or another.

The hon Van der Merwe correctly said that this was also piloted elsewhere.
I am aware that at uMsunduzi Municipality a similar programme has been
conducted with great success. This underlines the fact that in order to
succeed these programmes also require the co-operation of the media to
actually publish the names of people guilty of this.

The importance of really focusing on this issue and trying to correct
behaviour on our roads is underlined by the second matter that the second
member from the IFP raised about the terrible tragedy at the Blackheath
level crossing. I don’t know if the hon member is aware that that evening —
the accident happened in the morning at about 7 o’ clock — there was a
small group of people gathered at the level crossing: family, friends,
police and so forth. And what happened? Another minibus driver did exactly
the same thing. He cut across a whole queue of cars waiting at the level
crossing and crossed over. Fortunately, in this case there was no accident
and no smash. But it just underlines how absolutely reckless and senseless
some people can be. It’s not just minibus drivers; it’s all drivers across
the board who are really not taking things seriously.

The hon member suggested that we need to change the law. I don’t think that
the law is at fault. I think the law is there. But too often, for instance,
in magistrates’ courts and so on, these things are treated as if they are
accidents. They are not. These are smashes caused by culpable actions and
so forth. So, I think we need to toughen up the way we treat these matters.
I agree that we need to look at the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa,
Prasa, and the Rail Safety Regulator to make sure that level crossings are
as safe as possible. However, in many cases it’s not the infrastructure or
the booms. They were there in this case; it’s driver behaviour. Thank you,
hon Speaker. [Applause.]

     COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN CHINA AND SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Speaker, I just want to respond to the
very positive statement by the hon Selau. The visit to China, which took
place under the leadership of the President, was indeed a very important
strategic visit.

Among other things, the partnership agreement that he mentioned was in fact
a comprehensive strategic partnership agreement which substantially
elevated the level of the bilateral relationship which we have with the
People’s Republic of China. There is a series of structures which begin
with summit meetings periodically, meetings at the level of Deputy
Presidents and annual meetings by Ministers. Indeed it does mean that we
have a relationship with China which China has with a few other countries.

Some of the elements of a comprehensive strategic partnership were also
very important. Among other things is the commitment by the government of
China to encourage their enterprises to purchase more value-added products
from South Africa and co-operate in adding value and beneficiating mineral
products, as well as co-operate in manufacturing inputs for infrastructure
and green industry programmes.

I think it’s very clear that China chose to have a relationship with us
because they see us as a country with significant potential, an important
power in our own right as a middle-income emerging economy and also as a
part of the African continent. I can’t help but conclude that the way China
sees us is in very sharp contrast with the way the hon Mluleki George sees
us. I just want to say to him that it’s actually not the country that’s
gone to the dogs, it’s your party. I thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

  HANDING OUT OF 80 000 CELLPHONES BY THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS TO THE
                        POLICE AND HEALTH MINISTRIES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Speaker, the issue of partnership with
different partners in the community is a very fundamental pillar of
government, particularly in the fight against crime.

We further add our voice in congratulating Crime Line, which has formed a
very formidable partnership with the police. We say that together, we can
do more. Thank you very much.

                            PUBLIC SECTOR STRIKE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, firstly, I believe it’s
important for the House to note that it is the government that has improved
its offer to public servants and not public servants who have come back to
government with something new. Therefore, the hon Mluleki George is
entirely wrong in his assessment that this government has been unable to
move.

Secondly, the executive enjoys exactly the same privileges that the hon
Mluleki George so wonderfully enjoyed when he previously served in it.
[Applause.]

There has been no change whatsoever. There is no open revolt in the ANC. It
is stronger than ever and will go on to be far, far stronger that the party
of which the hon Mluleki is currently a member. I think if I were him, I
would not be talking about political issues being scrambled given the
scrambling, that currently characterises the party of which he is a member.
[Applause.]


                      BLACK AUTHORITIES ACT REPEAL BILL


                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move:


   That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                      BLACK AUTHORITIES ACT REPEAL BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Speaker, in a
democratic South Africa, we cannot but — at least historically — recognise
the Black Authorities Act, No 68 of 1951, as a defining piece of
legislation in the relationship between the state and citizens. Internal
colonialism such as apartheid left the democratic government with many
legacies, and seemingly intractable governance issues to contend with.
These include a chaotic and contradicting power structure transmitted in
racial hierarchies and tribally arranged local communities, giving birth to
deformed racial and tribal identities in South Africa.

While directly the apartheid state denied basic rights to the black
majority on racial grounds, in an authoritarian mode it introduced a well-
tested colonial project of indirect rule by instituting a customary mode of
rule, with state-appointed native authorities amongst Africans thus
redefining customs. This state incursion into traditions and cultures of
various Africans in South Africa distorted and damaged the established
practices of those affected.
The institutional legacy of the Black Authorities Act is a colossal social
experiment that a single legislative Act cannot wipe away. It is an ongoing
project that the democratic state remains committed to. The institutional
features of the Black Authorities Act bear themselves out in the
configuration of a number of arrangements within postapartheid South
Africa. Dislodging and dislocating the apartheid edifice of traditional
institutions with all the accompanying distortions and disfigurements is a
task that we have commenced with. We will continue with the systematic
removal of all the legislative pillars of this system.

Even with the fragmentation and resistance evident in the public response
to how this task is carried out or the pace of interventions in restoring
the legitimacy of the social organisations of our communities, we take
comfort in the unanimity of views that this repeal Bill is a step in the
right direction

In calling upon the Parliament of the people to approve this repeal Bill,
we commit to reforming the distortions created by the Black Authorities Act
and similar measures as they continually foster tension between
institutions and between institutions and people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P C NGWENYA-MABILA: Hon Speaker, section 55 of the Constitution
mandates Parliament to consider, pass, amend or reject any law before it.
Today we debate the report on the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill. As the
name indicates, the Black Authorities Act was introduced to support the
apartheid government’s policy of separate development. The repeal of the
Act is in line with the democratic government’s agenda to repeal all
statutes in the Statute Book that are redundant, obsolete or in conflict
with constitutional imperatives.

The Black Authorities Act, No 68 of 1951, is one of those Acts that are old
and obsolete, and it undermines the values of human rights and equality
enshrined in our Constitution. Therefore, the Act is not relevant to the
current situation.

Our Constitution indicates that all shall enjoy equal rights irrespective
of race or colour. Furthermore, section 21(3) of the Constitution says that
every citizen has the right to enter, to remain in and to reside anywhere
in the Republic. The Black Authorities Act undermines all of that. The Act
was enacted during the apartheid era to establish tribal, regional and
territorial authorities to administer the affairs of black people only and
not of all South African citizens. Its intention was to keep “kaffers op
hulle plek” or black people in their place, and that place was in the
homelands. South Africa is a unitary state. Racial and tribal divisions are
no longer acceptable.

The Constitution requires that people’s dignity be protected and respected,
but the Act was aimed at controlling, dehumanising, dividing and
discriminating against black people in the former homelands instead of
broadening constitutional values and human rights.

In a democratic dispensation, proper consultation with communities on
matters that affect their lives is vital. Rural people, as citizens of this
country, must be able to participate in the decision-making processes. The
Black Authorities Act gives the government, chiefs and headmen the right to
take decisions on behalf of rural people, which deprives them of the
freedom of expression as enshrined in section 16 of the Constitution - the
Bill of Rights. Public participation encourages people to be more
responsible for their actions.

As the ANC, we resolved at the Polokwane conference that we need to
strengthen the voices of rural South Africans, empower rural communities
and build the momentum behind agrarian change and land reform by supporting
the mobilisation of rural people, working together with progressive
movements and organisations and building forums and structures through
which rural people can articulate their demands and interests. This is in
line with section 18 of the Constitution, which supports freedom of
association and expression.

Rural development is the central pillar of our struggle against
unemployment, poverty and inequality. High levels of rural poverty and
equality inhibit the growth of our economy. Most rural people were
dependent on subsistence farming to feed themselves and their families, but
they are burdened with tax payments while they have no income. Section 6 of
the Act gives the territorial authority the right to impose tax on black
inhabitants. Through the Act, rural people have been required to pay taxes
such as horse, tribal, poll and, development tax, as well as and other
taxes to tribal authorities as well as government. This means that rural
people were doubly taxed, which contradicts the Constitution because it
restricts the power to levy taxes on national, provincial and local
government.

South Africa’s brutal apartheid past was based on inequalities. Women in
South Africa have a history of being disadvantaged which was built under
the old laws. The patriarchal system was the order of the day. Women were
made to depend on men economically. The status of women was reduced to that
of children. Women were not allowed to chair meetings. Meetings were
chaired by the commissioner or an adult male, which undermined the capacity
of women and promoted the ideology of male superiority, while the right to
equality is a basic right in the Constitution. Women were not allowed to
speak for themselves, and their voices were not heard.

Furthermore, women were not allowed to own property. When a husband passed
away, the eldest son or the brother-in-law was to take over. This
contradicts section 25(1) of the Constitution, which protects the rights of
every person to acquire and hold rights to property. The rights of the
people are the same regardless of race, colour or sex.

With the new dispensation, women are speaking for themselves and are not
represented by men as this undermines their rights. The rights of women are
of equal importance to those of men. The repeal of the Black Authorities
Act will eradicate gender discrimination and oppression, and it will ensure
that all South Africans do indeed have equal access to opportunities and
protection.

The ANC resolved in Polokwane that we need to ensure that the allocation of
customary land is democratised in a manner that empowers rural women and
supports the building of democratic community structures at village level
that are capable of driving and co-ordinating local development processes.

Gender equality must be a critical ingredient, and an important outcome of
all our programmes of rural development. Correcting the injustice of the
past requires that women must increasingly become beneficiaries and
decision-makers in respect of strategies to overcome poverty in rural
areas.

The programme of rural development and land reform must integrate clear
strategies that seek to empower the poor. This is especially the for those
who derive all or part of their livelihood from productive land in line
with the Freedom Charter’s call that “the land shall be shared among those
who work it”. Critical beneficiaries of change must be rural women.

Democracy requires that citizens be continuously engaged in governance
through interaction with those who make decisions. We are elected to make
policies and laws on behalf of the people. We are therefore required to
fulfil their mandate by ensuring continuous consultation and dialogue with
citizens whom we represent.

The Constitution accords the public a role in parliamentary proceedings. As
an activist parliamentary committee, we facilitated public involvement
during the processing of this Bill. The public was invited to make written
comments. Furthermore, public hearings were held whereby various
stakeholders made comments on the Bill. We heard the voices of the public.
The public supports the repeal of the Black Authorities Act.

Through the repeal of the Black Authorities Act, we have nothing to lose
but everything to gain as there will be a transition from the old
discriminatory Act to a new democratic, participatory social order whereby
rural people will realise their constitutional rights. The Black
Authorities Act has no space in this democratic dispensation as it has no
respect for people’s equal rights and dignity. It cannot be part of our
constitutional mandate. Therefore, it must be removed from the Statute
Book.

The people of South Africa declared that South Africa belongs to all who
live in it — black and white — and that no government can justify and claim
authority unless it is based on the will of the people.

I agree with the hon Minister that we will continue to review all pieces of
legislation which are on our Statute Book that continue to undermine the
dignity of South Africans and conflict with the Constitution as it is the
supreme law of the country. I therefore see no reason for this Act not to
be repealed. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs A STEYN: Hon Speaker, the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill correctly
states that the Act was a legislative cornerstone of apartheid engineering,
which sought to control communities of black people. It laid the foundation
for the establishment of statutory tribal, regional and territorial
authorities to administer the affairs of black people.

During apartheid millions of people were forcibly removed into separate
tribes, each with their own homeland. Time and again Bantustan
consolidation removals favoured compliant traditional leaders, who were
then rewarded with large tracts of land, and punished those who resisted by
putting them under the authority of the collaborators.

Albert Luthuli wrote in his book Let My People Go:


   The modes of government proposed are a caricature. They are neither
   democratic nor African. The Act makes our chiefs, quite straightforwardly
   and simply, into puppets and agents of the big dictator. They are
   answerable to him only, never to their people.

The DA welcomes the repeal of this Bill. But it is concerned by the
distorted legacy of the Bantu Authorities Act. This Act will live on. It is
in fact entrenched by other recent laws, the basis of which is the
Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act. The framework Act and
the new provincial laws now entrench the contested boundaries and make it
virtually impossible for groups who were put under the wrong tribal
authority during apartheid to fix the problem.

The new laws enable traditional leaders to have extensive powers within
these jurisdictional boundaries. This power is not based on the key
customary principle of voluntary affiliation and consensus. Instead, it is
based on the apartheid precedent of the top-down statutory power within
these fixed geographical boundaries.

These challenges could best be described by the stories related by rural
communities during the public participation process. Representatives from
Cala University gave the description of a case of two bulls in the same
kraal:
   Although South Africa has moved from an undemocratic era into a democracy
   in 1994, the lives of citizens living in communal areas has not changed
   much, unlike their counterparts in urban areas who are governed by means
   of elected municipal and ward councillors. Communal areas of South Africa
   have a complicated arrangement in that both municipal structures and
   traditional institutions have a say in rural areas.


The Ilizwe Lamafa Farmers’ Union said:

   If a person wants land, they have to go to the chief and request that
   from the chief. If he wishes, he will give you land and if he does not
   wish so, he will not give you land. The human rights for men, children
   and women were and are still deprived and violated by these
   chieftaincies. If you are summoned by the chief and you fail to appear
   before him, the chief can take away your residential rights or force you
   to work in his mealie fields for a period. This means that rural people
   are subjects and not full citizens.

In most of these cases heard, the plight was not for the removal of the
traditional leaders, but rather a serious concern by rural communities to
fight for the protection of their cultures.

In conclusion, the Black Authorities Act created these tribal authorities.
It disregarded individuals, families and clans living in the same area and
having particular rights over the same land. Parliament must ensure that
much-needed consultation takes place with affected communities and that
consultation is not limited to the chiefs. The DA supports the Bill.
[Applause.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Hon Speaker, Cope supports the repeal of this repugnant
Act, whose introduction in 1951 saw the entrenchment of the divide and rule
policy by the National Party government and the subsequent establishment of
the Bantustans. As a consequence of this Act, certain individuals were
appointed as chiefs against traditional protocols. These chiefs had no
legitimacy and were the rural people’s nemeses.

By imposing themselves on rural communities as traditional leaders, they
strove to enrich themselves and their families without benefitting the
people. Illegitimate chiefs were generally authoritarian and
megalomaniacal, and the people therefore rejected them.

The majority of rural areas, as a result of this apartheid era legislation,
still do not have infrastructure and amenities even up to the present time.
People still have to walk long distances for health care services and to
have access to clean water. The use of unsafe containers for storing water
is a norm in rural areas. As nothing is being done about that, the health
of rural communities has been adversely affected.
Unemployment and poverty continue to deepen, and this has resulted in a
massive migration of young men, leaving the aged, women and children in
rural areas to fend for themselves.

We want to see the repeal of this Act serving as a beacon of hope to those
women who are still perceived as minors and who cannot therefore enjoy land
tenure rights. This is intolerable. This Act perpetuated the stereotyping
of women and girls. It was therefore difficult for women to have even a
piece of land for erecting shelter. This impediment has lingered 16 years
into our democracy.

However, in supporting the repeal of this Act, we are mindful that things
could unravel in an undesirable way. We urge government to weigh the risks
and to be adequately prepared for what may transpire. Cope supports the
repeal of the Act and sheds no tears. Thank you.

Prof C T MSIMANG: Hon Speaker, the repeal of the Black Authorities Act is
very welcome news to the IFP. This was the cornerstone of all divisive
statutes of the apartheid regime for it not only discriminated against
blacks, but also divided one ethnic group from another. No wonder that all
blacks, excluding those who were beneficiaries from the system, rejected it
with contempt.

Despite the rejection, Dr Verwoerd, as the architect of Bantustan policy,
travelled throughout the country selling his policy. He arrived in Nongoma
in October 1955 to address some 300 Zulu amakhosi who had been invited by
paramount Chief Cyprian Bhekuzulu to listen to the message of Dr Verwoerd.
After the delivery of the message, Prince Buthelezi of KwaPhindangene, as
one of the three spokespersons selected by the paramount chief to respond
on behalf of the Zulu nation, confronted the fearsome Dr Verwoerd and
bluntly told him that the Bantustan policy was not acceptable to the Zulus.

This catapulted Prince Buthelezi to the centre stage of national politics,
and the Zulu nation sent emissaries to persuade him to serve in the
atrocious system in order to fight it from within. He was also urged by
icons of the ANC, Chief Albert Luthuli and Mr O R Tambo, to consider these
requests positively. Although opposed to the system, he eventually accepted
the offer, and for 20 years - between 1970 and 1990 - he relentlessly
fought apartheid in spite of insults and vilification. He was rewarded in
1990 when the then State President, Mr de Klerk, bowed under pressure from
Prince Buthelezi and other freedom fighters and dismantled apartheid, to
usher in a democratic dispensation through negotiation – an instrument
which Prince Buthelezi had always advocated.

Accordingly, the IFP supports the repeal and maintains that it is long
overdue. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: The Bill before us repeals legislation that had its origins
in the desire of the apartheid state to abuse traditional leadership to
advance its strategy of divide and rule. The Act was used to unilaterally
appoint traditional leaders in areas that never fell under traditional
leadership, and it was naturally the intention that those appointees would
control and manipulate people according to the wishes of the then
government. That legal framework was also used to strip legitimate
traditional leaders of their positions. The net result was to create
divisions and social disruptions that continue to be felt to this day.

Although the new legal framework does not always coherently address the
realities of traditional leadership, we are more than happy to bid farewell
to the old Black Authorities Act. Good riddance to this Act. The UDM
supports the Bill.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP supports this Bill. The Black
Authorities Act established statutory tribal, regional and territorial
authorities to generally administer the affairs of black people and
abolished the Black Representative Council, which constituted the limited
voting rights that existed at the time. It was a legislative cornerstone of
apartheid by means of which black people were controlled and dehumanised.
The ACDP agrees that the provisions of this Act are obsolete and repugnant
to the values and human rights enshrined in the Constitution, and must be
repealed.

The question arises as to why it has taken such a long time to repeal this
Act. We understand that there would have been unintended consequences had
the Act been repealed earlier, particularly relating to old community,
regional and other tribal authorities. The Act makes provision for a sunset
clause to enable KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo to repeal those provisions that
were assigned to them, hopefully by 31 December 2010. After that date, this
contentious Black Authorities Act will be no more. I thank you.

Mr P S SIZANI: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, I do not wonder — perhaps
some of you do - why many people from rural areas continue to flock into
urban areas in their numbers. Do we remember or refuse to remember that
there were black spots in South Africa and that people were herded into
Bantustans in the tribal areas created by this Act? Do we remember that
there were farm evictions, some of which are still with us today, in order
to put the “kaffer op sy plek” [black person in his place] as we continue
to hear about in our rural areas today?

As if this project was not enough, where blacks were the “other coloureds”
of apartheid, the regime created fake tribal leaders, tribal authorities
and tribes, which still characterise South African rural areas today, thus
jeopardising the democratic South African landscape in rural areas to this
day.

Section 2 of the Act created black tribes, and section 3 of the Act gave
the State President the authority to replace governments of black people
and create tribal authorities at his discretion. This was meant to
administer black affairs and make black people run their own affairs under
the supervision and tutelage of the white President of the time. They
removed blacks from the main body of the South African economy and the
political mainstream, thus disenfranchising blacks and removing their
rights in general.

The current democratic state has a Constitution that upholds human dignity
and entrenches such rights in the Bill of Rights. In the black spots, black
people did not have any human dignity. They were herded away like animals.
Nonracialism and nonsexism are entrenched in the South African Constitution
today. In those days people were categorised into tribes and kaffirs.

The supremacy ... [Interjections.] Do you want to deny this? [Laughter.]
[Interjections.] Are you sure you want to deny that it did exist?
[Interjections.]

The South African Constitution, and not the President, enjoys supremacy. I
want to repeat this point. The South African Constitution is the supreme
law of the country. The President is not the supreme law. Nobody under this
Constitution is above the law, not even the President. Because of that the
Constitution entrenches the rule of law. It does not allow any President,
at his discretion, to remove a person or banish a person from any space in
South Africa under the guise of a black spot.

Universal adult suffrage in South Africa gives all of us the right to vote,
unlike this Act which excluded blacks from voting in their own country.

The Constitution entrenches equality before the law, equal protection by
the law and benefit of the law, unlike Matanzima, Mphephu, Sebe and Qgozo,
Mangope and all the others of the same ilk who were a law unto themselves.
Their systems and structures cannot exist alongside the democratic system
that we have today.

Key to the repeal of this Act is the total eradication of all vestiges of
apartheid, including all undemocratic and dehumanising practices of
traditional authorities against women and rural people in general.

Furthermore, the Balkanisation of South Africa cannot promote a share in
the mineral resources beneath the soil, in the sea and on the land outside
tribal areas. Therefore, mobilising South Africans to become their own
liberators cannot be enhanced and realised in full unless we remove laws
like this. We need to destroy all tribal practices that seek to weaken the
progressive organisations, ideas and hegemony in a democratic South Africa.


We in the ANC appreciate that today this Act is an orphan like apartheid,
and therefore support its repeal as nobody benefited from it. However,
there are practices that were created by this Act whose legacy still exists
everywhere in South Africa and we must pursue and find them. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, let
me first thank the hon members for supporting this repeal Bill. Thank you
very much.

The mission of the ANC is twofold in the main. Firstly, it is to unite all
South Africans across race, gender and class. Secondly, it is to eradicate
the legacy of colonialism and apartheid in all its forms. Now, since 1994,
the ANC in this House and in the various legislative bodies across the
country has been introducing legislation and policies to achieve this
objective. Today this repeal Bill is part of this process of uniting South
Africans and of eradicating the legacy of colonialism and apartheid. That
is why we appreciate that today we have unanimously, as members of this
House, accepted this repeal Bill.

Lastly, it is very important for us to note that it is not going to take us
24 hours, 24 months or even five years to eradicate the legacy of
colonialism and apartheid. It is going to take a lot of time, a lot of
resilience, a lot of hard work and a lot of commitment. That’s what we mean
by the national democratic revolution. We sometimes hear people asking what
it is that we mean by the national democratic revolution. This is exactly
what we mean. It is a process. It is going to take us a bit of time, but we
are committed to it, and we will achieve our objective. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

              INDEPENDENT POLICE INVESTIGATIVE DIRECTORATE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the Independent
Police Investigative Directorate Bill, otherwise known as the Ipid Bill,
that has been placed before this House forms an important part of our
approach to policing and the type of force we envisage and wish to see
moving forward.

Whilst we put more emphasis on fighting crime, particularly on combating
serious and violent crime and fighting it toughly, we, at the same time,
balance that with our philosophy of community policing, which is oriented
towards respect for human rights, being community-centred, being biased
towards the weak and addressing the safety needs of society.

This piece of legislation will ensure that the rule of law is upheld at all
material times, even by the law enforcement agencies. This Bill was
introduced to Parliament together with the Civilian Secretariat for Police
Service Bill. The two Bills speak to the commitment of the civilian
oversight role over the Police Service.

In changing the focus and the name of the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate, we
are sending a clear message that the new body will not just focus on
processing complaints, but its emphasis will also be on developing a strong
investigating capacity. We also seek to investigate substantial systemic
defects in policing and in general corruption.

The Bill before this august body today does not only change in name, but it
also creates a separate piece of legislation away from where it is located
currently — within the SA Police Service Act.

Historically, there have been several problems that plagued the smooth
operation of the ICD. While it had powers to investigate the police, it
still had to submit its findings to the police themselves. This issue has
been raised over a period of time, particularly by parliamentarians.

In the legislation determining the mandate of Ipid, the focus is squarely
on what the most important issues are that Ipid should deal with in order
to make a real impact. In the process of determining the mandate, the
principle used is that Ipid should investigate those matters that will have
a lasting impact on transforming the police into a structure that not only
deals with crime with vigour, but also upholds the law and the
Constitution. It also highlights the fact that domestic violence will be
removed from Ipid and be placed under the secretariat.

The one area we specifically located under the new Ipid is the
investigation of any police officer involved in rape. We adopted this
stance primarily because crimes against women and girl-children remain one
of government’s key priorities. We want to ensure that in cases where a
police officer is suspected of committing such crimes, such a case is
investigated by an independent body. This approach will go a long way in
building public confidence in the force whilst at the same time re-
enforcing government’s commitment to ensure that the most vulnerable in
society are not abused by the very people who should protect them.

The Bill speaks to the fact that the national office should be a lean
administrative office providing strategic leadership and direction, but
with the capacity to execute the mandate located at various provincial
offices.

The White Paper speaks to the need to strengthen the relationship between
the ICD and the Civilian Secretariat for the Police Service. This Bill
enhances the relationship in some detail and strengthens co-operation
between the two bodies. With this piece of legislation, we have committed
ourselves to continue to work for the entrenchment of a culture of human
rights. We have now provided the new Ipid with the necessary tools, and it
will be up to the leadership of this body to implement their mandate. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon Members of
Parliament and our guests, hon members will know that SA Police Service
members have huge legitimate powers such as to arrest would-be criminals,
take suspicious people in for questioning, search people with or without
warrants and use deadly force when it is reasonably necessary, to mention
but a few.

As part of their work requirements, they are issued with firearms — the
well-known R5s — as it is legally understood that there may be
circumstances that require the use of firearms. These powers are indeed
huge, and if not monitored they can be brutally abused by the SA Police
Service members.

In order to prevent such brutality, section 206(6) of the Constitution of
the Republic calls for the establishment of an organisation that should
investigate any police brutality or abuse of power. From 1997 until now,
that organisation has been and still is known as the ICD. It was
established by the SA Police Service Act, Act 68 of 1995. The mandate of
the ICD, as we speak, is to make recommendations on cases it investigates
and submit those recommendations about police members to police management
for implementation. The current legislation, namely chapter 10 of the SA
Police Service Act, does not force SA Police Service members to implement
the ICD recommendations. This simply means that the ICD recommendations are
left to the discretion of the police management to decide whether to
implement those recommendations or not.

Because of this shortcoming, most often than not the SA Police Service
management simply ignores the ICD recommendations. Hence many organisations
and individuals, particularly the Portfolio Committees on Safety and
Security and lately on Police, realised that the ICD is a toothless but
extremely necessary organisation. It is through this understanding that the
ANC Polokwane national conference resolved that the ICD should be
strengthened.

The Bill that is before the House establishes a much empowered organisation
called Ipid. Unlike the ICD, which is complaint-driven, Ipid will be
investigation-driven. This Bill in fact repeals Chapter 10 of the SA Police
Service Act and amends other sections of the SA Police Service Act. It also
amends the Witness Protection Act, Domestic Violence Act and the Regulation
of Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-Related
Information Act. These repeals and amendments ensure that Ipid, unlike the
ICD, has teeth and can bite. Ipid will focus on more serious and priority
crimes committed by members of the SA Police Service. If you are not a
member of the SAPS, you will not be protected or your case will not be
processed by Ipid. Those cases include, as the Minister has mentioned,
deaths, rape, torture, assault and matters relating to systemic corruption.
Hon Ms Van Wyk will explain these in more detail.

This Bill also streamlines and recognises the handling process of
complaints and investigation functions. It establishes a formal liaison
mechanism between Ipid and the Civilian Secretariat for the Police Service
through the consultative forum. This forum will see Ipid, the executive
director and the civilian secretariat meeting at least four times a year.

This Bill also ensures Ipid’s independent oversight of the SA Police and
municipal police services. In this regard, Ipid will continue to be a
designated organisation. It will train its investigators and it will have
peace officer or police official powers as provided for in the Criminal
Procedure Act.

The Bill further aligns provincial strategic objectives with those of the
national office to enhance the functioning of the directorate. To achieve
this objective, the executive director will appoint provincial heads of
Ipid and establish a management committee that consists of an executive
director and a provincial head of each province.

The Bill outlines the process to follow in dealing with recommendations in
respect of the SA Police Service and municipal police services resulting
from investigations conducted by the directorate, as well as sanctions that
include imprisonment in the event Ipid’s recommendations are ignored by the
SAPS. This did not exist with the ICD.

The Bill clearly enhances accountability and transparency by the SA Police
Service and municipal police services, of course in accordance with the
principles of the Constitution. This Bill clearly spells out first that the
SAPS and municipal police must co-operate with Ipid. Failure to do so will
result in sanctions being applied. These may also include a prison
sentence.

The Bill provides for Ipid to function independently from the SA Police
Service and calls for each organ of state to assist the directorate to
maintain its impartiality and to perform its functions effectively.

As I conclude, let me thank all those institutions, organisations and
individuals who made written and/or oral submissions on this Bill. Most of
the submissions identified weaknesses in the Bill, which were referred to
the committee. Options and solutions were provided, which assisted us in
the processing and production of the Bill that is before this House today.

Let me mention here that all those who made submissions supported the Bill.
Almost 95% or more of the submissions advised us as the portfolio committee
to define “torture”. We clearly heard these submission, but all members
across party lines took a decision not to define “torture” in this Bill. We
believe that the Combating of Torture Bill is the Bill that should define
“torture”. This means that the dictionary definition will be used for the
purpose of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill. Hon Koos
agrees with me.

It will also be important for me to thank the state law advisers, the ICD
staff and particularly the executive director, as well as the civilian
secretary. These people worked very hard and met all our deadlines. Our
support staff equally assisted us, and we appreciate their contributions.
The media showed positive interest in this Bill, and we appreciate that.

Lastly, but not least, I want to thank all members of the portfolio
committee. I think and believe that the Bill that is before the House today
is good. I believe that it will empower Ipid and, as such, be supported by
all parties. The ANC supports the Independent Police Investigative
Directorate Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Deputy Speaker, in 1994, as a country we moved away
from an era when policing had been in total thrall to the political regime.
We created a Police Service and moved away from what was previously a
police force – a police force that literally forced citizens to look down
the barrel of a gun should they attempt to question their right not to live
under unjust laws and globally despised policies. Indeed, any citizen who
attempted to stand up against them was treated extremely harshly, and
political prisoners regularly slipped on a bar of soap and fell out of the
top floors of police headquarters all around the country.

An effective oversight and investigatory unit was required in order to
serve as a watchdog for the police. However, for as many years as I have
been on the Police or the Safety and Security portfolio committee, as it
was called during the last term, I have been watching the ICD exemplify the
most cynical nonimplementation of the constitutional mandate.

Before the unit was established in 1997, the SAPS had a special
investigation unit based in Pretoria that dealt with corruption cases. But
they closed that down and created the anticorruption unit, which they also
closed down, claiming that the ICD would deal with such matters. They then
very deliberately kept the ICD on a shoestring budget, effectively ensuring
that the police complaint system was marginalised at a time of entrenched
corruption and criminality within the SAPS and indeed at a time when,
elsewhere in the world, the handling of such complaints by the public was
developing apace. What the public was left with was 219 people nationwide
to deal with deaths in police custody or as a result of police action or
other serious police transgressions. The ICD had a 23% turnover rate and
the anticorruption unit had three investigators and one investigation
officer per 44 000 SAPS members.

Today in this House we take a great stride forward in at long last giving
the ICD — soon to be known as Ipid — the teeth of a bulldog. One must focus
on the reasons for this new legislation. It is absolutely possible that the
hon members who created the ICD in 1997 believed they were creating
implementable legislation, but it had one fatal flaw. They presumed that
the SAPS would honour the spirit of the Bill. The ICD recommendations
regarding criminality, misconduct or deaths — as the case may have been —
were in fact, in most cases, ignored. Sadly, the nation learnt the hard way
that SAPS members are mere flesh and blood like the rest of us and, given
an option, would inevitably take the easiest way out.

At the outset the indications were that the system would work well, but
after the honeymoon came the cold, hard reality that what had been created
was in fact a marriage from hell. The SAPS woke up to the fact that there
was gestating within it an entity created to crush its own criminality.
But, to their relief, they realised that there was nothing at all in the
Bill that could force them to implement those recommendations.

According to one briefing by the ICD to the portfolio committee — I
remember well how it was revealed — the number of complaints received
against the SAPS had increased from 5 000 the previous year to over 6 000.
Deaths in police custody as a result of police action had also increased
from 792 to 912 over the same period. At the same time the SAPS was less
and less inclined to bother to act on the ICD recommendations. Indeed they
implemented just 58% of them and threw the rest into the trash. I watched
in horror as that figure dropped to 42%. The last time I asked, the SAPS
were implementing just 10% of those recommendations. The recommendations
represent hours and hours of hard work on the part of professional
investigators. The SAPS today treats the outcomes of those investigations
with total contempt.

So, what exactly were they ignoring? Well, in just one year we learnt that
criminal conduct by police had increased by 24%, misconduct by 6% and
deaths in police custody by 15%. On numerous occasions the deaths in police
custody were only learned about by the ICD when they read about it in the
newspapers — newspapers which are currently still allowed to report on such
travesties.

Indeed, every year the ICD receives an increased number of complaints. What
is of particular interest is the fact that the ICD is one of the best kept
secrets in the country. The Ministry has kept the ICD as close guarded a
secret as one might expect some people to keep a mistress or an
illegitimate child. It has been suggested that accountability and oversight
were being increasingly neglected. I would say the neglect itself was
criminal

In 2005, 22 police officers — the most in six years - had been reported to
the ICD for allegedly raping members of the public, including children. It
would be shocking even if one of our police officers had done that. But
they were accused of such acts. What was just as shocking was that
apparently their colleagues, other SAPS members, covered up for them. The
result was that not one of the 22 had ever been charged or convicted.

Police officers were reportedly hiding evidence against their colleagues so
that charges were withdrawn. In other cases police officers were arrested
only to be released on petty cash bail amounts. At the same time the ICD
told us that this was just the tip of the iceberg.

An example of how guilty members of the SAPS are allowed to return to duty
was reported where a constable who was found guilty of indecently
assaulting a gang-rape victim was back at work the next week. During the
2006-07 financial year, a total number of 707 SAPS employees were
criminally charged for aiding escapees. Of those 707, only 14 were
suspended. Of those 14 suspensions, only six were found guilty, and one
resigned. Presumably we were to believe that the other prisoners mastered
the art of teleportation.

The manipulation of crime statistics alone has certainly never been
properly tackled, and yet one must come back again and again to the
unthinkable. We are also referring to instances where citizens are shot,
beaten, raped, killed or tortured by SAPS members or gang-raped in cells or
indeed women put in men’s cells and left to be gang-raped overnight. It was
horrific to learn of the travesty of justice for one of those women. The
two officers on duty who locked her in the males-only cell were served a
sentence of dismissal, suspended for six months. That meant that they were
back at work the next day and faced no loss of income, demotion or any
other penalty.

The value placed by the SAPS on this woman’s life, body and wellbeing was
so contemptuously dismissive that it made women all over the country fear
for their own safety and terrified that, should they find themselves locked
up for an unpaid traffic fine or any other petty offence, they may suffer
the same fate. They were asking if this was what women could hope to expect
from the SAPS.

As for males, how many men have been raped in police cells because proper
and regular cell checks were not conducted? The message sent out to the
general public and to other SAPS members here was that they would keep
their jobs, regardless of how negligent they were and how many people
suffered because they failed in their duty.

So, it comes as no surprise that some SAPS members take bribes, lose
dockets and refuse to open cases with impunity. After all, what actual risk
was there that anything serious would happen to them? A report published by
the Centre for Violence and Reconciliation stated that when asked what the
worst thing was that would happen to them if they were caught taking a
bribe, 6% of the SAPS members replied that nothing would happen to them and
32% stated that they might get a written warning.

The SAPS members do not perceive that there is any real risk of serious
repercussions if caught failing in their duty. If you did wrong, you had
very little to fear, until today. What incentive has there been for the
public to report incidents of abuse when little action was taken against
police members in the wrong? This lack of firm action not only undermined
the morale of good cops — and there is a vast majority — but it also
discouraged people from co-operating with the police, until today.

Even when the SAPS management went to the extraordinary length of
suspending a member, they were suspended on full pay, and the investigation
would then be stalled. These investigations took months, if not years,
thereby costing taxpayers millions. At that stage, only 2% of SAPS
employees criminally charged with assisting in the escapes from police
cells, for example, were ever suspended. And when I last checked, we were
looking at R90 million having been spent on the salaries of suspended SAPS
members.

At the time when public confidence in the police was decreasing, these
figures should have been setting off alarm bells among senior SAPS
management. Instead, when questioned about the low dismissal rate of police
criminally charged with rape, murder and armed robbery, the then SAPS
Director of Communications, Selby Bokaba, stated that “the SA Police
Service disciplined members in other ways besides dismissal”. One law for
the police and another for the rest of us.

The ICD did the best it could under the most impossible circumstances,
which included a lack of co-operation from the SAPS, inadequate funding and
a high staff turnover due to salaries. The SAPS simply did not take matters
of police discipline seriously. Ironically, during the provincial “shutdown-
the-Scorpions” hearings packed with bussed-in ANC members, claims were made
from the floor that there were still housebreakings, rapes and attacks, and
thus this elite crime-fighting unit should be shut down. This was ironic
because of the confirmed presence of police members within the SAPS who had
been found guilty of offences on active duty while it was them, and not the
Scorpions, who should have been dealing with those types of matters.

The latest SAPS annual report revealed that the police had set aside R7,5
billion for civil legal claims against the department, equivalent to 18% of
the budget. Indeed, the civil claims increased by 31% in just 12 months.
These included assault, shootings, damage to property, police actions and
the like. It became obvious that the inability of the SAPS to hold its own
officers to account constituted one of the most significant impediments to
expanding and improving the quality of policing. My attempts to introduce a
private member’s Bill to radically empower and expand the role of the ICD
were put on hold over and over again. But today, finally, we see some
action aimed at cleaning the dirt out of the SAPS and polishing up a badge
that has been badly tarnished. Virtually every proposal in my private
member’s Bill has been incorporated into the legislation.

The time for empty rhetoric is over. This Bill gives the power to the
civilian body to oversee our police. The DA will support this Bill – a Bill
we have worked on so well together in the portfolio committee. But I must
raise the issue again that the head of the ICD — soon to be Ipid — should
be at the same level as the National Police Commissioner. Within the
context of a ranked structure psyche, not having this situation could and
probably will lead to problems of attempted noncompliance.

It may be too late for the woman allegedly raped by police some 10 months
ago in Knysna — to date no identity parade has be held. It may be too late
for the three students in King Williams Town driven off the road by student
police, terribly injured and then robbed at gunpoint. It may be too late
for the wildlife officer left by drunken officers to be gang-raped by 20
men overnight in Northern KwaZulu-Natal. But this Bill is certainly going
to give this watchdog the bite it needs and should have been given long
ago. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the most significant aspect of the
Bill before us lies in its ensuring that the Police Service becomes a
professional Police Service that operates within the spirit of our
constitutional norms. Section 205(3) of the South African Constitution of
1996 states that:

   The objects of the police service are to prevent, combat and investigate
   crime, to maintain public order, to protect and secure the inhabitants of
   the Republic and their property, and to uphold and enforce the law.

Ipid was established under section 50(1) of the SA Police Service Act and
section 222 of the interim Constitution, amongst other things, to ensure
that cases against the police are properly investigated. In the
Constitution section 206(3), (5)(a) and (6) combined are the relevant
sections. The complaints body must investigate cases brought before it and
those of alleged misconduct or offences committed by a member of the Police
Service.

Without this body, the police would be a law unto themselves and be
accountable to no one. Ipid replaces the ICD which was established in terms
of the legislation that predated our Constitution. As such, the
constitutional requirement of government to establish an independent police
investigative directorate, in terms of section 206 has not been given full
effect up to now. This Bill, therefore, rectifies a very important
omission.
The Bill is further aimed at addressing the historical abuse of power, the
allegations and/or reports of police brutality towards citizens under
arrest and those caught up the crossfire as police members carry out their
duties. There are also high levels of police torture and abuse of victims
in violation of citizenship rights as opposed to fair treatment, arrest
procedures, interrogations and violations of human rights outside the
realms of their overall work. Historical events and details in the annual
report point to several documented cases where the Police Service has
failed members of the public by investigating itself and then covering up
for itself.

The Bill provides for the obligation by the police to co-operate with the
law, engage civilians oversight and make sure that it does not have
unwarranted outcomes where there is a failure to comply. Funds are to come
directly from Parliament’s budget as part of its appropriation.
International examples which show that this Bill is a step in the right
direction include Brazil, which has a police ombudsman and a civilian
complaints review board, and the USA, which has an inspector-general. This
is going to help us take away the element of political interference.

Targets of this Bill include the following: police offences should relate
to deaths in police custody, rapes and the shooting of innocent victims in
the line of duty as a result of police misconduct; the investigative
operations of the previous ICD should be strengthened, and its mandate
should be more refined; there should be an authority to refer matters for
specialist investigations to other relevant orders; and there should be co-
ordination with other police bodies.

The fact that the directorate will be independent from the Police Service
and that it will report directly to the Minister of Police is both welcome
and necessary. On the one hand it will allow for independent oversight of
the SA Police Service as well as the municipal police services, and on the
other hand it will afford Parliament an opportunity to exercise greater
oversight over the Minister himself.

The independence, impartiality and accountability of the directorate are
important developments. In the recent past, the ICD was not taken
seriously. Unfortunately a large number of recommendations it made to the
Police Service were blatantly ignored. However, that will now be history.
Henceforth, failure to implement the recommendations of the directorate is
a criminal offence punishable by law in terms of this Bill.

The aim of this Bill is to make sure that South Africa has a professional
Police Force that responds to human rights and will not unnecessarily
target law-abiding policemen and women who operate within the law. It also
aims to strengthen the expertise, resources and independence of the
civilian oversight of the Police Service. By changing its name to Ipid,
this gives the directorate a platform to approach this new Bill with more
openness, resolve and purpose, both politically and operationally.

Cope hopes that the executive director will perform his duty with
credibility and professionalism free from politics, and be transparent. It
is imperative that the directorate is properly resourced so as to carry out
its mandate. Cope also supports a most thorough security screening of
members appointed to the directorate. We hope that the government will make
sure the screening is done in such a way that no one joins the
investigative directorate without having been screened properly. Therefore,
Cope supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU:  Sekela Somlomo, neNdlu ehloniphekileyo ... [Madam Deputy
Speaker, and this august House ...]

... the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill is an essential
component of an effective and accountable Police Service. As its very name
suggests, it must be independent and, by its definition thereof, impartial.
This is critical to both the directorate and the Police Force’s success in
delivering an effective and accountable service to the public of South
Africa. Therefore, the Bill must not only establish the investigative
directorate, but it must also give it teeth and measures of protection from
those who would otherwise be able to use and abuse political powers and
persuasion to thwart the directorate in its investigative functions.

The IFP is vehemently opposed to any form of interference with the
investigative directorate from either the secretariat or the Ministry. We
concur very strongly with the Minister of Police when he said at the
beginning of August that the Bill must address the past weaknesses of the
directorate and that the directorate must act as a check on police powers.
Police misconduct and criminality will be relegated to the past where it
belongs as it has no place and is most unwelcome in our democracy.

However, the Bill is not a universal panacea and will not be able to
correct all the problems on its own. It must be supported by effective
legislation and sufficient resources, and left to its own resources in the
carrying out of its duties as only then will it be a truly effective tool
for the oversight of our Police Service.

The provincial head of the directorate must report to both the MEC and the
premier in order to make sure that the head of government in the province
knows exactly what is going on within the Police Service.

In conclusion, the IFP wishes to stress the importance of the total
independence and apolitical alignment of this directorate as this is the
only manner in which it will be able to carry out its mandate successfully.
We further state that, as a party, we do not wish to see or hear about any
favours being granted to any individual or group of individuals. The law
must apply equally to all as all are equal in the eyes of the law. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon members, the UDM welcomes the
Bill that is before us today. Indeed, we urge government to promulgate and
implement the provisions with haste. Since its inception, the Independent
Complaints Directorate has struggled to perform its most basic function,
namely to act as a watchdog over the police. This Bill seeks to address
this glaring legal hole in our democratic dispensation with the
introduction of a reconstituted Independent Police Investigative
Directorate, as well as the innovation of the substantial penalties and
prison sentences for police officials who contravene the provision of this
Bill to undermine investigations.

Whenever we formulate a policy and legislation, it is important that we
remember why the constitutional obligations of this democracy were created
in the first place. In this particular case, it means that we need to
remember the brutality, ruthlessness and lawlessness that many members of
the apartheid police operated with. Those police atrocities and injustices
were some of the hallmarks of an illegitimate, oppressive regime. In a
modern constitutional democracy, we cannot allow such behaviour. That is
why we must be vigilant, especially at this time when it is popular for VIP
police members to behave like thugs with badges.

We note that the estimated cost of making the new directorate operational
runs into several hundred million rands. We need unconditional undertakings
from the Minister that this money will be forthcoming and that it will be
spent on acquiring the required officials and investigators. We cannot
tolerate a continuation of the previous trend of an understaffed
directorate that failed to swiftly and thoroughly investigate incidents
involving the police. The UDM supports the Bill. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.


Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, die burgers van ’n land moet vetroue
kan hê in hul polisielede, want die polisie is die enigste instansie
waarheen burgers kan gaan waar hulle voel hul regte, asook hul lewens,
beskerm word.

Nou wil ek vir die agb Minister sê, u het vandag van hierdie podium af
gehoor van die een voorbeeld na die ander van wangedrag onder ons
polisielede. Agb Minister, die publiek van Suid-Afrika het op hierdie
oomblik nie die vertroue in die Polisiediens wat hulle behoort te hê nie.
Daar gebeur te voel goed, en ek stem saam, dit is dáárdie lede wat ’n
verleentheid is vir die ander lede in ons polisie.

Ek wil ook vir u sê, agb Minister, dat die VF Plus hierdie wetsontwerp
verwelkom. Dit is ’n wetsontwerp wat al lankal hier gedebatteer moes gewees
het en alreeds geïmplementeer moes gewees het.

Maar ek wil vir u sê, u kan soveel strukture en soveel rade en direktorate
instel as u wil, maar u moet gaan kyk na die dissipline wat in ons
Polisiediens heers. Ons mense het nie genoeg dissipline nie. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, the citizens of a country should be
able to trust the members of their police, because the police are the only
institution to which citizens can turn for the protection of their rights
as well as their lives.

Now I want to say to the Minister that he has heard here today, from this
podium, one example after the other of misconduct by police officers. Hon
Minister, right now the South African public does not have the confidence
it should have in the Police Service. There is too much going on, and I
agree that those members are an embarrassment to the others in our Police
Service.

I also want to tell you, hon Minister, that the FF Plus welcomes this Bill.
It is a Bill that should have been debated here a long time ago and
implemented already.

But I want to say that while you may introduce as many structures, councils
and directorates as you wish, you should rather be looking at the
discipline that prevails in our Police Service. Our people do not possess
enough discipline.]

They are not proud to be members of the SA Police Service. If they were
proud, they would comply with the rules and set an example to citizens of
our country to comply with legislation. There is a lack of that pride and
discipline in our Police Service, and I miss it.

So, ons kan wel hierdie direktoraat hê, maar ons moet indringend gaan kyk
om die dissipline in die Polisiediens terug te bring.

Verder wil ek sê dat ons nou wel die direktoraat het wat ons gaan instel,
maar ons moet dan ook seker maak dat hierdie direktoraat dit prakties kan
uitvoer. Ek is bekommerd. Ons moet sorg dat hulle genoeg mannekrag het en
dat hulle die finansies het om behoorlike ondersoeke te kan doen. Dan sal
ons weer die vertroue in die Polisiediens terugkry. Ek dank u. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[So we can have this directorate, but we should thoroughly investigate the
restoration of discipline in the Police Service.

Furthermore, although there may be this directorate that we are going to
introduce, we should still ensure its ability to act. I am concerned. We
must ensure the presence of sufficient manpower and funds to undertake
proper investigations. Then we will regain our trust in the Police Service.
Thank you.]

Mr G LEKGETHO: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, comrades and
fellow South Africans, the ANC’s 2007 Polokwane conference resolved to
strengthen the Independent Complaints Directorate. This Independent Police
Investigative Directorate Bill is doing exactly that. For this to happen we
need an independent police investigative directorate that is efficient,
strong, and has teeth to bite and crush.

My role today is to inform hon members about and persuade them to support
the Bill. In persuading the hon members, I will deal in some detail with
some of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill talks about the establishment
of a national office headed by an executive director. In accordance with
the Public Service Act, the Minister will nominate a suitably qualified
candidate for appointment to head the directorate. The hon Minister will
then allow the committee to confirm or reject the appointment within 30
days.

The appointment is for a term of five years and is renewable for one
additional term only. This is important for grooming the new broom and to
also let it exit in a dignified manner while it still sweeps clean. Hon
members should pay keen attention to this. I will detail it later.
The head has a huge responsibility to carry out. He or she must ensure,
amongst others, that proper records of all financial transactions, assets
and liabilities of the directorate are kept. The executive director is also
responsible for the appointment of provincial heads when there are
vacancies.

It is also fitting to mention the composition of the national office. It
will consist of the executive director, the corporate service unit, the
investigation and information unit, the legal unit and any other unit
established subject to the approval of the hon Minister, Nathi Mthethwa.

The functions of the national office are critical and must be mentioned.
The national office must do the following: give strategic leadership to the
directorate; conduct internal audits of the directorate; provide
administrative support; submit an annual report to the Minister and
Parliament; refer criminal offences to the National Prosecuting Authority,
NPA; and refer complaints regarding disciplinary matters to the national
commissioner and, where appropriate, to relevant provincial commissioners,
to mention but a few.

The Bill allows for the establishment of a management committee that
consists of provincial heads. The executive director may invite any person
he or she deems fit to the meeting of the committee. The committee will,
amongst others, ensure co-ordination and alignment within each province
regarding priorities, objectives and strategies across national and
provincial levels, and it will also ensure adherence to financial
requirements prescribed in terms of the Public Finance Management Act.

The committee will also indentify other matters of strategic importance to
the functioning of the directorate within each province. These
interventions are appropriate for the speedy and efficient establishment of
a single police entity as resolved in Polokwane.

The Bill also provides for the establishment of a consultative forum to
facilitate closer co-operation between the civilian secretary and the
executive director to discuss issues relating to trends, recommendations
and the implementation of such recommendations. The meetings of the forum
must be held at least four times per year. This is important because there
is no guesswork as to when and how many meetings should be held. The
committee will monitor and get reports. This is business unusual.

It is true that the Bill provides for the establishment of provincial
offices with provincial heads at the top. He or she will be responsible for
the appointment and performance management of the staff. The head will
control and monitor active cases and ensure adherence to guidelines issued
by the national office relating to investigation and the management of
cases by officials within their respective provinces. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART:  Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the ACDP will support this
Bill. The Bill is a response to the question “Quis custodiet ipsos
custodes?” Who guards the guards? Section 206(6) of the Constitution
provides for the establishment of an independent police investigative
directorate to guard the guards by investigating any alleged misconduct or
offence committed by a member of the Police Service.

There is clearly a need for a more effective, well-resourced and
independent investigative directorate, particularly if one has regard to
the wide powers enjoyed by members of the Police Service, including the
right to use deadly force under certain circumstances. One only has to be
reminded of the controversies surrounding the blue-light brigades as well
as allegations of uniformed members committing crimes, including rape and
torture, to appreciate the need for this much-improved directorate.

The ACDP welcomes the fact that this directorate will operate independently
of the Police Service, with a separate budget. The thrust of the
directorate’s work will be to address systemic problems within the Police
Service. The directorate will be able to investigate a number of offences,
including deaths in police custody, deaths as a result of police action,
rapes by police officers – whether on or off duty – complaints of torture
and corruption matters within the police.

We as the ACDP trust that the work of the directorate will contribute to
ensuring that the Police Service becomes a far more professional service
that operates within the boundaries and norms of the Constitution.

However, in order for this directorate to operate effectively, it requires
sufficient investigators and resources. Without the necessary teeth, this
Bill will be aimless. The ACDP will thus closely monitor the implementation
plan for this Bill. I thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, hon members, in 2005,
Parliament adopted a report from the then Portfolio Committee on Safety and
Security. The report was a product of interaction over a period of time
between the portfolio committee and the national office of the ICD and its
provincial offices. Serious concerns were raised in the report and some
recommendations were made. Amongst these recommendations were that in order
for the ICD to function properly it required legislation separate from that
of the SA Police Service Act. Not only would separate legislation enhance
the independence of the directorate, but it would also provide an
opportunity to deal extensively with the operational and structural
challenges facing the directorate.

The Bill before the House today addresses all these issues and more. It
provides the framework for a strong, well-empowered and effective police
oversight body. The truth is that we require of our men and women in blue
to be the custodians of our laws, to execute their duties with honour and
dignity and to, at all times, act in such a manner that will enhance public
respect and confidence. Any elements within the police whom are bringing
dishonour to the police should face the full might of the law.

The Bill determines that the national office will provide for strategic
direction and administrative support. It is at provincial offices where the
actual work will take place and where we should create capacity.

Chapter 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of provincial offices.
It deals with the appointment of provincial heads by the executive director
and requirements regarding their performance agreements. In the past, high
vacancy rates within the ICD were a huge problem, especially at provincial
offices, and the committee wanted to ensure that we will not have a repeat
of that. As a result, section 20(5) determines that the executive director
must fill vacancies at the level of a provincial head within a period not
exceeding six months.

Section 21 deals with the responsibilities of the provincial heads. These
include the normal administrative and financial functions. It further
empowers the provincial heads to refer matters investigated at this level
to prosecuting authorities for a decision on criminal prosecution. The
provincial heads must also provide the executive director with reports on
matters investigated and the finalisation and recommendations of cases.
They must also report to the relevant MEC on matters that were referred by
the MEC to the provincial head.

In chapter 6, the Bill deals with investigators’ appointments, their
functions and the powers they have. In order to be appointed as an
investigator, applicants will have to undergo a security screening. This
must be done in conjunction with the National Intelligence Agency, NIA.
Investigators can also be subject to further security clearances from time
to time. Any investigator who does not comply with security clearance
prescripts must be discharged from their position as an investigator. All
investigators will be given policing powers, and this chapter obliges the
Minister to bestow such powers on an investigator within three months after
they have been appointed.

Investigators have powers provided for in the Criminal Procedure Act, Act
51 of 1977, relating to the following: the investigation of offences; the
ascertainment of bodily features of an accused; the entry and search of
premises; the seizure and disposal of articles; arrests; the execution of
warrants; and the attendance of an accused person in court. Investigators
will also be able to direct any person to submit an affidavit or affirmed
declaration. They can also direct any person to appear before them or to
give evidence and hand over documents that have a bearing on a case that is
investigated. They may also question persons on such evidence.

Section 25 deals with conflicts of interest and the disclosure of such
interests by investigators. Any investigator who has financial or other
interests in a case that is being investigated must declare so, and they
will have to withdraw from such an investigation if they have a conflict of
interest. Like with the legislation that deals with the Hawks, this Bill
also makes provision for integrity measures that may be prescribed by the
Minister.

Section 28 of the Bill deals with the type of matters that the Independent
Police Investigative Directorate will be investigating. This is one of the
sections of the Bill that resulted in the most debate. Before I deal with
this section, I think it’s important to highlight that there are different
departure points on this issue. There are those — and we have seen them
today in action — who would like to create the impression that the police
cannot investigate itself or its own. This is a view that we as the ANC do
not share. There are, as we speak, ex-police officers locked up in our
jails because of criminal investigations conducted by the police
themselves. There are many examples. Over just the last few weeks, the
police acted decisively against criminal elements that infiltrated their
ranks.

The ANC believes that, ultimately, the police remain responsible to
investigate acts of criminality, no matter who committed those acts. We do
not subscribe to the hysterical notion that all of the police are corrupt
or criminal. We believe that the majority of our police are hardworking,
honest men and women who execute their duties with honour. That said, we
need to focus Ipid where its action will make the most and a lasting
difference. The action that they take should not only address the
individual police officer who did wrong, but must also send a clear message
to the rest of the Service while influencing, with lasting impact, the way
in which things are done and the way police conduct themselves.

Section 28 determines that Ipid must investigate all deaths in police
custody and any deaths as a result of police actions. These actions include
any deaths that occurs while the police were busy executing their duties.
This provision also allows for planned operations by the police. But it
also allows for those incidents where a police officer puts himself or
herself back on duty to effect an arrest. The debate around this issue was
whether we should include any deaths by a police officer while on or off
duty. If, for example, a police officer who is not on duty visits a club,
gets into an argument and then murders a person, it is our view that this
is simply a criminal matter and as such an investigation must be handled
accordingly and be investigated by the police.

Furthermore, Ipid must investigate any complaint relating to the discharge
of an official firearm by a police officer. The deciding factor here is
that there must be a complainant and there does not necessarily have to be
an injury as a result of such shooting. An example here would be the
inquest conducted by the Human Rights Commission into the shooting by Metro
police officers in the City of Cape Town in 2007 during xenophobic attacks,
where municipal police officers shot at two young boys playing innocently.
While there was no injury, this was clearly an abuse of power and a
shockingly inhumane action.

This section also obliges Ipid to investigate all cases of rape where the
accused is a police officer, whether that police officer has been on or off
duty. Many members have spoken about this point. It was felt that it is
important that Ipid investigates such cases as part of government’s
commitment to address crimes against women and children decisively.
Furthermore, Ipid will also investigate any cases of rape while such a
person was in the custody of the police. Here it does not matter who the
perpetrator is. The fact that the person got raped while in police custody
indicates some form of negligence on the part of the police. The
investigation in this regard will not only focus on who committed the
crime, but also on why it was possible for a rape to be committed while the
person was in the custody of the police.

Complaints of torture and assault against a police officer must also be
investigated. The executive director can initiate investigations of
corruption on his or her own or after the receipt of a complaint by a
member of the public or when a case was referred by the Minister.
Furthermore, Ipid must investigate any other matter referred to it by the
Minister, an MEC or the Secretary of Police.

The issue of systemic corruption may be investigated by the directorate.
The concept of systemic corruption was, to some, abstract. Typically, the
nature of systemic corruption would be, for instance, where it is reported
that a specific police station is involved in the bribing of foreigners.
Something within the station — the command and control of the station or
the systems used — allows for this to happen. Here the focus would not only
be on who was involved in the corruption, but also on how it was possible
for them to be involved.

Chapter 7 deals with the reporting obligations and co-operation by members
of the SAPS and municipal police services and disciplinary recommendations.
This has been one of the biggest complaints by the ICD over the years and
one of the greatest criticisms against their effectiveness. Many of the
cases they investigate might not result in a criminal procedure, but the
recommendation might be that disciplinary action be taken by the SAPS.
There was no obligation on the SAPS to implement such recommendations, and
they were often just ignored. This section in the Bill changes that
completely.
Section 29 obliges any member of the SAPS to immediately inform Ipid if
they become aware of any matter contemplated in section 28 - the offences.
Within 24 hours after that the SAPS must submit a written report to the
directorate. Section 29(2) spells out the co-operation that is required
from the SAPS and municipal police members during an investigation. This
includes assisting Ipid investigators to arrange ID parades within 48 hours
after being requested and securing the availability of members for
affidavits, statements, necessary documents and to give evidence.

Where Ipid’s recommendation is that disciplinary steps be taken against a
member or members, the national commissioner or the appropriate provincial
commissioner is now obliged to institute disciplinary hearings within 30
days after receiving the recommendation. Clearly, this now takes away the
discretionary handling of recommendations by the police or municipal
police. On a quarterly basis, a report on the progress of such disciplinary
matters must be submitted to the Minister with copies of it to the
executive director and the Secretary of Police. Upon finalisation, the
national commissioner or relevant provincial commissioner must inform the
Minister of the outcome of such hearings and again submit copies to the
executive director and the Secretary of Police.

Chapter 9 deals with offences and penalties. Any person or private entity
who interferes, hinders or obstructs the directorate is guilty of an
offence and liable on conviction to a fine or imprisonment not exceeding
two years. Members of the directorate who disclose information that can
affect a case will face the same sanction. Most important in this section
is that the police officers who are in contravention with regard to
anything contained in section 29 will also be liable to a fine or a period
of imprisonment not exceeding two years. There is no one set of teeth in
this Bill, but there are about 10 sets of teeth in this Bill.

Ipid, through the executive director, has the same reporting obligations as
any other department to the Minister, the Auditor-General and Parliament.

We have no doubt in our minds that this Bill thoroughly addresses the
shortcomings in the previous legislation. We further believe that, if
properly implemented and executed with diligence, the Bill will go a long
way in further instilling a culture of human rights, an ethos of service
and an approach above any suspicion within the SAPS and municipal police
services. Our people expect and deserve nothing less. The ball is now in
the hands of the leadership of the executive director and his staff to make
the difference.

Hon Kohler-Barnard raised a few issues that I just quickly want to respond
to. But I am going to do so in basically one sentence. Hon Kohler-Barnard,
I think is time to consider retirement and start writing that melodrama
that you present to us on a daily basis. The Minister is not responsible
for whether the ICD is known or not known out there. That is the
responsibility of the leadership of the ICD, and we must make sure, as
Parliament, that they actually do that. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise to thank
all the members of the committee as they participated positively on this
very important piece of legislation. It shows the determination of the
committee in ensuring that we strengthen civilian oversight over the
police.

Let me just say one thing. We may blame the police for abusing their
powers, but give anybody in society unchecked powers and they will abuse
them. What is important is to put in place checks and balances. I can’t say
anything more, Deputy Speaker. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: The DA
really wishes this Bill to be passed today, but I would like a ruling from
you. I’m very concerned that we may not have a quorum. I really don’t think
any of us wants to be party to legislation by stealth. We’ve looked through
books, and I can’t work out the ruling. A ruling from the Table would be
appreciated, please.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, we ask
that the question stand over until Tuesday.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a suggestion that the question stand over till
Tuesday. [Interjections.] I think there is agreement on that.

Decision of question postponed.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY —
                    REVISED INDUSTRIAL POLICY ACTION PLAN

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Members of Parliament, colleagues and
South Africans, especially the unemployed, industrialists and many people
in the manufacturing sector, the Industrial Policy Action Plan, Ipap2, is
no dream. We believe it is a reality capable of dynamically industrialising
South Africa using manufacturing to drive it while generating millions of
jobs.

The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry spent many weeks deliberating
on Ipap2. It came to the conclusion that it is a radical shift to grow a
developmental economy by taking a deliberate decision to ensure that
investment targets the production sectors of the economy to arrest the
decline in manufacturing and accelerate employment creation.

Within the context of a new growth path, Ipap2 focuses on value-adding
sectors with the potential for high employment creation and growth
multipliers. Indeed, it identified a number of constraints, among which are
the following: exchange rate overvaluation and volatility; high cost of
capital; failure to adequately leverage public procurement; monopolistic
pricing of key inputs; a low skills base to support industry; aged,
unreliable and expensive rail and port systems; and low productivity
levels, currently.

The key overarching issues raised during the public hearings were as
follows: employment creation; equity challenges; coherence between micro-
and macroeconomic policies; and all of the issues that have been identified
as constraints.

With regard to employment creation, will Ipap2 create 10 000, 20 000,
50 000 or 60 000 jobs? It will create million of jobs if it is implemented
effectively.

The National Union of Metal Workers of South Africa, Numsa, welcomed the
government’s break from its neo-liberal economic orthodoxy in that it
confronts the structural challenges faced by our economy. Many other
stakeholders, in their submissions to the committee, argued — and this went
across the board from unions, academics, businesses and industrialists -
that no country has developed without a focused and well-resourced
industrial policy.

Prof Patrick Bond asserts that the impact of the global financial crisis
merely highlighted the existing and inherited contradictions of the neo-
liberal macro- and microeconomic policies pursued. In fact Minister Davies,
with whom we have a very strong and constructive relationship, acknowledged
that the advances of the past 15 years did not bring about structural
changes that would absorb the marginally unemployed people into new
productive, income-earning activities.

Manufacturing has become the most productive sector, and, as I said, it is
manufacturing that Ipap2 is highlighting. It is the biggest contributor of
the production sector - 54,3% in 2008. But, it has been varied, and there
is a steady decline in productivity and competitiveness. Due to all of
those constraints I raised before, manufacturing, especially within the
automotive, clothing and textile factory areas, has been identified as the
engine of sustainable growth and job creation in developing countries.

In the submissions, we and many other people called for coherence between
macro- and microeconomic policies and welcomed the reality that Ipap2
recognises this and that it will ensure that this coherence takes place.

Cosatu and Mr Jennings from the PG Group raised their concerns in respect
of a stable and competitive currency. Cosatu called for the devaluation of
the currency while Mr Jennings said – he reflected the position of a number
of people who were exporting - that the current strong value of the
currency threatened the export sector, particularly the automotive
component, etc.

Public procurement and industrial financing will be dealt with by hon
Radebe.

The committee called on government to significantly recapitalise the
Industrial Development Corporation, IDC, and review its legislation and
align it with the objectives of the developmental economy. In fact, as
Business Unity South Africa, Busa, pointed out, the way it is currently
legislated, it acts like a commercial bank.

The competition policy will be dealt with by hon Radebe, and hon Khumalo
will certainly deal with the impact of standards, quality assurance,
accreditation and metrology, SQAM, on developmental trade.

I can’t cover all sectoral issues. Hon Radebe will be looking at minerals,
iron ore and steel. But we went so far as even to bring in the green and
energy-saving industries because there is absolutely no doubt that Ipap2
recognises the scope of the green industry to drive economic development.

The automotive sector itself has been growing. You will see this outside.
The localisation content in vehicles that are produced by Volkswagen South
Africa began at about 10% to 20%. Today it is reaching more than 70%. But
the National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa,
Naamsa, is concerned about the impact of the dispute between Kumba Iron Ore
and ArcelorMittal South Africa.

The conclusion of the committee is saying that we will encourage — and we
believe that Ipap2 also encourages this — regional dimensions here and
promote regional integration. But it is also of the view that the transport
system and logical infrastructure must be improved to support Ipap2.
Telecommunications will note the shortage of critical skills and the like.
Two or three of the key recommendations are that there is an integrative co-
operative approach between departments and sectors.

In fact, there is absolutely no doubt that it is essential that the public
and private sector work together. Of course, the fact that there was
overwhelming support from those who came to the public hearings, ranging
from unions to business, industrialists and manufacturists, simply
indicates that Ipap2 has been too long in coming.

Of course, there is the issue of black economic empowerment, BEE, which is
meant to broaden the base, upstream and downstream. The committee was of
the opinion that the current tendency towards elitism and BEE must be
surgically removed.
Hon Speaker, I would like to thank all committee members for their active,
robust deliberations here. The committee and all of us — opposition parties
included — believe that the targeted outcomes that we dealt with and those
that we believe Ipap2 generates can be achieved through this
implementation. It is no dream. It is an achievable, implementable
programme to which the entire Cabinet must give their wholehearted support.
It cannot be limited. If it is limited it will cost us our development, and
we will not achieve millions of jobs. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr S J F MARAIS: Voorsitter, op ’n vraag van my in hierdie Huis aan ’n
vorige President is ek verseker dat die regering oor ’n industriële beleid
beskik wat enige uitdagings die hoof kan bied. Vandag weet ons dat die
Industriële Beleidsaksieplan nie aan die verwagtinge voldoen het nie, en
dat die doel met die Industriële Beleidsaksieplan2 is om die tekortkominge
en uitdagings aan te spreek. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, after I asked a former President a question
in this House, I was given the assurance that government has an industrial
policy that is able to handle all challenges. Today we know that the
Industrial Policy Action Plan has not lived up to expectations and that
Ipap2 aims to address the shortcomings and challenges.]

South Africa has lost global market share and was overtaken by Brazil as an
important emerging economy over the last 15 years. This has detrimental
consequences for us in Africa and in both South-South and North-South trade
relations. The inability to attract foreign direct investment, to regain
global competitiveness in strategic industries and to create sustainable
jobs has become our Achilles heel.

The success of an industrial policy is not dependent on a once-off
successful intervention by government, but on applicable and targeted
support over a period of time. The main purpose of Ipap2 should be to speed
up the process of structural change towards higher production and
employment initiatives and to know when to adapt and/or terminate
interventions as circumstances change or to rectify outright mistakes.

Ipap2 has identified 13 strategic sectors compared to the current 7. Most
of these have shed jobs in 2009 — 870 000 to be specific. It also sets out
seven policy objectives. However, there are no cost-benefit analyses or
explanations linked to each of the favoured sectors. There are also no
quantifiable and measurable objectives explaining the expected cost and
impact of each intervention. The impression is that government has decided
on the winners and leading sectors, which is contrary to the belief of the
DA that successful industrial policies are always market-driven and private
sector-led in partnership with government.
The South African economist Jac Laubscher said that “industrial policy
should aim at discovering the competitive advantages in the economy in
close collaboration with the private sector instead of prescribing what
they should be”. Dani Rodrik of Harvard University said that “the real test
for an industrial policy is whether governments can let losers go”.

One gets the impression that some of the sectors made the list because they
are either fashionable or ideologically attractive while others respond to
strong lobbying from vested interests. Global investors are losing
confidence in our credibility as an investment destination. The practical
implications of the current black economic empowerment policy, as
represented by the widely reported ArcelorMittal South Africa-Imperial
Crown Trading, AMSA-ICT deal, the constant rumours about nationalisation
and state corruption and the effects of the Green Paper on agricultural
land ownership have added to negative perceptions.

In instances of successful global industrial policies, a focused and
specialised approach was followed together with partnerships between
government and big and small enterprises. Ipap2, in our opinion, is
targeting too many diverse sectors with no real strategic thrust and
targeted financial support in specific sectors to clearly lead the
industrialised recovery. It ignores the fact that our strength lies in our
diversity and in sectors where we can be champions, as well as the limited
financial resources available.
Dit wil voorkom asof geen werklike moeite gedoen is om die strategieë uit
te brei om vir spesifiek klein, medium, en mikro-ondernemings,
entrepreneurs en koöperasies te voorsien nie, en om te verseker dat die
beleide van handel, swart ekonomiese bemagtiging en arbeid proaktief en op
’n holistiese wyse ondersteuning aan industrialisasie en volhoubare
belegging bied nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It seems as if nobody took the trouble to extend the strategies to provide
for specific small, medium and micro enterprises, entrepreneurs and co-
operatives, and to ensure that the policies of trade, black economic
empowerment and labour will provide support to industrialisation and
sustainable investment in a proactive and holistic manner.]

Although Ipap2 provides for retail, financial and some service-related
activities, its main focus is on growing the manufacturing sector. It is a
myth that only mining, agriculture and manufacturing can be regarded as
productive sectors. No mention was made of the possibility of utilising the
service sector as a lead sector. Experiences in India have shown that
service-led sectors’ growth can be sustainable and be a leading economic
sector. Today services are the largest sector in the world, accounting for
more than 70% of global output, and we are not part of that.

Nie genoeg klem is geplaas op die finansiële sektor wat noodsaaklik is vir
ekonomiese groei en ontwikkeling nie. Die Suid-Afrikaanse finansiële
dienste sektor word hoog geag in die wêreld en is ideaal om dienste te
voorsien tussen Afrika en die res van die wêreld. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Not enough emphasis is being placed on the financial sector, which is
essential for economic growth and development. The South African financial
services sector is held in high esteem around the world and is ideal to
provide services between Africa and the rest of the world.]

South Africa has ample raw material, natural resources and low-skilled —
mostly unemployed — labour. A key element of Ipap2 seems to be the
importance of technological knowledge and capacity for which a highly
skilled labour force is needed, which depends very much on an effective
education and skills development regime, for which South Africa is not well
positioned. Thus, Ipap2 is targeting an ideal labour force and not the one
we have.

Other barriers Ipap2 is facing are the lack of foreign direct investments
due to unpredictability and low investor confidence, low productivity and
weak global competitiveness, a highly regulated but inflexible labour
regime, limited availability of project funding, and the poor state of our
transport infrastructure.

Ipap2 emphasised the importance of local beneficiation and how this will
increase the local content of manufactured products, employment and foreign
earnings. However, the reality seems to be different. For example, the
Automotive Production and Development Programme is seen to be central to
the success of Ipap2. The prevailing criticism is its highly mechanised
nature and the very small local content in vehicles assembled, in some
cases less than 30%. Companies like Volkswagen South Africa have set a
target of 70% local content. However, it does appear that much of the raw
material and semi-finished products are still imported and are judged to be
100% local content after some value has been added. Both Naamsa and
ArcelorMittal South Africa confirmed that while South Africa has some of
the best iron ore in the world, South Africa does not produce flat sheet
metal to be used in the manufacturing of vehicle bodies.

Meer klem moet ook geplaas word op waardetoevoeging van Suid-Afrikaanse rou
materiaal en om die arbeidsintensiewe voertuigkomponentebedryf as ’n
globale kompeterende sektor te ontwikkel. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[More emphasis should also be placed on value-adding with regard to South
African raw material and developing the labour-intensive motor vehicle
components industry as a competitive sector globally.]

Industrial development zones, IDZs, in the past were targeted and designed
to drive specific industrial and export sectors. During the visit of our
committee to Coega, it became clear that not enough priority and support
are being committed to IDZs despite the enormous initial state investments
made. The DA believes that export processing and job creation zones can be
an effective mechanism that must enjoy targeted behind-the-border
incentives. Such zones should be implemented in more rural areas where wage
subsidies and tax incentives on profits and to first-time employees should
be considered to also contribute to the economic development in those rural
areas.

Agro-processing offers opportunities to effectively structure land reform
through the utilisation of commercial productive land as well as existing
production capacity, knowledge and expertise. This will add to rural
development, strengthen the whole agrisector and contribute to food
security, second tier agri-industries and their export capacity.

As we have learned from our last interactions with Eskom and the iron,
steel, and automotive industries, there are still many stumbling blocks
preventing Ipap2 from achieving the intended outcomes. We support the view
of the committee with regard to the need for continuous evaluation of
appropriate strategic industrial actions plans that will meet the demands
of the time and will enjoy the full support and buy-in of government,
labour, South African business and foreign direct investors. This will not
only contribute to optimal employment and beneficiation in South Africa,
but will assure strategic global competitive positioning, sustainability
and an open-opportunity environment for all. Ipap2 must be seen as a step
towards practical and achievable action plans that will contribute to the
actual growing of our economy. The DA will continue to play a constructive
role to develop the best options for our needs. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C M P KOTSI: Chairperson, Ipap2 stands for Industrial Policy Action Plan
2, which clearly means that there was another one before — Ipap1. Ipap2 is
addressing the challenges we experienced in Ipap1.

Any government worldwide is not about the creation of jobs, but is about
creating a conducive environment through policies and legislation that
would enable the economy of the country to grow so that private companies
are able to create massive numbers of jobs for the people.

During our public hearings as the committee, we were able to listen to and
interrogate a number of sectors on how they plan to come to the party in as
far as Ipap2 is concerned. They really raised some of the challenges they
have. Some of the challenges were as follows: the exchange rate
overvaluation and volatility; failure to adequately leverage public
procurement; monopolistic pricing of key inputs; unreliable, aged rail and
post systems; low skills base to support industries; and low productivity.

For this industrialisation plan to work, we need companies like
ArcelorMittal South Africa and Kumba Iron Ore to be committed and do so as
the nation expects them to do, and not as they wish. It seems that because
they are connected in a high office, there’s a free-for-all. Recent reports
about ICT getting mineral rights and immediately selling them back to
ArcelorMittal constitute proof that only the connected few so-called BEE
companies can get the deals.

This government has demonstrated during the World Cup that it has the
ability of focus on being timeous and delivering on schedule. It must show
that same commitment in arresting the country’s industrial decline.
Everyone agrees that labour-intensive industries are the best to assist
this country. But that should be put together with what we plan to do as a
country in terms of increasing growth. This must not be for personal gain,
but for the country as a whole.

We need to look at the clothing industry that has declined at this point in
time, especially in the Western Cape. Programmes like the Motor Industry
Development Programme, MIDP, that have worked for automobile industries,
also need to be looked at.

At the present moment, the country is experiencing a serious political
strike. I call this a political strike because many teachers and health
workers are complaining that they want to go to work, but Cosatu is
threatening them that they shouldn’t. How can Ipap work if Cosatu, which is
part of the tripartite alliance, is the instigator? In this case,
government has come to the party by addressing the workers’ needs. But
Cosatu is not prepared to come to the party because this is not an
industrial strike but a political strike.

I think the ANC, within its ranks, should look into sorting this matter out
because for Ipap to work and for us as a country to create more jobs, we
also need to move. It is very important for the country to look at these
things because it is of no use for us to create Ipap when Cosatu is not
party to that and when it is creating its own fights within the industry,
not about jobs, but about positions they want in the ANC. In this case,
they should really be part of the tripartite alliance and not part of
another party because they are a part of creating those jobs. [Applause.]

This Ipap is not going to work if Cosatu continues to instigate people who
really want to work. Many teachers fear going to work because they are
being assaulted. It is not about the fact that they are a part of this. The
ANC should bring the tripartite alliance to the party so that we can
deliver to the people of this country and make sure that jobs are created.
It is only on that basis that we are able to create jobs and not divide
this country. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]
Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Hon Madam Chairperson, Ipap2 represents, as it
states, an action plan by the Department of Trade and Industry in
attempting to create a platform for the direct and sustainable increase of
manufacturing productivity within our country.

We are at an extremely delicate juncture, economically speaking, with fears
of a double-dip recession looming and with some economies in the world
already showing signs of contraction. A cluster-co-ordinated strategy must
therefore be determined and implemented between the various stakeholders
and government departments, as well as the industry if South Africa is to
avert economic disaster.

The creation of sustainable employment being core to Ipap’s programme must
remain strongly within our focus. Unemployment levels which are dangerously
high at the moment need to be addressed because of their dire socioeconomic
implications, which in themselves are counterproductive to domestic growth.

Mechanisms which attract foreign direct investment into the manufacturing
sector and will have the effect of bolstering both employment and
productivity must be put in place.

South Africa’s manufacturing competitiveness must be on par globally if we
are to sustain the increase we have seen in our manufacturing sector over
the past 10 years. Variables such as the very high costs associated with
capital and its limited availability in this country, as well as unreliable
and costly port, rail and road systems, coupled with very high electricity
prices, do not make South Africa as attractive as other developing
countries, such as India and Brazil.

The automotive industry has been identified as one of the core focus
sectors for the current period. This is a sector which is expected to
contribute an extra 150 000 jobs in the next 10 years, and is also a sector
which avails lends to increased productivity as only 35% local content is
presently used in motor vehicles manufactured in this country. Furthermore
in this regard, Ipap2 must be assisted by national skills development in
the automotive and other manufacturing industries. Trade schools should be
readily available for learners countrywide who want to pursue a career in
manufacturing.

In conclusion, the IFP would like to see a co-ordinated approach and the
working together of all interested sectors of government in making Ipap2 a
great success as herein lies the key to us meeting our future growth path
goals. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A RADEBE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and members of Parliament,
the 2010 January 8 Statement of the ANC identified strategic development
priorities which must be attained in 2010. These are speeding up growth and
creating more jobs, decent work and sustainable livelihoods. To attain the
objectives of creating more jobs, decent work opportunities and sustainable
livelihoods, an inclusive economic growth path based on a comprehensive
industrial strategy was agreed upon. This inclusive growth path was
anchored on the following four programmes: the expenditure of the budgeted
R787 billion on improving public infrastructure; tailoring fiscal and
monetary measures in a way that complements trade and industry policies;
preserving as many jobs as possible; and ensuring that funds meant to
assist companies in distress flow to deserving enterprises.

The ANC also noted that the global financial crisis opened up space for a
fundamental transformation globally and domestically. It is recognised that
the unfettered free-market system does not have the capacity to address the
serious social and economic inequalities in the world. The ANC recognises
that the state must play an active role in the economy. The state must
address the pressing challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequality.

During his Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance called for a growth path
that envisaged the following key actions: creating youth employment;
developing labour-intensive industries; maintaining public and private
investment; generating an inclusive economy; striving to achieve low
inflation and a stable exchange rate; and increasing productivity and
competitiveness and attracting foreign direct investment. All these actions
point to a government committed to creating a new industrial policy which
deals with issues of equity, poverty and underdevelopment.

During the public hearings, the monopolistic pricing of key inputs in the
steel industry was identified and the consequence thereof was quantified.
For example, ArcelorMittal always received cheap iron ore from Kumba at
cost plus 3%. This exclusive deal was meant to provide cheap steel for
domestic consumption. Instead local consumers were slapped with an import
parity price, which did not take into consideration that steel is a
strategic industry. This led to increased costs for motor, canning and
manufacturing industries.

Kumba also undermined the economy by exporting ore instead of processing it
so that value-added products could be created. During public hearings, Prof
S Roberts and Cosatu were of the view that all monopolistic firms which
were involved in uncompetitive behaviour must be dismantled and additional
competition enforcements enhanced. The committee is of the view that the
Competition Act should be strengthened and capacity should be increased to
give greater power to the implementing agency.

Since the ArcelorMittal and Kumba fight is bleeding the economy, we call on
the Minister of Trade and Industry to revisit the principles which underpin
the privatisation of Iscor, which are to ensure the viability and cost-
competitiveness of local steel production and to ensure a competitive steel-
pricing regime to support the development and deepening of value-added
manufacturing products in downstream industries. The interdepartmental task
team of the Ministers of Trade and Industry, Economic Development and
Mineral Resources must conclude its work so that the economy can be spared.
This is because when two elephants fight it is the grass that suffers.

The other issue that came out during public hearings is the leveraging of
public procurement. Both business and organised labour have called for the
overhaul of the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act and further
called that procurements should be used as an instrument of
industrialisation. This means that there must be a change from ad hoc
procurement practices to fleet-type purchasing arrangements. For example,
when Transnet purchases locomotives, it should purchase 50 of them instead
of purchasing just five so that it can ensure that the majority of the
parts that go into locomotives are locally sourced so as to ensure that
more jobs are created in the value chain industries.

Business Unity SA, or Busa, and Cosatu have also called for the alignment
of the National Treasury regulations with the broad-based black economic
empowerment, BBBEE codes. Since the current BBBEE legislation does not have
industrialisation and the creation of employment as its primary objectives,
this legislation should be subordinated to the imperatives of industrial
policy. This demands a legislative change.

The other challenge identified during the public hearings is the issue of
high costs and limited allocation of capital. The lack of private capital
investment within production sectors of the economy was highlighted in
Ipap2. The acknowledgement that the cost of capital is high relative to our
trading partners requires an approach that will allow government to be a
catalyst to unblock financial impediments to growth and employment
creation. This means that development finance institutions should promote a
developmental agenda and not be as risk-averse as commercial banks. The
development finance institutions must be able to provide financing at rates
below the market. This means that institutions like the IDC should be
regularly recapitalised so that they can attain their developmental mandate
on a larger scale. This also calls for changes in the legislative framework
of the IDC.

One of the fundamental problems which undermine our industrial policy and
economic growth is the volatility and the overvaluation of the exchange
rate. Dr E Wessels is of the view that a strong currency is not necessary
to reduce the cost of imported capital goods in developing countries. He
also stated that the inflationary consequence of depreciation has been
exaggerated because the overall impact on the economy is determined by the
ratio of nontradable prices to tradable prices.

The National Treasury is of the view that the exchange rate must depreciate
in the long term and still advocates the reduction of dissaving and the
inflation-targeting framework. The SA Reserve Bank is in favour of the
gradual accumulation of foreign reserves and the facilitation of the
development of hedging instruments which will assist in smoothing excessive
rand volatility over suitable timeframes.

The committee is of the view that issues of volatility of the exchange
rate, the interest rate and its impact on manufacturing should be addressed
at the highest level of government. This high-level government engagement
must be followed by a national indaba to promote the objectives of Ipap so
as to secure increased participation by all stakeholders, for example all
spheres of government, organised business and labour, civil society and
academics.

Resources needed to fund Ipap2, like the R20 billion incentives made
available by the Treasury over five years, must be used together with other
funds, amounting to R787 billion spent on infrastructure.

The ANC has called upon the people of South Africa to work together to
fight poverty and underdevelopment. Ipap2 calls upon us to put aside our
political differences and work together as a cohesive force as we did
during the Fifa World Cup. Hon Minister, President Zuma said during the
national executive committee lekgotla:

   The defining feature of this administration will be that it is a
   government that knows where the people live, which knows what the people
   think, and which acts fast on the issues they raise.

Hon Minister, the tribe has spoken. Let the chief’s administration act
accordingly. Thank you. [Applause.]

Adv A D ALBERTS: Chairperson, the committee report is a result of a
committee — irrespective of party political affiliation — that has sensed
the urgency of addressing the challenge of growing the economy in a manner
that will lead to sustainable employment creation. The report reflects a
pragmatic approach to tackling this challenge by supporting the use of
industrialisation as a tool and leverage for growth.

Daar bestaan ernstige strukturele gebreke in ons land se ekonomie wat
uitgewys is deur die afgelope paar jaar se werklose ekonomiese groei, waar
die nuwe rykdom nie omgesit is in genoegsame werkskepping nie. Hierdie
verslag probeer hierdie gebreke aanspreek deur erkenning te gee aan die
behoefte vir ’n geïntegreerde en sistemiese benadering tot ekonomiese groei
en werkskepping. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Economic growth without increased job opportunities during the past few
years has brought to light serious structural deficiencies in our country’s
economy, where the new wealth has not been converted into adequate job
creation. This report attempts to address these shortcomings by
acknowledging the need for an integrated and systemic approach to economic
growth and job creation.]

It is enlightening to note that this committee has adopted an approach of
“South Africa first” when it comes to responses to macroeconomic matters
like trade, thereby seeking policy space within the international trade
instruments which this country can use to achieve its economic goals
without flouting international laws.

This committee, together with the DTI and other agencies concerned with the
country’s economic growth, must continuously investigate industrial and
service opportunities as they appear on the horizon for investment and
development. We live in a global environment where the innovation cycle is
increasing at an unprecedented rate and information flow is deepening.
Therefore, our ability to scan for opportunities and our ability to
exercise expert choices must also be enhanced.

In order to unlock further value, we must release the labour market from
restraints like affirmative action, arrest crony-based capitalism, stop
cadre deployment and pursue an open and inclusive market, amongst others.

Die VF Plus ondersteun die idee van ’n vaardigheidsoudit ten einde ’n
register daar te stel vir gebruik waar tekorte in die arbeidsmag bestaan,
solank die werking daarvan in samewerking met die arbeidsmakelaarsbedryf
plaasvind. Hierdeur kan ons weer geleenthede gee aan vaardige persone wat
as gevolg van regstellende aksie nie geleenthede sou gehad het nie, maar
ook sorg dat nuwe vaardighede gekweek word, waar leemtes bestaan soos blyk
uit die oudit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The FF Plus supports the notion of a skills audit in order to establish a
register that could be used wherever shortages in the labour force exist,
as long as it is implemented in co-operation with the labour broking
industry. Through this we can once again afford skilled people
opportunities they would not have had because of affirmative action, but
also ensure that new skills are nurtured where there are deficiencies as
revealed in the audit.]

If we can ensure co-ordination among all the role-players in the economic
matrix, we will be able to ensure that the tide comes in to lift all the
boats in the harbour. Then we must remember to untie the currently
disadvantaged boats so that they too can sail into the sunset and
prosperity.

Ms F E KHUMALO: Chairperson, the major cause of unemployment is a
structural distortion of the economy which favours capital-intensive
industries due to the monetary and industrial policies of the apartheid
years. An economy that grows without creating sustainable employment
opportunities for the majority of her citizens is not sustainable. An
economy that relies on exporting raw materials without beneficiation is
also not sustainable. The question is: What does this Ipap seek to achieve?
Who are the intended beneficiaries? What distortions does it want to
rectify? How does it achieve a balance between the primary and secondary
sectors of the economy?

Ipap2 has been welcomed by business and labour as well as other
stakeholders to bring structural changes through skills upgrading,
agroprocessing and standards, quality assurance, accreditation and
metrology, SQAM. Ipap2 recognises the critical need for skills upgrading to
reach sustainable industrialisation, and it has listed a number of areas
where specific skills development is required, namely: SQAM; standards
writers; laboratory personnel and compulsory specification practitioners;
metal fabrication and tooling industry skills; solar water heating;
forestry, timber, paper and pulp furniture; business management; and
efficiency skills for new forest growers and beneficiaries of land reform.

Ipap2 includes a number of interventions that focus on development plans
relevant to certain sectors and improving such facilities. In terms of the
advanced manufacturing sector, one of the interventions is to revive and
upgrade existing training centres at state-owned enterprises and reduce
bottlenecks of up to 18 months at testing facilities. This should assist in
addressing the five-year gap with regard to 14 500 scientists, engineers
and other technical skills.

A coherent and integrated skills development strategy must be developed and
implemented to ensure that institutions of higher education appropriately
align their academic programmes to meet the skills demanded by the
industry. Government should ensure that institutions and sector education
and training authorities, Setas, are adequately funded. Furthermore, they
should partner with business to develop relevant on-the-job training
experiences for the unemployed and for the youth to improve their
employment possibilities and to promote continued learning for their
existing employees.

Agroprocessing is an identified intervention sector that will contribute to
rural development. The key reason for this is that the sector mainly uses
primary agricultural products as an input. Some parts of this sector, such
as packaging, are often situated in or near rural areas where the
agricultural products are grown.

Agroprocessing also feeds into a number of downstream industries such as
wholesale outlets, retail chains, restaurants, pubs, shebeens and fast-food
franchises, as well as the hotel industry. Therefore, the prevalence of
agroprocessing has a huge impact on both direct and indirect jobs as well
as on food security because it comprises a highly diverse group of
subsectors and industries, namely food processing, beverages, aquaculture,
horticulture, medicines, aromatics and flavourings. The following
subsectors have also been identified to focus on: the aquaculture and
organic food sector, small-scale maize milling, fruit and vegetable canning
and rooibos and honeybush products.

Small and medium enterprises and co-operatives should be direct
beneficiaries of the agroprocessing sector development. However, the
following issues are critical to ensure that they reap the benefits of such
development: access to affordable financial support for capital and
operating expenses; access to markets; knowledge of supply and demand;
affordability of telecommunications; reliability of transport; and skills
development support.

SQAM institutions are reliable institutions that ensure the integrity of
new manufacturing industries and existing manufacturing industries. The
SQAM institutions ensure that South Africa’s standards are adhered to and
that the market is not subjected to poor quality and cheap imports. They
provide protection to consumers by ensuring the quality and safety of
products, including with regard to health and environmental aspects, and
ensure that they themselves are recognised domestically and
internationally. Therefore, certified products are accepted.

Through the process of achieving international quality assurance standards,
the development of the small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs, and co-
operatives can be stimulated, which could lead to an increased demand for
their products by larger enterprises that must meet standards and promote
preferential procurement. The cost of being assessed for certification is a
concern. The government should consider the cost implications for SMMEs and
co-operatives and provide support to assist their development. Furthermore,
standardisation with the SADC region can promote regional integration and
broaden markets for South Africa.

For Ipap2 to be a success, the government should develop the necessary
technical and managerial capacity in the fields of economics, accounting,
engineering and, in general, management science. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Malungu ahloniphekile, besicela ukuthi nithi
ukwehlisa umsindo kancane. [Hon members, we request you to lower the noise
levels.]

Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Hon Chairperson, hon members, the DA believes
that the protection and creation of jobs should be an important part of the
national agenda. We need to see all spheres of government working towards
this goal. The revised Ipap is one department’s response to this challenge.


But – and here we share the sentiments of the hon Kotsi from Cope – in an
open opportunity society, the responsibility for industrial growth is not
only the responsibility of government. In an open opportunity society,
government should create an environment in which the private sector will be
able to drive that economic growth.

South Africa has lost much of its industrial capacity over the last few
years. The recession and the enormous number of jobs that have been lost
have highlighted the fragile nature of the South African economy, and the
hon Alberts of FF Plus has just referred to that. The good news is that
every recession, by its very definition, is followed by a period of
economic growth. The DA believes that it is of the utmost importance for
government to make the structural changes needed by the economy now. This
is needed so that we can avoid the constraints that hampered the economy
during the last economic upswing.

The sad reality is that we have lost much of our skills base, including the
ability to train sufficient numbers of artisans and others with the skills
needed by a modern, growing, knowledge-based economy. The subperformance of
the Setas is contributing to the current skills deficit. Government should
also invest much more in infrastructure.

Parliament has dealt extensively with the negative effects of our failure
to invest in power plants in good time. But there are other examples as
well — examples such as our transport system, especially the railways and
the harbours, that has not seen the capital investment needed to support
long-term growth in industrial activity. Major developments are too often
turned down or delayed, even at the local government level, due to capacity
constraints pertaining to water, sewerage or road infrastructure.

Also, the way in which black economic empowerment is undertaken does little
to instil investor confidence. This was recently illustrated by the alleged
mistakes made in the awarding of mining rights to Imperial Crown Trading.
It was clear from the oversight visits by the committee that government’s
support, both in finance and in the advice given to small entrepreneurs,
leaves much to be desired.

Many industrial development zones remain underdeveloped areas due to the
lack of incentive schemes. We therefore welcome the tax incentives that we
have learned of earlier today – incentives to the value of R20 billion over
the next five years. A DA-run administration would improve the ability of
government to create those opportunities that mark a truly open opportunity
society. I thank you. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, this Parliament is really quite a strange place.
You know, when we are in the portfolio committee, we all agree on almost
everything. And then we come into plenary and suddenly we find major
differences. For that reason, I want to talk ideology, and I hope that the
hon leader of the DA will forgive me if I talk ideology.
You see, we are told by the hon Marais that successful industrialisation is
always market driven – I hope I got that quote right because that’s the
note I took. And then the hon Kotsi said that it’s the private companies
that create jobs, and then she went on to attack Cosatu in a way that we
have not heard for many years. I think even under apartheid, people didn’t
attack the trade unions quite so vigorously!

So, what is this ideology that we are talking about? Suddenly it is the
private sector that is going to do the job. Let me tell you about the
private sector in South Africa. Firstly, the Business Report reported on
30 July 2010 on the ease of doing business. It reported that South Africa
has a better ease of doing business than Argentina, Brazil, Chile and
China. South Africa scored higher ... [Interjections.]

Mr S B FARROW: Where’s the ideology?

Prof B TUROK: The ideology is that this government and this country are
very friendly to business, right? But — and here comes the but — the
exports of South Africa with regard to industrial output are much lower
than the countries I mentioned. So, the ease of doing business is high, but
the consequences are low.

Secondly, Wits University reported in Business Day on 10 August 2010 that
in 2007, R450 billion of South African wealth went abroad. This is the
private sector. It is not the state that sends the money overseas.

Thirdly, Business Day of 19 August 2010 reported that in 2008, South Africa
imported R5 billion worth of machine tools. Now, if you say to me that the
private sector is the sole solution or even the main solution, I’m afraid I
have to disillusion you because a few months ago Prof Ha-Joon Chang of
Cambridge University — he is a South Korean and an expert on the East Asian
tigers — came to Parliament — right here — and gave a talk in the Old
Assembly. I can do no better than to summarise what he had to say.

The advice he gave us is that we need a fundamental transformation of the
productive sector of South Africa — Ipap. Exactly! He didn’t know about
Ipap. But he said “fundamental transformation of the productive sector”,
which, of course, includes the private sector.

Then, he said that the enormous success of East Asia was due to the
following: one, aggressive state intervention; two, the directing of
investment to particular sectors in which the state also helps to direct;
and three, trade protection, subsidies, regulation and state ownership.
Those were the policies which brought unprecedented growth to South Korea,
Japan, Taiwan, Malaysia, etc.

So you see, the private sector ... [Interjections.] Yes, of course, we are
all for the private sector. By the way, in the portfolio committee
hearings, the private sector didn’t talk the language of the DA and Cope.
On the contrary, they were totally in favour of Ipap and they were totally
in favour of strong state intervention because without strong state
intervention, the private sector does not push the way it should.

Between 1950 and 1980, South Korea experienced 6% growth over the whole
period. The result was that income doubled every 12 years. The result of
that — listen carefully — was that in 1961, per capita income in South
Korea was $80 per head.

Mr I M OLLIS: Tell us about North Korea.

Prof B TUROK: I will tell you about North Korea tomorrow. [Laughter.]

So, per capita income was US$80 per head in 1961. Today it is US$28 000 per
head in South Korea. That’s the result, and it is the result of the same
policies that are in South Africa. [Interjections.]

Listen quietly because you were around during that period.

In South Africa in 1961, our income per capita was US$400, and it is now
US$3 000 per capita. In South Korea it is US$28 000 per capita. So, who has
done better? South Korea has shown the way for us to follow. Indeed, Ipap
is built very much on the kind of interventions that South Korea accepted.

We talk about the developmental state. We don’t talk much about the private
sector, but now, in the ANC, we talk about a developmental state. What is
this? South Korea adopted the policies of a developmental state, which
meant planning, co-ordination and sectoral industrial policies. Peculiarly,
France has done the same. Scandinavian countries have done the same. What
they did is what Ipap is doing — identifying strategic industries,
technology, research and development, and upgrading where necessary.

The state does the planning and co-ordination, and the private sector
implements. And you are quite right. The state creates the environment — I
think you said the same thing. But you see, it is neither a capitalist
state nor a business state. It is a developmental state that provides that
environment. That’s essential.

The other thing they did was implement protectionism. The United States was
the most protectionist country in the world in the last century. They had
very high tariffs, and they grew behind the tariffs. Why can’t we, in a
modest way, also apply protectionism?

Prof Ha-Joon Chang told us that South Africa has a strong base. We have the
IDC, the Development Bank of SA, or DBSA, and state-owned enterprises. He
also said, DA, that we have a strong political base as well. The ANC is a
strong party. You see, you need a strong ruling party in order to rule and
to rule effectively. Ipap is actually based on a strong ruling party, and
that’s what is sitting over here. Prof Chang said to us that we can do the
job.

Finally, he talked about human capability. You know, very often Harvard
professors and so on tell us that our capability is low. Let me tell you
what Prof Chang said. He said that at the beginning of industrialisation in
East Asia, their human capital base was lower than that of South Africa,
and now it is much higher. So, you see, South Korea’s level of literacy in
the forties was lower than that of South Africa during the same time. But
today they have massive engineering and massive technological human
capability. The lesson in all this is that we must put Ipap in place. We
must do all the necessary things, and we need a good developmental state to
do it. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I would like to start by
thanking all those members who made, mostly, constructive and thoughtful
contributions during this debate. I would also like to appreciate the work
of the portfolio committee, under the chairpersonship of Joan Fubbs, for
organising public hearings and finalising a comprehensive and excellent
report, which succinctly captures most of the salient points made by no
less than 38 stakeholders of a very, very high calibre during the course of
those hearings.

The parliamentary hearings and the report itself have confirmed something
that we ourselves have discovered in ongoing, extensive consultations with
key stakeholders, both in business and in labour — that there is
overwhelming support in this country for the objectives, analysis,
diagnosis and direction of the policy proposals included in Ipap2.

As we have said repeatedly, we regard Ipap as a rolling action plan and a
living document. Through ongoing consultations and engagements, we plan to
amend and improve our Ipaps in the process —as we describe it — of learning
by doing.

Ipap is one of the platforms of the new economic growth path which is
designed to place us on a qualitatively new, more labour-absorbing growth
path. Ipap is rooted in the perspective which argues that we need to make
structural changes in the trajectory of accumulation if we are to reduce
the unacceptably high levels of unemployment in this country, and with them
poverty and inequality.

Ipap identifies a number of constraints which have led to a situation in
which the productive sectors of our economy have grown at only about half
the pace of consumption-driven sectors. It proposes a number of ways to
address these constraints.
We have to work for the success of these policies and programmes against
the backdrop of a considerable external shock, whose impact on the
industrial sector and on jobs continues to be severe.

The global economic climate is characterised by great uncertainty. Although
it appears right now that the world economy is moving out of recession, the
extent and the nature of the recovery is uncertain and fragile, at best,
with growth in the developed world expected to be, at best, sluggish for
many years to come.

This context of uncertainty and oppressed trading conditions for us with
our established trading partners in the developed world, in our view,
requires that we do things differently. It makes it even more imperative
that the policy perspectives and tasks set out in Ipap are implemented.

Frankly I’ve heard nothing today ... and I think I’ll have to make
allowances for the fact that people say something different in the
portfolio committee from what they say up here. There is an element of
grandstanding when they come to this podium. But I think I have heard
nothing that suggests that there is any coherent or credible alternative to
the strategy which we are proposing.

Further than that — and I want to build on a point that was made by the hon
Turok – the lesson from the experience of those developing countries that
have performed more successfully during the crisis and which have now
emerged as major new poles of economic power and major new forces of
dynamism in the world economy, countries like China, India and Brazil, is
that all of them, without exception, had active state-led industrial
policies which sought to identify, support and nurture key value-added
production sectors. In fact, the experience of economies like India, China
and Brazil has merely echoed that of every other country at any time in
economic history which succeeded in placing itself on a new growth path
characterised by increasing as opposed to diminishing returns to scale.

I want to quote from a recent book called Industrial Policy and Development
By Mario Cimoli, Giovanni Dosi and Joseph Stiglitz, which says:

   All the countries which are nowadays developed undertook indeed
   relatively high degrees of intervention to support the accumulation of
   technological capabilities and the transformation of their organisation
   of production, especially in the early period of industrialisation.

Ipap is indeed based on and draws precisely lessons and learnings from key
developing countries which have now emerged as powerful forces in the world
economy.

In response to the hon Marais, I want to say that the choice of 13 sectors
in Ipap is not the product of some thumb-suck by government. Rather, it is
the product of an exercise of self-discovery and continuous engagement with
key stakeholders. The fact that we have chosen 13 subsectors is a
reflection of the diversity of the existing industrial base. At the same
time, the hon Marais appears to have forgotten that there are in fact three
identified focus areas. The first of these are metals fabrication, capital
goods and transport equipment industries, which we say need to grow and
development fundamentally on the back of the infrastructure investment
programmes that we will be undertaking in this country. The second focus
area is green industries, and the third is precisely one of the ones he
mentioned — agroprocessing.

It is also not true that Ipap ignored service sectors. Some high-value
service sectors like tourism and business process outsourcing, BPO, are
actually part of Ipap. But the bigger picture is that the growth path
strategy, which is being developed by my colleague, Minister Ebrahim Patel,
will deal with this much more comprehensively because the domain of Ipap is
in fact value-added sectors. I would argue that, again, the experience of
economic history is that the quality and income-generating capacity of
service sectors are much stronger when they are rooted in an economy which
has growing and expanding productive sectors than when they are rooted in
an economy which does not.

I would contend that the debate on the desirability of Ipap is now
completed with the adoption of this report. The task now is to move towards
implementation and the task of rallying important forces behind this
particular programme. As the DTI, we are now firmly in implementation mode.
In fact, we are committed to presenting a six-monthly implementation
report, and that report will have to refer to the period of implementation
up to the end of this particular month. We are now two quarters into the
implementation of Ipap.

I want to just say that the report which we will be presenting to both
Cabinet and Parliament, according to the commitments which we made, will
reflect in detail on all the different action plans which have been
identified in Ipap. As a sort of preview, I can say that, broadly speaking,
most of the work which we have identified that we need to do in these two
quarters is being done and is on track. There are very few exceptions.
Although I must say that if there are any exceptions, I am not happy with
that because I think we need to keep the pressure up to make sure that all
the work is done when it needs to be done.

There are a couple of issues that were raised by hon members in the debate
that I would just want to refer to. A number of people spoke about the
issue of procurement. Indeed procurement was a major, major issue in Ipap
itself. I am pleased to be able to report that a joint task team from
National Treasury, the Department of Economic Development and the
Department of Trade and Industry has reached an agreement on the set of
proposed amendments to the regulations of the Public Preferential
Procurement Finance Act. These proposals, which are fully compatible with
World Trade Organisation, WTO, rules, we believe will considerably scale up
our ability to use state procurement as a mechanism to generate and support
local manufacturing.

When these proposals are implemented, subject to Cabinet approval, we
believe that this will signal the first phase in a broader comprehensive
review of state procurement which will address a number of the issues
raised by the committee in the report, including the potential of co-
ordinated procurement processes at the level of metro municipalities.

As the committee noted in its report, there are a number of positive
examples that show what is possible. The eThekwini Municipality’s
procurement of public transport equipment is exemplary. They achieved 98%
local procurement, and it showed what can be achieved when the will is
there.

The reason for the display of the exhibition which we are having outside in
the private sector of the Volkswagen Polo, is that the local content of
that particular vehicle has gone up from 39% to 74%, which is an objective
we have set in the automotive programme. [Applause.]

We are proposing that the accreditation for local procurement be undertaken
by Proudly South African, which will give that campaign a major boost. We
believe that all of this will assist us in moving towards getting a higher
proportion of local production from the investments which we are making in
infrastructure.

A number of members referred to the issue of ArcelorMittal and Kumba. Let
me just say a couple of words on this, although this is not central to this
particular report. Let me just say that the unbundling of Iscor in 2001
involved what we are convinced are two public and developmental
obligations. The first of these was that the company that received the
licence to mine iron ore incision would have to make a proportion — and
indeed it was a rather modest proportion — available at cost plus 3% to
support local steel production.

The second public and developmental obligation was that the beneficiary or
the recipient of that concessional iron ore would have an obligation to
pass this on in the form of a competitive steel price that would support
downstream manufacture. I think that recent events and the differences
between the two companies that have benefited from this arrangement show
that there was a weakness in that those public service obligations were
embedded in contracts between two private companies.

As is known, the Department of Trade and Industry together with the
Department of Economic Development and the Department of Mineral Resources
has established a task force which has, as its objective, to ensure that we
identify all the levers in government to make sure that those particular
objectives are restored.

Make no mistake, it is essential for the success of Ipap that we have in
place competitively priced steel available for downstream manufacture.

I don’t have any time to go through the large number of other individual
recommendations made in this excellent report. Suffice to say that we are
prepared in the committee to go through each of them in detail and that we
will be reporting, as I said earlier, through the six-monthly report, both
to Cabinet and to Parliament.

As far as implementation is concerned, we also believe that the new system
of monitoring and evaluation in government, with the different new
structures in place — implementation structures and so on - offers us a
mechanism whereby all the different contributions coming from all the
different parts of government to make Ipap a success can be monitored and
be evaluated.

In implementing this important industrial policy initiative, we know that
there are no easy victories. We will continue to signal that we are going
to be honest and very serious about what we are doing. We call upon all
South Africans to do, in this area, what we succeeded in doing in the World
Cup — making it a major success.

Let us then work together to make our industrial policy a success. Let us
work together to grow the economy and to fight the scourge of unemployment.
I trust that the House will adopt the excellent report on the hearings on
industrial policy by the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move:

   That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:29.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Membership of Assembly

     1) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        passing away of Dr M Tshabalala-Msimang, has been filled with
        effect from 19 August 2010 by the nomination of Mr J D Thibedi. Ms
        E R Maputha, who was initially nominated to fill the vacancy, is
        unavailable.

2.    Submission of Private Member’s Legislative Proposal

    (1)     The following private member’s legislative proposal was
        submitted to the Speaker on 1 September 2010 in accordance with
        Rule 234:

        (a)      Legislative proposal to regulate business interests of
             State employees (Mr I O Davidson)


     Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
     Special Petitions for consideration and report.

3.    Tabling of Public Protector Report No 1 of 2008-09 and of response of
     Minister of Health thereto

     1) Correspondence dated 9 November 2009 was received from the Minister
        of Health in response to recommendations in Public Protector Report
        No 1 of 2008-09, a report on an investigation conducted in terms of
        section 182(1)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, and section 8(1) of the Public Protector Act, 1994
        (Act No 23 of 1994) and submitted to the 3rd Parliament for
        consideration. As the report was not tabled at the time, both the
        report and the related correspondence are hereby tabled.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Health  and  the  Portfolio
        Committee on Mining for consideration.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
        Commission (FFC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 73-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
        Unit (SIU) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 220-2010].

 2. The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of
        Education for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 13 for 2009-2010 [RP 93-2010].
 3. The Minister of Higher Education and Training

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of
        Education for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 13 for 2009-2010 [RP 93-2010].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Reply from the Minister of Transport to recommendations in
        Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on Strategic Plan
        and Budget of Department of Transport and its Entities, as adopted
        by the House on 11 May 2010.

    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the Voluntary Disclosure
    Programme and Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B29-2010] (National
    Assembly- section 75), dated 31 August 2010.

     The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
     Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill
     [B 29– 2010] (National Assembly – section 75), referred to it, and
     classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports
     the Bill without amendments.

Report to be considered.

 2. Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws
    Amendment Bill [B28-2010] (National Assembly- section 77), dated 31
    August 2010.

     The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 28– 2010] (National Assembly – section
     77), referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
     Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

Report to be considered.

 3. Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the Report
    of the Auditor-General  on  the  2008/09  financial  statements  of  the
    Department of Labour, dated 24 August 2010

Introduction

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the  Committee),  heard  evidence
on and considered the contents of the Annual Report and the  Report  of  the
Auditor-General on the 2008/09 financial statements  of  the  Department  of
Labour (the Department). The Committee noted the  qualified  audit  opinion,
highlighted  areas  which  required  urgent  attention  of  the   Accounting
Officer, and reports as follows:

 1. Capital Assets


The Auditor-General  reported  that  the  Department  established  an  Asset
Management Unit in March 2008 to address  the  deficiencies  identified  and
reported in the  prior  year‘s  audit  report.   However,  the  audit  still
revealed, amongst others, the  following  significant  shortcomings  in  the
management and control of assets and the asset register.

    a) A number of assets on the asset register were included at  incorrect
       values.

    b) The asset register was not adequately maintained in accordance  with
       the requirements of National Treasury Regulations.

    c) The reconciliation of the prior year balance  as  disclosed  in  the
       financial statements with the  asset  registers  for  the  financial
       years ending 31 March 2007 and 2008 is still outstanding.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
     a) The Department employs professionally  skilled  personnel  and  that
        ongoing  monitoring  and  supervision  are  undertaken   to   enable
        management  to  determine   whether   controls   are   present   and
        functioning;
     b) Personnel are provided with in-service training;
     c) Adequate controls are designed and  implemented  to  ensure  that  a
        complete and accurate fixed asset register is maintained and updated
        on a regular basis;
     d) Disciplinary action is taken against underperforming staff ;
     e) Monthly reconciliations are performed  as prescribed; and
     f) Shortages or losses that were incurred due to  an  inadequate  asset
        register are identified and reported on.

2.    Governance Issues


The Auditor-General reported the following:

     a) The Audit Committee met seven times during the year under review and
        carried out its  functions as required in Section 77 of  the  Public
        Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No. 1 of 1999).
     b) The  operations  of  the  internal  audit  function  established  as
        required in Section 77 of the Public Finance  Management  Act,  1999
        were limited due to staff vacancies. As a result, they  were  unable
        to carry out all their audits in terms of their annual plan.

The Committee is concerned about the lack of stability at senior  management
level where personnel  have  been  in  acting  positions  for  an  extensive
period. The Department experiences vacancy levels in excess of  10%  in  all
of the programmes and acknowledges  that  this  is  a  major  impediment  to
service delivery.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
     a) The Department’s Audit Committee takes corrective action with regard
        to internal control   deficiencies;
     b) Personnel with adequate skills are employed;
     c)     The head of human resources and senior management  fills  vacant
        posts urgently;
     d)     Disciplinary action is taken against management  and  staff  who
        fail to perform their duties as required; and
     e)     Management implements  a  performance  management  system  where
        staff performance is  evaluated  against  specific  key  performance
        areas to enable management to take appropriate steps based on agreed
        deliverables.


3.    Non-compliance with Laws and Regulations
The Auditor-General reported the following:
   a)  The  Department  did  not  maintain an   effective,   efficient   and
      transparent system of  financial  and  risk  management  and  internal
      control, as transfer payments were made to  entities  without  service
      level agreements in place.
   b) The Department did not have an approved Fraud Prevention Plan.
   c) The Accounting Officer did not take reasonable steps to  recover  debt
      before debts owed to the  State  were  written  off  as  irrecoverable
      debts. 
   d) Regular assessment of supply chain management performance to  identify
      whether the system is functioning effectively was not performed.
   e) The performance contract of the chief financial officer was not signed
      by the relevant officials.

   f) Lack of approved controls to verify the accuracy and  completeness  of
      levies, interest and penalties transferred to the sector education and
      training authorities (SETAs) and National Skills Fund as  is  required
      by practice note 1 of 2008 issued in terms of the  Skills  Development
      Act (No. 97 of 1998).

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
   a) Control activities are identified and developed with consideration  of
      their cost and their potential effectiveness in mitigating risks;
   b) Management establishes, documents and implements  a  fraud  prevention
      plan;
   c)  Management  maintains  an  effective  risk  management  policy  which
      continuously  evaluates  and  updates  the  financial  management  and
      internal control risks;
   d) Reasonable steps are taken to recover debts before  they  are  written
      off and further steps are taken to recover debts from the  individuals
      responsible;
   e) Criminal charges are  laid  against  individuals  who  have  committed
      financial misconduct;
   f) Internal control deficiencies are identified  and  communicated  in  a
      timely manner to those responsible for taking corrective action;

   g)  An  effective  and  well  capacitated  internal  audit  division   is
      established;

   h) Management implements regular assessments of supply chain  performance
      to ensure that deficiencies are corrected;

   i) The entity addresses areas of responsibility and establishes lines  of
      reporting  in  order  to  support  effective  internal  control   over
      financial reporting; and

   j) Effective policies and procedures in relation to  financial  reporting
      are established and communicated.


4.    Conclusion

The Committee further recommends that  the  Executive  Authority  submits  a
progress report on the implementation of all the  above  recommendations  to
the National Assembly within 60 days of the adoption of this report  by  the
House.

Report to be considered.
4. Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on  the  Report
   of the Auditor-General on the 2008/09 financial statements of the Council
   for the Built Environment, dated 24 August 2010

Introduction

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the  Committee),  heard  evidence
on and considered the contents of the Annual Report and the  Report  of  the
Auditor-General on the 2008/09 financial statements of the Council  for  the
Built  Environment.  The  Committee  noted  the  disclaimed  audit  opinion,
highlighted  areas  which  required  urgent  attention  of  the   Accounting
Authority, and reports as follows:

1.    Governance Issues


The Auditor-General reported that:
    The Internal Audit function was outsourced  to  Pricewaterhouse  Coopers
    during the 2008/09 year and has subsequently  been  outsourced  to  SEMA
    Integrated Risk Solutions.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
    The Audit Committee oversees controls to enable the organisation to have
    sufficient and trained employees to fulfil these functions in-house.

   2. Irregular, Fruitless and Wasteful Expenditure


The Auditor-General reported the following:

a) Penalties and interest amounting to R11  239  were  incurred  during  the
   2008/09 financial year due to the late payment  of  taxes  to  the  South
   African Revenue Service (SARS).  A further penalty of R139 792 was levied
   by SARS  after  year-end  in  respect  of  the  late  submission  of  the
   IRP5 reconciliation.

b) Further, during the 2008/09 year, a settlement amount was  obtained  from
   a finance company and paid over to  settle  outstanding  amounts  due  in
   accordance with a lease agreement in respect of a photocopier. The  total
   of the remaining lease payments amounted to R48 061 and the total of  the
   settlement payments amounted to R55 883.  The difference  of  R7  822  is
   expenditure that could have been avoided had reasonable care  been  taken
   and therefore constitutes fruitless and wasteful expenditure.



The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:

   a) Strict rules and regulations are implemented to prevent irregularities
      and that disciplinary steps are taken against those who do not  follow
      recognised prescripts;

   b) The effectiveness  of  internal  control  is  strictly  monitored  and
      supervised;

   c) Internal control deficiencies are identified and communicated timely;
      and

   d) Corrective action against employees who fail to perform their duties
      is taken.




   3. Trade Receivables

The Auditor-General reported that:
     Sufficient appropriate audit evidence could not be obtained to  confirm
    membership    fee  income  and  trade  receivables  contained  in   the
    comparatives; and trade receivable balances in the current year.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:

     Proper processes are implemented to  ensure  accuracy,  occurrence  and
     completeness of calculations and income received by the entity.



 4. Non-compliance with matters affecting the entity

The Auditor-General reported the following:
     a) Significant difficulties during the audit concerning delays or non-
        availability of requested information;
     b) Deficiencies in design and implementation of internal controls in
        respect of financial and risk management and compliance with
        applicable laws and regulations and information systems not
        appropriate to facilitate preparation of financial statements;
     c) Prior year audit findings not substantially addressed;
     d) Late submission of strategic plan and budget; and
     e) Inadequate reporting on perfomance indicators.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
     a) An environment where senior leadership  ensures  proper  monitoring
        and oversight is created;

   b) There is effective monitoring of basic controls,  processes  and
      reconciliations throughout the year; and

   c) Controls in respect  of  deficiencies  in  risk  management  and
      compliance  with  laws  and   regulations   are   designed   and
      implemented.



5. Conclusion

The Committee further recommends that  the  Executive  Authority  submits  a
progress report on the implementation of all the  above  recommendations  to
the National Assembly within 60 days of the adoption of this report  by  the
House.

Report to be considered.


6. Seventh Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts  on  the
   Report of the Auditor-General on the 2008/09 financial statements of  the
   Boxing South Africa, dated 24 August 2010

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the Committee) heard evidence  on
and considered the contents of the Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the
Auditor-General on the 2008/09 financial statements of Boxing  South  Africa
(BSA). The Committee noted the qualified audit  opinion,  highlighted  areas
which required urgent attention of the Accounting Authority, and reports  as
follows:

1. Operating Expenditure

The Auditor-General reported the following:
     a) BSA could not provide sufficient and appropriate audit evidence for
        operating expenditure amounting to R346 239.000;
     b) Information that  was  considered  necessary  for  determining  the
        accuracy, completeness and occurrence of operating expenditure  was
        not obtained; and
     c) The entity’s records did not permit the application of  alternative
        audit procedures.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
     a) Measures are in place  to  ensure  that  supporting  documents  are
        safeguarded  and  properly  filed  after  they  are  processed  for
        reference for audit purposes;
     b) Requisition for payments are verified and approved before  payments
        are made; and
     c) Disciplinary action is taken against officials who fail  to  comply
        with the measures to safeguard records in accordance with PFMA

2. Going Concern

The Auditor-General identified that:
     BSA incurred a net loss of R4 327 497 during the year  ended  31  March
     2009 and total liabilities exceeded its total assets by R5 951 045.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
     Risks relating to  the  status  of  BSA  as  a  going  concern  are  be
     identified,  analysed, and addressed as a matter of urgency.

3. Fruitless and wasteful expenditure

The Auditor-General identified the following:
     Fruitless and wasteful expenditure to the amount  of  R1  313  226  was
     incurred as the entity failed to comply with its internal policies  and
     procedures regarding dismissals and did not pay its value-added tax and
     pay-as-you-earn on time which resulted in interest and penalties  being
     incurred.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
     Competent  individuals  are  appointed  to  ensure   proper   financial
     reporting and adherence to policies and procedures.

4. Non-Compliance with applicable laws and regulations

The Auditor-General reported the following:
     a)     Quarterly reports to the executive authority were not  submitted
        within 30 days of the end of each quarter  as  required  by  Section
        26.1 of the Treasury Regulations.
     b)     Evidence that the budget and the strategic plan  were  submitted
        to the executive authority as  required  by  Section  53(1)  of  the
        Public Finance Management Act and Section  30.1.1  of  the  Treasury
        Regulations, could not be provided for audit purposes.


     c)     BSA has budgeted for a deficit without obtaining  prior  written
        approval from National Treasury as required by Section 53(3) of  the
        PFMA.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
     a) Proper steps are taken to ensure that Boxing South  Africa  complies
        with applicable regulations;
     b) An action is developed, implemented  and monitored to address  these
        audit findings; and
     c) Quarterly reports are submitted to relevant authorities on time.

5. Conclusion

The  Department  of  Sport  and  Recreation  should  urgently  address   the
institutional  capacity  and  funding  constraints  of  BSA  to  ensure  its
organizational viability. Arising from the hearing, the  Committee  believes
that BSA should ensure the  appointment  of  competent  staff  in  order  to
execute its mandate successfully.

The Committee further recommends that the Accounting Officer  should  submit
a progress report on the implementation of all the above recommendations  to
the National Assembly within 60 days after the adoption of  this  report  by
the House.

Report to be considered

6. Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the  Report
   of the  Auditor-General  on  the  2008/09  financial  statements  of  the
   Department of Correctional Services, dated 24 August 2010

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the Committee) heard evidence  on
and considered the contents of the Annual  Report  and  the  Report  of  the
Auditor-General on the 2008/09 financial statements  of  the  Department  of
Correctional Services (the Department). The Committee  noted  the  qualified
audit opinion, highlighted areas which required the urgent attention of  the
Accounting Officer, and reports as follows:

     1. Internal Controls

The Auditor-General reported the following:

   1.1      On the Audit Committee
        a) The Audit Committee has not fulfilled its  responsibilities  for
           the year as  set  out  in  Section  77  of  the  Public  Finance
           Management Act  (No.1  of  1999)  and  Section  3.1.10.  of  the
           Treasury Regulations.
        b) The internal audit unit did not fulfill its responsibilities for
           the year as set out in the Treasury Regulations number 3.2.
        c)  There  were  significant  deficiencies  in   the   design   and
           implementation of internal control and risk management.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
        a) The Audit Committee  and  internal  audit  unit  are  adequately
           staffed and function properly; and
        b) The Department implements appropriate internal control and  risk
           management measures.

1.2   On Asset Management
        a) Assets are counted annually and exceptions are not  followed  up
           timeously.
        b) Documentation relating to assets were not readily available  for
           examination.
        c) The control activities surrounding the control of assets are  in
           place but they are not applied appropriately.
        d) Assets captured on  LOGIS  resulted  in  information  not  being
           available on a timely basis to  allow  effective  monitoring  of
           events, activities and transactions to allow prompt reaction.
        e) Assets recorded on the financial systems were not reconciled  to
           the fixed asset register.
        f) Data recorded by the information and financial systems  was  not
           compared with physical assets/stock and discrepancies exist.
        g) Management does have a strategy in place to ensure that  ongoing
           monitoring  is  effective  but  this  is   not   being   applied
           effectively with regards to asset management.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
        The Department develops and implements a  monitoring  strategy  that
        will address  matters  related  to  proper  counting,  verification,
        recording and documentation of assets as  provided  for  in  Section
        10.1.1 of the National Treasury Regulations.

   2. Capacity Issues

The Auditor-General identified the following shortcomings:

        a) The Department had a high vacancy rate in critical  occupations,
           e.g. nurses (25.4%), pharmacists (44.4%), medical  practitioners
           (20%), finance  and  economics  related  professionals  (26.1%),
           financial &  related  posts  (47%)  and  information  technology
           (66.7%).
        b) Inadequate training of personnel.
        c) The Human Resource (HR) plan  has  not  been  updated  with  the
           projected information for the 2008-09  financial  year.  The  HR
           plan provided only reflects projected information for the  2006-
           07 financial year, resulting in  the  department  not  complying
           with chapter 1, part 3, paragraph D1(c), of the  Public  Service
           Regulations (PSR).

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
        a) A comprehensive human resource strategy is developed  that  will
           attract,  retain  and  address  the  remuneration   of   skilled
           professionals in critical occupations in order  to  ensure  that
           the Department carries out its mandate successfully;
        b) The training resources available within the public  service  are
           adequately utilised at all levels.
        c) The Public  Administration  Leadership  and  Management  Academy
           (PALAMA)  is  speedily  engaged  to   ascertain   the   training
           requirements within the Department.
        d) A comprehensive HR plan is developed annually as required by the
           Public Services Regulations.

   3. System-related Issues

The Auditor-General identified the following shortcomings:

        a) No proper reconciliations were performed between WAT  and  LOGIS
           systems to ensure that all assets are captured.
        b) Lack of independent reviews by management caused shortcomings in
           internal controls.
        c) Inadequate policies  and  procedure  manuals  have  resulted  in
           incomprehensive business processes.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
        a) There is continuous performance  monitoring  and  reconciliation
           between WAT & LOGIS  systems  to  ensure  that  all  assets  are
           captured.
        b) Policies and procedures are developed and implemented to  ensure
           the adequacy of business processes.

   4. Unauthorised Expenditure

The Auditor-General identified the following:
        Department  incurred  unauthorised  expenditure  amounting  to  R483
        million as a result of implementing the Public Service Co-ordinating
        Bargaining  Council  (PSCBC)  resolution  no  1  of  2007   on   the
        improvement of salaries and other  conditions  of  service  for  the
        financial years 2007/08 to 2010/11.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
        The Department properly budgets for its salary increments and  other
         conditions of service in line with the PFMA.


   5. Conclusion


   The Committee is alarmed by the Department’s poor financial  planning  as
   it noted during the hearing. The hearing revealed that the Department had
   budgeted R 297 million for payment of overtime work but ended  up  paying
   R1.2 billion to balance  its  overtime  bill.  Therefore,  the  Committee
   recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures proper financial  planning
   to avoid such occurrences.
   The Committee is of the view  that  there  was  value-for-money  for  the
   Department  when  it  was  utilising  the   services   of   the   Special
   Investigative Unit (SIU) in rooting out  corruption  in  the  Department.
   Therefore, the Committee recommends that  the  services  of  the  SIU  be
   continuously utilised by the Department to follow up on  any  occurrences
   of corruption within the Department.


   The Committee has noted the recurring qualification on assets  since  the
   2005/06 financial year, and it is for this reason that it  calls  for  an
   urgent progress report from the Department to outline the steps taken  to
   correct this situation.


   The Committee further recommends  that  the  Executive  Authority  should
   submit a progress report on  all  the  recommendations  to  the  National
   Assembly within 60 days after the adoption of this report by the House.

Report to be considered


