---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 February 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-02-15
---

                          MONDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 10:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

The Speaker announced that the vacancies which occurred in the National
Assembly owing to the passing away of Mr F T Masango and Mr J Schmidt had
been filled by the nominations of Mr A D Mokoena, with effect from 26
November 2009, and Mr D C Ross, with effect from 1 December 2009,
respectively, and that the vacancies which occurred due to the resignation
of Dr Z P Jordan and Dr S M Pillay had been filled by the nominations of Mr
A M Maziya, with effect from 26 November 2009, and Mr M R Sonto, with
effect from 3 February 2010, respectively.

Messrs Mokoena and Maziya had made and subscribed the oath in the Speaker’s
office on 1 December 2009, and Messrs Ross and Sonto had made and
subscribed the oath in the Speaker’s office on 15 December 2009 and 10
February 2010, respectively.

The Speaker further announced that the vacancy which occurred in the
National Assembly owing to the resignation of Ms N E Hangana had been
filled by the nomination of Ms D E Dlakude, with effect from 9 February
2010.

                                    OATH

Ms D E Dlakude, accompanied by Ms N P Khunou and Ms M D Nxumalo, made and
subscribed the oath and took her seat.

                    CONDONATION OF STARTING TIME OF HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House, notwithstanding the hours of sitting of the House as
  provided for in Rule 23(2), condones the starting time of the House at
  10:00 today, 15 February 2010, to debate the President’s state of the
  nation address.
  Agreed to.

                   PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

                                  (Debate)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have received a copy of the President’s address
delivered at the Joint Sitting on 11 February 2010. The speech has been
printed in the Minutes of the Joint Sitting.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, hon President and Deputy
President, hon members of this House, as the ruling party, the ANC once
again wishes to join the masses of our people in thanking President Jacob
Zuma for calling the Joint Sitting of Parliament on the evening of 11
February 2010 to deliver his state of the nation address.

The timing of the state of the nation address is particularly important
because it coincided with the celebration of the 20th anniversary of the
release of our icon, Seaparankoe Nelson Mandela, from prison.

The delivery of this important address in the evening, when workers and
students were at home, was an affirmation of the activist character of the
fourth democratic Parliament. The ANC and the masses which it represents
believe that the release of Nelson Mandela will remain a watershed moment
worthy of auspicious celebrations.

We therefore wish to thank the President for dedicating the 2010 state of
the nation address to Nelson Mandela and all recognised and unsung heroes
and heroines of our struggle for liberation. Our gratitude also goes to the
ANC, the National Interfaith Leaders Council, and the My Mandela Moment
leaders for organising and participating in the re-enactment of the release
of Nelson Mandela.

For some days before the state of the nation address, there was a debate as
to who had brought about the release of Nelson Mandela. Some attributed it
to Mr F W de Klerk, while others credited the exiled leadership of the ANC.
The President has cleared up the confusion and laid the matter to rest.

However, the debate has offered us an opportunity to rewrite the history of
our country, not only for posterity, but also to reflect the struggle
between humanity and inhumanity and the triumph of humanity and its
inherent values of equality, freedom and justice for all.

In his address to the first Pan-Africanist conference in 1900,
W E B du Bois foretold that the colour bar would be the greatest problem of
the twentieth century.

Hardly two years thereafter, in 1902, the Boers and the British concluded
the Treaty of Vereeniging, which reconciled these two imperialistic,
colonial and settler communities on the basis of social exclusion of the
black majority. This social and political exclusion was consolidated and
constitutionalised through the South Africa Act of 1909, which created the
white, supremacist Union of South Africa. The President correctly observed
that this exclusion of black people from the apartheid Union was one of the
chief reasons for the formation of the ANC in 1912.

The centenary of the establishment of the Union of South Africa presents us
with an opportunity to reflect on the struggle between humanity and
inhumanity and to celebrate the victory of humanity and its inherent values
of equality, freedom and democracy, over a period of 100 years. The
struggle started with the wars of resistance which were waged by the likes
of Inkosi Bhambatha.

In 1892, Mangena Mokoni, founder of the Ethiopian Church of South Africa,
called on the African people to unite and co-operate to defend themselves
against settler communities who were forcibly depriving them of their land
and natural resources.

Recently President Jacob Zuma rightfully bestowed the Order of Mapungubwe
on Mokoni as a leader of the church that espoused Pan-African ideals and a
champion in the promotion of African unity and co-operation.
In the same year, 1892, John Langalibalele Dube called for a spiritual,
humane and prosperous Africa.

In 1905, Pixley ka Seme not only embraced these values, but also called for
a unique civilisation for Africa and Africans. Chief Albert Luthuli
embraced such a civilisation, relating it to the ancient Egyptian and
Chinese civilisations.

The distinctive feature of this civilisation began to emerge in the 1921
speech of Z R Mahabane, who observed that the Union government had forcibly
dispossessed black people of their land and natural resources, degraded and
dehumanised them, rendered them voteless, hopeless, homeless and landless.

Going forward, the ANC was left with no choice but to fight for the
recovery of the humanity of black people and its inherent values of
equality, freedom and democracy. Their demands for freedom were
incorporated in the 1923 and 1943 Bills of Rights.

The struggle between humanity, as espoused by the ANC, and the inhumanity
of the colonial system, escalated in 1948 when the National Party came into
power on the platform of apartheid, that is, separate but unequal
development of black and white people. The apartheid system used a host of
legislation to deprive black people of their humanity and fundamental human
rights.

In 1955, the one and only genuine Congress of the People, led by the ANC,
responded by adopting the Freedom Charter, which negated the inhuman
apartheid system. It offered a constitutional vision after thorough
consultation with the people, and presented a blueprint for a postapartheid
South Africa.

Henceforth, there were two contesting value-systems in the country, that
is, the democratic values of freedom, equality and justice for all, and the
inhuman apartheid values which reduced black people to subhuman beings.

The banning of the Communist Party of South Africa in the early fifties,
and the ANC and the PAC in the early sixties was recognition by the
apartheid authorities that human and progressive values were occupying the
high moral ground. The banning of these people’s organisations did not
deter people from their struggles. The vision of the new South Africa
embodied in the Freedom Charter dealt a deadly blow to the white
supremacist ideology and produced two competing value-systems in the
country.

The host of repressive legislation used to suppress the progressive values
contained in the Freedom Charter, and the banning of political
organisations such as the ANC, PAC and SACP, led to armed resistance
against the inhuman apartheid system. The 1976 Soweto uprising and the
mushrooming of mass democratic organisations during the first half of the
eighties testified eloquently to the fact that the struggle against
apartheid was essentially a war about values.

Addressing the ANC consultative conference in Kabwe, on 16 June 1985,
O R Tambo characterised this war of values as follows:

  The conviction that to be white was to be a missionary of civilisation,
  has given birth to a tidal wave whose strength will not abate until
  civilisation in our country is reckoned in the language of freedom and
  democracy. The pursuit of the certainties of a bygone age has itself
  become the gravedigger of fond hopes that injustice could be rationalised
  into a system of thought, implemented as a practice and imposed as a
  decree and be accepted by the victims of that injustice. Illusions
  closely held for many a year, that white minority rule would last until
  eternity, are stalking all the enclaves of white South Africa proclaiming
  everywhere that, in fact, they are illusions, fleeting shadows without
  substance. The apartheid system is in crisis.

[Applause.]

Therefore President Jacob Zuma correctly observed that the release of our
icon, Nelson Mandela, was brought about by the resolute struggles of our
people. It was these struggles that forced P W Botha and his colleagues to
initiate talks about talks. However, the President correctly acknowledged
Botha’s contribution in this regard.

Before acknowledging other people’s contribution, it is fitting to
highlight that O R Tambo effectively laid the foundation for this country
to become a shining example of freedom, equality and democracy and enabled
humanity to achieve victory over inhumanity.

Under the leadership of O R Tambo, the ANC realised that P W Botha was not
yet ready for genuine negotiations as was evident in his Rubicon speech of
1985, which called for a new constitutional dispensation based on group
rights rather than on human and people’s rights.

The ANC interacted with various progressive lawyers and facilitated the
establishment of the National Association of Democratic Lawyers, Nadel,
which promoted human and people’s rights and vehemently opposed the group
rights ideology. On 1 May 1986, conservative and progressive lawyers faced
each other at the University of Pretoria where the human and people’s
rights concept surfaced for the first time in the constitutional discourse.


The conflict between group and human rights played itself out at this
conference. The human rights perspective of the progressive lawyers that
surfaced in this conference found expression in the ANC 1987 statement on
the question of negotiations, which rejected group rights and secret
negotiations.

In the same year the Arusha Conference, The World United Against Apartheid,
reaffirmed that the Pretoria regime was both illegal and illegitimate
because it was not based on the will of the people.

By 1989 the resolute struggles of the people convinced the ANC leadership
that the National Party government had no option but to negotiate. Thus, in
1989 the ANC published the constitutional guidelines for a democratic South
Africa whilst O R Tambo championed the formulation of the Harare
Declaration which set out the objectives and management of the negotiation
process.

President Jacob Zuma correctly pointed out that it was the resolute
struggles of the people and the outstanding leadership, foresight and
clarity of vision of O R Tambo that laid the groundwork for the historic
announcement by former President F W de Klerk 20 years ago.

In the spirit of nation-building and social cohesion President Zuma has
acknowledge all those who contributed to the release of Nelson Mandela and
other political prisoners. This includes former political prisoners, the
legal team in the Rivonia Treason Trial, the international community, Mrs
Helen Suzman and uMtwana ka Phinda ngene, hon Mangosuthu Buthelezi.

Upon his release Nelson Mandela recognised and acknowledged the tireless
and heroic sacrifices of the people and committed himself to serving the
people.

President Jacob Zuma called on Parliament and the nation to recommit itself
to building a better future for all South Africans, black and white, in
pursuit of the ideal that Madiba has fought for his entire life, the ideal
of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in
harmony and with equal opportunities.

This bears testimony to the fact that the Zuma Presidency is fully anchored
in the values that Madiba embodies, espouses and epitomises.

In this regard we wish to commend President Jacob Zuma for being consistent
because, since his first state of the nation address in 2009, the President
has linked the recovery of the humanity of all South Africans with the
creation of decent jobs, provision of quality health and education, rural
development and the fight against crime and corruption.

The practical measures announced during his 2010 state of the nation
address show that the President has a clear and pragmatic plan to improve
the quality of life of all South Africans.

As we did in 2009, we will celebrate July as Nelson Mandela Month through a
series of community activities aimed at helping the needy and the poor.
This is in the spirit of ubuntu and its inherent values as embodied by
Nelson Mandela and the past and current leaders of the ANC.

The ANC leadership calls for an overarching value system that can unite all
people regardless of race, class or gender. In this regard we have also
committed ourselves to strive for the creation of a nonracial, nonsexist,
united, democratic and prosperous society in which the value of all
citizens is measured by their common humanity.

However, we recognise and respect the cultural, religious and linguistic
diversity of our people and shun all attempts by any group to impose its
values on other groups. The common humanity of all South Africans has
provided a framework for an overarching value system.

President Zuma has already committed his administration to building a new
South Africa based on ubuntu values and principles. This vision found
support in the meeting of a multiparty leaders’ forum where leaders of
political parties called on the President to find common ground and a
common platform for nation-building, social cohesion and moral
regeneration.

The leader of the IFP, hon Mangosuthu Buthelezi, shared the President’s
vision in his response to the 2009 state of the nation address. He observed
that the national celebrations of historic importance are mostly attended
by African people from the townships and villages. He suggested that we
should follow an inclusive approach in nation-building and social cohesion.

The multiparty Chief Whips Forum unanimously endorsed the inclusive
approach to nation-building and identified two already-existing mechanisms
for its realisation. These mechanisms are the Parliamentary Millennium
Programme, PMP, and the Parliamentary Interfaith Group. These mechanisms
will be resourced by Parliament to enable all political parties to assume
joint responsibility for moral regeneration, nation-building and social
cohesion.

The President has often called on all political parties to identify
national issues around which we should co-operate in our quest for nation-
building and social cohesion. We believe that this mechanism offers
appropriate platforms for this purpose.

We have identified the need to incorporate the views of the electorate in
the legislative and oversight business of Parliament as a strategic
objective for the Fourth Parliament by providing a platform for schools,
tertiary institutions and rural communities.

Parliament as a nation-building institution must provide an opportunity for
the electorate to engage and consider issues on democracy, heritage,
education, nation-building, social cohesion, service delivery and moral
regeneration as well as international relations and co-operation.

The PMP should be a nonpartisan project resourced by Parliament and should
be used as a vehicle to take Parliament to the people. The project would
allow members to co-operate more regularly on constituency work despite
their party political affiliations. The PMP will therefore cement and give
effect to the concept of an activist Parliament at a multiparty level.

A parliamentary religious group has existed since 1994. It often received
support from Parliament without formal recognition. The support of all
political parties for the President’s call for the recovery of the humanity
of all South Africans, both black and white, and the promotion of moral
regeneration for social development, reawakened an interest in the place of
religion and politics. The multiparty Chief Whips’ Forum has therefore
decided to revive the parliamentary religious group and to rename it the
“Parliamentary Interfaith Group”, PIG.

This group has already forged ties with the National Interfaith Leaders
Council and has affiliated to the Interfaith Action for Peace in Africa,
Ifapa. The two organisations, together with the ANC commission for
religious and traditional affairs, have met the Sudanese Interreligious
Council, which has invited them to visit Sudan before their national
elections.

The Parliamentary Interfaith Group and the PMP are destined to play a
critical role in the promotion of nation-building, social cohesion and the
African agenda. The ANC, as the majority party in Parliament, has begun
this year fully rejuvenated and ready to continue intensifying the
implementation of the programmes on which it has entered into a contract
with our people during the current term of government.

We are encouraged by the message of the President to the people, which
reflects a caring government that endeavours to improve the material
conditions of our people, particularly the poor. Last year we committed
ourselves to what we called an “activist Parliament” during this 5-year
term of Parliament.

In practice, what this means is that, as the majority party in this
institution, we shall work with more resoluteness, vigour and decisiveness
in the course of executing our duties within both Parliament and our
constituencies.

During this particular year that we celebrate the 20th anniversary of the
release of former President Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners,
as well as the unbanning of liberation movements, we shall spare neither
strength nor energy to ensure that the objectives of our glorious
liberation struggles are brought into practical reality.

We will, indeed, move with the necessary speed employing extraordinary and
unusual means to roll back the frontiers of poverty and underdevelopment,
joblessness and other social ills faced by the majority of our people. This
we shall do while building on the many gains South Africans have achieved
since the dawn of democracy 16 years ago.

In this regard, the constituency outreach programmes and intensified
parliamentary oversight, which are the very backbone of the activist
Parliament, shall be the prominent and central strategic future of the work
of each of our Members of Parliament.

The ANC’s National Executive Council, NEC, lekgotla resolved that the
deployees of our movement at all levels of government will be subjected to
a rigorous performance assessment system to ensure that nothing impedes our
drive towards achieving the goals our people have set for us. [Time
expired.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, Mr President, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, 11 February 1990 marked the day that our President,
father of the new South Africa, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela walked from
prison en route to becoming the President of the country that he sacrificed
so much for. Thank you, Mr President, for recognising the colossal role
that uTat’ uMadiba played in reconciling our people.

Thank you, for recognising all the other people that you did for the role
they played in bringing about reconciliation, peace and democracy. Thank
you, also, to those that you did not mention. I know you could not mention
all of them, but thank you to Archbishop Emeritus Tutu and the other
religious leaders who eventually joined ranks to bring about change. Thank
you, Mr President, for your effort at using a nation-building tone, such a
tone has been missing from the state of the nation address since the
retirement of former President Mandela.

We are all proud and indeed blessed to have had a President who is revered
the world over and compared to leaders like Gandhi, Washington, Lincoln,
Luther King and Churchill. The South African movie, Invictus, and the book
by John Carlin, Playing the Enemy, are indeed a celebration of a leader who
has received widespread veneration and been canonised in his own lifetime
for his visionary leadership and human dignity.

Former President Mandela displayed exemplary leadership. He had the courage
of his convictions. He was a man of iron will who was prepared to take on
both friend and foe. He was not averse to or afraid of taking on his own
colleagues in the ANC because he never felt beholden to anyone or any
faction for his position.

Apart from being personally compromised, Mr President, you appear to owe
your allegiance to a certain block within your party’s alliance that makes
you all the more compromised and vulnerable.

Your state of the nation address left me wondering whether you had indeed
read it beforehand, whether you had been set up or whether the people who
advise you just did not realise how important it was for you to deliver an
extraordinary address for both personal reasons and reasons of national
importance. Well, with all due respect, you achieved neither.

The people of our country need to be rallied to roll up their sleeves. They
need to hear the presentation of a national vision that they can respond to
as a clarion call to nationhood and future prosperity. The nation
desperately needs leadership.

The tenuous respect given to you by a deeply suspicious electorate in April
2009 has been systematically eroded. Your trademark song, for example, will
never again be sung without invoking a sense of ambiguity.

Laura Miti recently wrote in the Daily Dispatch:

   What Zuma and probably the ANC failed to realise is that the new slate
   that the President was apparently given by the public after his
   inauguration had conditions similar to those given to an offender serving
   a suspended sentence. The nation had wanted to put the muck behind it and
   so gave him a second chance. But after that President Zuma was expected
   to be on his best behaviour for the rest of his public life. But no, he
   seemed to think the probation he was put on by the nation after escaping
   corruption charges on a technicality and after committing a serious
   sexual indiscretion coupled with making an unbelievably naive statement
   on HIV and Aids was carte blanche. The crowds after all, still roared his
   name at rallies across the country - his popularity seemed untouchable.

Well, Mr President, popularity in politics dissipates like this morning’s
mist.

Mr President, on the day that you paid due respect to former President F W
de Klerk and others in the NP leadership and service related echelons for
crossing the proverbial Rubicon and for having the foresight and courage to
take bold decisions, your chief cheerleader harangued former President De
Klerk and treated him with contemptible disrespect. The fact that neither
you nor anyone in the ANC leadership have not publicly rebuked him for this
or any other examples of his oafish behaviour is a matter of lamentable
concern.

As surely as former President Mandela was quoted as saying, “Posterity will
prove I was innocent”, will posterity prove that you and the other ANC
leaders are in dereliction of your duty in this regard.

Your first year in office has hardly been stellar and your call for 2010 to
be a year of action really rings hollow in our ears. Why?, because we have
heard all these exhortations before. Remember these: “the age of hope”,
“business unusual”, “all hands on deck”, “working together we can do more”
and “faster, harder, smarter”?

Why should 2010 be the year of action more than 2008 or 2009? The ANC is
wasting precious time with all these empty slogans. Who really believes
that the ANC government will provide anything “faster, harder, and
smarter”?

Speaking of wasted time, author and political activist Paul Trewhela – I am
sure you know him - in his book, Inside Quatro, speaks candidly about the
balance sheet of 15 wasted years under the guidance of the ANC as the
unchallenged party of government. Regarding this he says:

   No party ever came to government with such an overwhelming mandate from
   the people and with such immense goodwill internationally. Few dissipated
   that trust so convincingly.

Trewhela singles out education as the greatest failure. He believes, and we
concur, that the ANC should have seized on this from the outset and told
the whole nation -

   We have limited resources, and there are great compelling needs, but this
   above all – with dedication, good sense and common effort – can rise up
   and prepare for the future a new generation that will be better fitted to
   solve the country’s problems than ourselves.

We all know about the state of education in our country and no one knows
better than the parents who aspire for their children to have a better
education than they had had. Trewhela says:

   Instead, the materialistic scramble for personal wealth, at any price,
   the rancour, the power play, the strutting about of great men and some
   women, the arrogance of office, the delusions, the false gods, style,
   instead of substance, 15 wasted years.

Mr President, your exhortation to teachers to be in the classroom seven
hours a day was actually already made last year. This rhetorical appeal had
no impact on the matric results. You will have to tackle the role of
education unions and teachers regarding underperformance in this crucial
field. Again, political will and exemplary leadership from you and all
leaders involved will be definitive.
Mr President, you rightly spend vast sums of money going to Davos, to court
financial friends and to attract foreign investment, but you continue to
ignore pressing priorities within your government. You ignore the Auditor-
General’s assertion of a almost total breakdown of financial management.

In the Eastern Cape, for example, the department of health overspent its
budget by R1,8 billion, with no discernable difference in service delivery!
What happened then was that creditors were not paid and that resulted in
the closure of SMMEs and their subsequent sequestration, with the result
being the catastrophic consequence of job losses.

When will you invest in putting competent people into key posts, and when
will you begin ensuring that scarce resources are efficiently, effectively
and economically spent? It appears not in the near or foreseeable future,
as you and Mr Mantashe have stated that your failed and unlawful policy of
cadre deployment will continue. In fact, you say that cadre deployment will
be more objective and transparent. This is the ultimate oxymoron.

Recent court rulings in this regard, in fact, have found mostly in favour
of applicants who have been prejudiced by cadre deployment. The case of Dr
Vuyo Mlokoti against the Amathole District Municipality and Adv Zenzile is
a case in point. Speaking of East London or Buffalo City, Mr President, you
must know that as the next city to be upgraded to a metropolis, this city
is now referred to as “Buffalo Circus”.

The ANC provincial leadership is now putting it under administration and
all I can say is, heaven help Buffalo City. This is because the following
municipalities have been put under administration in the Eastern Cape:
Mnquma Municipality, King Sabata Dalindyebo Municipality, Great Kei
Municipality, Koukamma Municipality and Sunday’s River Valley Local
Municipality. And nothing has changed in those municipalities because the
problem is caused by intractable infighting in the ANC. It is a political
disgrace and nothing else. [Applause.]

The recent firing of mayors in Mpumalanga and other provinces across the
country is not a genuine endeavour to turn around the crisis in service
delivery; it is merely a changing of the political guard.

Mr President, your declaration that you will conclude performance contracts
with your Ministers with measurable outcomes being the criteria for
monitoring their individual performance is refreshing. This, of course, is
not as innovative as you make out and should, in fact, have been in place
in Cabinet since 1994.


It will also require political will and you will have to personally support
and back Minister Chabane to the hilt. If you can’t or won’t, the contracts
will be worth as much as the Public Finance Management Act is in our Public
Service corps.

That Act has been in place for 10 years - one of the best pieces of
legislation in this country, but the most ignored. The road to hell, they
say, is paved with good intentions.

Equally, Mr President, your corruption commission comprised of the very
Ministers under whose watch corruption flourishes, will be stillborn if
there is no real political will and exemplary leadership.

In Kenya, after Mwai Kibaki replaced the notoriously corrupt Daniel Arap
Moi, he promised an end to corruption. He appointed John Githongo as the
Anticorruption Minister. Michela Wrong, in her book It’s Our Turn to Eat,
exposes how the consequences of Githongo’s efforts that were tantamount to
mucking out the Aegean stables led to him being hounded out of the country
of his birth, because he uncovered more and more self-service, self-
enrichment and sleaze amongst his own colleagues. This ultimately placed
his very life at risk.

Kuza kufuneka ugade Mhlekazi obekekileyo uChabane, ngoba xa uza kufuna
ukubetha amaqabane, aza kufuna ukubetha wena. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[You must be on guard hon Chabane, for if you want to punish the comrades,
they will in turn want revenge.]

Githongo said, at the time that -

   Africans are the most subservient people on earth when faced with force,
   intimidation and power. Africa, all said and done, is a place where we
   grovel before leaders.

South Africa needs exemplary leadership, not fear, or entitlement, from its
leaders. It is not your turn to eat.

Blind allegiance to ANC leaders and slavish behaviour of deployed cadres
putting the party first is a recipe for the disaster we are experiencing at
local government level. It compromises discipline and commitment amongst
public servants, because cadre deployment beneficiaries are actually held
to ransom similar to the thinly veiled threat by Michael Corleone in The
Godfather, when he said:

   You’re my older brother and I love you, but don’t ever take sides against
   the family again.

On presidential pardons, allow me to advise that you resist the temptation
to abuse your position of power to pardon your friends. Beware, also, of
taking the nation’s intellect for granted. You cannot use the pardon of one
person as a smokescreen for the pardon of another. Pardons should be
considered only in cases where there has been a travesty of justice. This
is not evident on first principle in the cases of Shabir Schaik and Eugene
de Kock.

Pardons undermine the rule of law and the principle of equality before the
law, which you, sir, incidentally, are responsible for upholding.

When you compromise yourself and the rule of law, you accelerate the slide
to a failed state. Zimbabwe is a shameful example of this regression. It
has become evident that despite your outspokenness about Zimbabwe before
your election, you have succumbed to your party’s policy of silent
diplomacy, because you cannot bring yourselves to act against Mugabe and
bring his tenure of terror to an end.

I recommend that you read the DA’s road map to peace and democracy and
implement its recommendations.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: What have you
been smoking?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I don’t know - the same thing that the new
ambassador from England smokes, because what she said is what we are
saying: Get rid of Mugabe, have an election and carry on. [Applause.]
It has become evident that Zanu-PF, under the now almost surrogate
leadership of Mugabe, refuses to acknowledge their failure in government
and culpability for unimaginable human rights abuses that are catalogued in
the DVD that has been given to your office. I wouldn’t laugh about it, hon
President. If you’d seen the DVD you wouldn’t be laughing.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please address yourself to the Chair.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: The ever-deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe
is entrenching the social and economic difficulties in many communities in
South Africa that have shown that they have the potential to ignite ethnic
and xenophobic confrontation. This situation requires the political will to
grasp the nettle that is Mugabe.

Mr President, speaking of political will, let me inform you that in the one
area where you have shown some will, meddling with the Judiciary, the JSC
and judicial appointments, your actions and those of your emissaries have
not gone unnoticed, and are a source of grave concern.

There are apparently some bulletproof jurists and legal practitioners that
have the unconditional support of your government, despite how compromised
they may be. The fact is that Mr Mpshe seems to have been rewarded for
juristic compliance, and so too Mr Simelane. Also, Mr Ngobeni provides
legal services to the ANC, you and the Department of Defence, despite his
very apparently compromised position as a legal practitioner.

The latest revelations about Mr Seth Nthai’s alleged solicitation of a
financial reward to make a legal challenge go away or to go one way or
another, are all examples that compromise the independence of the Judiciary
and contaminate the profession as well as the government, due to these
people’s unhealthily close relationship with the governing party’s
leadership.

Mr President, you must give unambiguous leadership about how we’re going to
create jobs and stimulate our economy as we pull out of this recession.
Some ideas from someone who has always shown post-recession capital growth,
namely Richard Branson, are instructive. He clearly states that optimism
and instinct are no substitute for hard work. He recommends that leaders
should surround themselves with trusted and talented people; keep them
happy and motivated; be innovative; provide and maintain a certain quality
of service; and ensure value for money. You, sir, have failed in all of
these to some extent or the other. Your government must now look for
solutions not excuses.

Many aspersions have been cast on the productivity of South African
workers. This is fallacious, because who do these gainsayers think actually
built the magnificent 2010 football stadia? And they did so on time, in
fact, far ahead of time, better than some of the so-called most productive
nations in similar situations.

It is not the South African work force that holds us back; it is the
government’s restrictive and convoluted labour laws that keep South
Africans out of work. [Applause.]

During a recent visit to Tongaat in KwaZulu-Natal, I met with retrenched
textile workers and none asked for government handouts. Mrs Dolly Yeriah
held up her hands to me and said she has perfect hands and wants to put
them to use in order to provide for her own family. This re-enforces the
fact that self-provision and independence are a source of self-respect and
personal human dignity.

The Presidential Hotline has been a supreme public relations fiasco, as its
very existence is an indictment of all three spheres of government and all
its implementing agencies. Furthermore, the few examples of success are the
exception rather than the rule. My office has evaluated this hotline
closely, and the catalogue of frustrations reads like a comical version of
Animal Farm.

South Africa will host a unique and successful World Cup. We will welcome
the world to visit our amazing country and have fun in the sun. The
visitors must be treated like royalty, not robbed or fleeced by
unscrupulous hospitality providers, because their experiences will
determine whether or not they return and become tourism multipliers.

The eyes of the world will see us through lenses never ever seen on
international TV, and this image will decide the prudence of our enormous
investment in this event. We cannot allow ourselves to be embarrassed by
any unintended disappointments.

Iintloni ezifana nombane ophela esithubeni nje ngokuhlwa kwango Lwesihlanu
azamkelekanga. I-DA ithi phambili Bafana Bafana, phambili! Phambili Mzantsi
Afrika, phambili! Siza kubabonisa abantu baphesheya ukuba i-Afrika
iyaqaqamba. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Disappointments such as a power failure on a Friday evening are not
acceptable. The DA says, forward Bafana Bafana, forward! Forward South
Africa, forward! We will show our overseas visitors that Africa is
shining.]

Posterity will judge the DA and other opposition parties on whether or not
we had the courage to speak truth to power, and to be a realistic political
counterweight. The DA has done this most effectively to date. Imagine being
an opposition to uTat’ uMandela and even Thabo Mbeki - not easy.

We have grown, nonetheless, and if you do the math you will all know that
the Western Cape was not won by the 18% of white voters. The DA is a real
alternative and the electorate has recognised this. In 1994 we had seven
members; in 2009 we have 77 members.

We are solution-oriented because we do not want to inherit a bankrupt or
scorched earth. Therefore, we will contribute in every way we can to ensure
a prosperous South Africa; certainly not to entrench the ANC. Our political
growth has been assisted by the quality or lack thereof of leadership in
the ANC at all levels of government because leadership is as leadership
does.

The reality is that the current crop of ANC leaders is being found wanting
compared to the previous generation; certainly compared to the person we
are paying tribute to in this debate.

In conclusion, I want to say that if you feel that I was being unfair or
prejudiced in this response, if you read the newspapers from Friday to
today, you will see that the people of this country are unhappy with the
direction that is being given by the leadership. The people of this country
want exemplary leadership, and I appeal to all of us in this House who are
in positions of leadership to give that exemplary leadership. Thank you.
[Applause.]
The SPEAKER: Can I remind the members and the speakers that they should
speak through the Chair and direct themselves to the Chair.
Rev H M DANDALA: Speaker, Mr President, hon members of the House, on behalf
of Cope I also wish to add our appreciation of the fact that the President
dedicated this year’s state of the nation address to the memory of the
release of Mr Nelson Mandela.

Cope pays tribute to Mr Nelson Mandela and all those who worked with him to
bring us the wonderful freedom we enjoy. There are very few stories of such
exemplary leadership around the world such as we can see with Mr Mandela.
He is selfless, disciplined, and he is dignity personified. He is an icon
of world peace.

The portrait of Raymond Asquith as drawn by John Buchan applies aptly to
Dalibhunga. He says:

   Our roll of honour is long but it holds no nobler figure!

When the world honoured Mr Mandela with the Nobel Prize, amongst countless
other honours, we became proud. South Africans can stand anywhere in the
world and claim as ours his contribution to the triumph of good over evil.

When he ascended to high office, the state of our nation was one full of
hope and, as Bantu Biko once said:

  We had set out on a quest for true humanity and somewhere in the distant
  horizon we could see the glittering prize.
The glittering prize was that of triumph over hopelessness.

Hon members, the question that we need to ask ourselves is: What is the
legacy that Parliament asks us to celebrate through this reflection on the
state of the nation?

The legacy can be summed up in a few indicators: South Africa and the ANC
gave us a great leader with a sense of honour and a strong moral focus; he
raised our eyes to what we can become as a nation; he trusted and respected
the law and allowed himself to be tested by the law; he insisted on the
separation of state and party powers; he spurned patronage in all its
forms; he had depths of compassion for the poor, always treating them with
the utmost dignity; and his hallmark was and still is a sense of honour.

Twenty years on, we have not captured that glitter of hope. We have
debilitating poverty for millions of our people. In a country with our
resource base, it is simply a shame that so many people live below the
breadline. We have millions of our children who are unable to read or write
owing to an education system in collapse. We are not safe in our own homes
owing to the high levels of crime. Indeed, we can defeat these problems,
provided that we firstly acknowledge that this is the true state of the
nation, and then rally to galvanise the nation to rise to the challenge.

What this nation needs, Mr President, is inspirational yet transformative
and action-oriented leadership. In her book, Laying ghosts to rest,
Mamphela Ramphele says:

  Successful people are those who make and admit mistakes rather than fail
  to confront their failure. We need to acknowledge where we have fallen
  short as a nation.

We have to determine to take corrective measures. This is the only way we
can triumph over these many challenges – to build a nation that the whole
world will watch in admiration even as we host the Fifa World Cup.

South Africans are waiting for the government to invoke our collective
sense of honour so that we can rise to overcome, just as we have done in
the past, to win against all odds.

I call on the President and his government to listen carefully to the pulse
of this nation. Our people are angry at the promises made but not
fulfilled. And so Cope asks: Why should South Africans believe you now?

You promised 500 000 jobs or job opportunities. The fact is that almost a
million jobs have been lost during the period of the promise. Will the
South African people be told what the macro strategy is for reversing the
apartheid economy that marginalised the majority of our people from being
innovators in the creation of their economic destiny and made the townships
and rural areas mere consumers of economic output rather than key drivers
of economic innovation?

Small businesses are still waiting with anticipation for the single
business registration system that was promised when the President took
office. Cope asks: How will South Africans under the leadership of our
President transform their parlous economic state that is marked by the
growing gap between the rich and the poor?

By the President’s own admission, land redistribution – a tool in the hands
of his government – will not meet its 2014 target. Many of the farms bought
by the government under this scheme have dropped in productivity, if not
left as ghost farms threatening the livelihoods of communities. Our food
security as a nation is under threat. Why should South Africans believe you
now, Mr President?

In response to your previous state of the nation address, you promised
that, in order to ensure service delivery and executive accountability, you
will make all your Ministers sign performance contracts by the end of July
2009. You have not told us if any Ministers, to date, have signed these
contracts.

Instead of acknowledging this glaring gap, you have now further promised us
a new outcomes approach that will make 2010 a year of action. Why should
South Africans believe this, when your own office, Mr President, according
to the Auditor-General’s most recent report, has failed to get an
unqualified audit, and the man you put in charge of the evaluation of his
colleagues goes shopping with a state credit card? [Applause.]

Cope welcomes the ministerial committee to combat corruption. Yet, as late
as last week, this committee could not sit due to the unavailability of
Ministers.

Mr President, we welcome your emphasis on education and the initiatives you
have announced to focus the nation on this priority. Successive ANC
governments have promised that no child will study under a tree. The
question of infrastructure to allow teachers to do the things highlighted
in your speech, has become urgent. What kind of pupils can we produce, when
over 79% of our schools don’t have libraries and laboratories?

In the week preceding the state of the nation address, another report was
released, pointing a finger at the South African Democratic Teachers’
Union, SADTU, the teacher union aligned to your government. This report
pointed out that they have been out of schools for 42% of all the time that
has been lost by the country through industrial action since the dawn of
democracy.

Cope calls on the government to declare a state of emergency in education
so that teachers may not use innocent children to fight their battles with
the state.

Mr President, most of our state hospitals are in a parlous state. We
welcome your stated commitment to right this wrong. We also welcome the
mooted policy of National Health Insurance, NHI. But South Africans will
ask with justification: Why should we believe that, this time ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Speaker, Xhamela, Your Excellency our President,
Nxamalala, our hon Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon members of this
House, we all applaud the wise decision of the President to dedicate this
year’s state of the nation address to the 20th anniversary of Madiba’s
release. May I, Mr Speaker, request all the men in this Chamber to stand
“sikhahlele” [“so that we salute”]?

Aah!

HON MEMBERS: Aah!

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Dalibhunga!

HON MEMBERS: Dalibhunga!

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, on a point of order: While
I appreciate the observance of culture, which is admired by many leaders in
our country, I think as leadership we should have regard for the equality
clause in our Constitution and ensure, particularly when we are in
Parliament, that these principles of our Constitution are observed in
practice. [Applause.]

I think it’s most unfortunate for an hon leader to call on males in the
House to rise, thus excluding the female members of the House. That’s most
unfortunate. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member, that is noted.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Speaker, I would like to say that I really pity
my daughter for her ignorance because it’s not because women are being put
down. It is our tradition out of respect for women that they sit down when
we do that. It has nothing to do with slapping down women. That is an
African culture. We are in Africa and that is an African tradition. It has
nothing, whatsoever, to do, nor does it infringe ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, proceed with your speech.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: I pity your ignorance.

Having spent 10 years in government, I’m aware of both the great challenges
which have confronted us since 1994 and of how much still remains to be
done to meet the minimum objectives promised with our liberation. I was
committed to the agenda of social and economic liberation while I was in
government. And I remain committed to it from the opposition benches.

Last week the President often referred to us all as being compatriots, and
indeed we are. In addition, I respect the President, warts and all, because
behind him, rightly or wrongly, lies the will of the democratic mandate of
66% of the South African people. I could not hinder or oppose that without
opposing the South African people. However, I must differentiate between
the will of the South African people and that which is required to deliver
to the people what they expect.

In this critical time the President stands to fail and words alone will not
fix problems. I cannot afford to see the President and his government fail.
If they fail, my own country fails. If the President and his government
fail, I will not applaud and rejoice, but will weep. [Applause.] For if
they fail, our liberation fails.

In this time of economic turbulence and enormous challenges, we are in this
boat together. Together we will sail or sink. Therefore the type of
engagement I seek and offer the President is in the recognition that my
admonitions, my criticism and insight are being offered with no interest in
mind but the success of our country and the survival of our liberation
process. [Applause.]

From this perspective, I must denounce and warn against the practice of
making exaggerated and unrealistic promises which government has pursued
and does not seem to be willing to ever relinquish. We must stop insulting
the intelligence of our people, especially the poorest of the poor.

We are experiencing social ruptures, widespread protests and ever-
increasing dissatisfaction because what was promised is perceived not to
have been delivered. This cannot be addressed by promising more, unless we
wish to see the social unrest rising out of control into a wave which wipes
us all out.

I’m convinced, Your Excellency, that if we stop treating our people as if
they are morons by promising them pie in the sky, they will be with us.
They will understand that we have a difficult role to play. We do not need
to promise what obviously cannot be delivered. After all, we have not been
in this democratic dispensation for that long. We knew that we were
starting to govern a people the majority of whom comprised the poorest of
the poor who had deliberately been kept under conditions of deprivation.

Let us not therefore pretend to be latter day Pied Pipers of Hamelin in
that fable where the Pied Piper played his pipe and all the rats followed
him. We must not pretend to our people that we have any magic wands because
we have none. We should refrain from insulting our people by running to
them with food hampers during elections, which we know cannot be sustained.

This government cannot continue to try and be everything to everyone. This
is the time to take the developmental direction and pursue it with single-
minded determination. The economic and social crises require firm
stewardship. In this process I plead with the President to heed my
admonition, rather than the call for easy populism and radicalism often
fuelled by a long-obsolete communist mindset. [Interjections.]

Before it hit South Africa, I warned the government that we would not be
spared from the mounting world economic depression. In the same week there
was a Financial Mail cover story, with our then hon Minister of Finance’s
photograph on the cover, in which the Minister was saying that according to
government advisors we will not be as ravaged by the recession as other
countries. The impression was that the depression would bypass South
Africa.

Thereafter, from our benches we warned the government not to give excessive
credence to the same economic advisors who are now touting the exaggerated
promise of a quick economic recovery, looking for green shoots in the
underbrush of a dying forest of economic depression. Do we want to brand
ourselves as a nation of denialists? We have been in denial whether it came
to crime or whether it was HIV and Aids.

I praise the President for the announcement he made about the new long-term
programme of infrastructural development. But it will take time before its
economic benefits will be felt. In the meantime, we need to deal with the
projected downturn in the construction industry after the third quarter,
which will coincide with the recessionary effects that always follow the
completion of the infrastructural work and expenses associated with World
Cups or Olympic Games, whether it was in Greece or in other countries where
events of this type have been held.

I fear that the people of South Africa are going to experience much
economic anguish after August this year, and we must prepare for that.
Let’s prepare our people for it without dampening their enthusiasm for the
magic of the 2010 World Cup.


Our economic vision must be clear and avoid all that is confusing. The talk
of nationalisation is most detrimental as is the ambiguity with which the
President has fudged this issue when he said that the matter is open for
debate. If we don't make the clear and unequivocal statement that we shall
not nationalise anything which can stand on its economic feet in this time
of crisis, we will deter domestic and foreign investors who might look at
South Africa as a land of opportunity.

I must admit that as we grew up as young African nationalists in the ANC,
we were quite fascinated by nationalisation. I paid two visits to the late
President Julius Nyerere. My first trip was paid to Mwalimu to thank him
for giving sanctuary to all our political exiles. On the second occasion I
wanted to see Ujamaa, African socialism in operation. President Nyerere was
a very honest politician. He gave me his book, 10 Years After Arusha. By
that time he was already admitting some of his mistakes in implementing
African socialism, Ujamaa.

In 1994, when President Nyerere came to South Africa, he visited me in my
office as Minister of Home Affairs. He told me that in 1980 he said the
following words, “You have inherited a jewel”, to President Mugabe, when he
was then installed as the first Prime Minister of a democratic Zimbabwe. He
was referring to the economy of Zimbabwe. He also said:

   Don’t do what I did in Tanzania. Don’t destroy it.

The rest is history. [Laughter.]

My stand against nationalisation is not inconsistent, of course. I have
voiced my opinion in this House for three years on the necessity for
nationalising the Reserve Bank, as was done in the United Kingdom, so that
the government may begin regaining control over what we use as our money
and hope that we may one day move towards a debt-free currency.

We must go beyond the commitment not to nationalise, to adopt the policy of
privatising anything which will be better off if relinquished from
government ownership and which taxpayers have no business in financing. Our
anguished taxpayers have no reason to continue to pay the bill for
companies that operate at a perpetual loss, only because they have found in
the state an indulgent sugar-daddy who continues to pour out money with no
hope of return, such as in the case of Denel and SAA. [Applause.] If
privatised, these companies will find their correct positioning in the
marketplace.

A year has passed and little has been done to bring about the savings
promised last year, with the prospect of the taxpayer having to continue to
pay for the constant mismanagement of the Land Bank and many other state
entities which have now been out of control for years.

I urge the President to speak with one tongue and in a loud voice to
provide iron-fist leadership in economic matters, and cut into positions of
privilege, consolidated economic turf and institutional corruption without
fear of inflicting pain or creating resentment, for the rest of the country
will recognise and applaud his leadership.

To the President I say: Be merciless in shutting down the many state
institutions which do not deliver and redirect their funding towards those
which can deliver. I know that the President referred to what he called a
review of the parastatals in his interview with the SABC on Saturday. We
must now move beyond just rhetoric on this issue.

This is not a time in which the country can endure hesitation or a wishy-
washy benevolent style of leadership. At the risk of becoming unpopular, it
is time for the President to rise to the challenge of being tough and
determined. If one tries to be all things to all men, one ends up being
neither fish nor fowl. [Applause.]

The priorities he identified for us have remained unchanged since 1994.
They are the health and education crisis, crime and corruption crises,
unemployment crisis and the rural development crisis. And, I would like to
say, as far as rural development is concerned, Your Excellency, it will
never take off without traditional leadership being given an opportunity to
be part of it.

It is a disgrace that after 16 years of black rule in South Africa no
budgets are being made available to all traditional structures and
leadership. These problems have become worse since 1994, and we must accept
that they are not going to be solved within the present paradigm. Albert
Einstein, the genius, defined madness as expecting different results while
continuing to do the same thing.

With regard to education, we must have the courage of firing teachers who
do not produce results and stop this nonsense of refusing to perform a
thorough assessment of teachers’ skills and education. A teacher whose
class does not obtain the desired results for two years in a row should be
immediately dismissed, as should the principal of a school with poor
results. Please, Your Excellency, implement what you have announced. The
plight of our education system is so serious that the President should not
be intimidated by the threats of the teachers’ unions. [Applause.]

As the President knows, in the erstwhile KwaZulu we had a much higher pass
rate than we now have in the very same schools, in spite of the standard
having been lowered and the amount of money spent on education and teacher
training having dramatically increased. This is unacceptable. As a country,
we cannot afford to lower educational and exam standards, unless we wish to
commit national suicide by instalments. [Applause.]

The crime situation is out of control. Yesterday and today newspaper
headlines announced that students are killed just for their cellphones; and
that gives me sleepless nights. Your Excellency, I wonder how many of the
visitors that are coming in June will be killed for their cellphones.

According to the crime statistics published on NationMaster.com, South
Africa has the highest per capita levels of murder by firearms and rape and
assault anywhere in the world where crime statistics exist; and has the
second highest level of murder by means other than firearms. The solution
to this massive crisis is not through quick fixes, such as calling on the
police to become trigger-happy, at the risk of slaughtering innocent
bystanders and suspects alike.

Let’s face it, generally speaking, our Police service does not have the
required capacity to identify and interrogate witnesses, to collect and
secure evidence, and prepare and present cases for prosecution. This is as
a result of both a lack of training and of resources.

The fundamental problem with crime is that most criminals have a legitimate
expectation of impunity. In most parts of our country, crime is still
amateurish; but as it flourishes, the crime industry becomes better
organised, which will find our police even less prepared to cope with what
is likely to come. Let us no longer rely on words, words, words. We need
better-trained and better-resourced policemen, and higher standards, which
may force those who do not live up to the new required levels of output,
performance, training and education to leave the force and find other
opportunities for employment.

We cannot continue to carry dead wood in the Police Service and in the
Public Service alike. After 1994, it was unavoidable and necessary for a
number of insufficiently qualified people to be inserted in the Public
Service or promoted beyond their natural talents, education and training.
However, this has created a pervasive climate of inefficiency and poor
performance often adjusted to the performance of the lowest common
denominator.

We now have the benefit of a new generation of bright, competent and well-
trained younger people who have come through the ranks of our universities
and the Public Service itself. It is time to separate the wheat from the
chaff and get rid of those who cannot keep up with the very challenges that
the President has outlined in the state of the nation address.

Government is people. And if people in the government are not good enough
to carry forward what it takes to overcome the challenges that the
President has identified, our government will not deliver
no matter what the President says and no matter what his Ministers commit
themselves to doing.

Finally, I now plead that we stop the rhetoric of celebrations. The
President and the hon Chief Whip have kindly recognised that I dedicated my
life to the release of former President Mandela and other political
prisoners, and the unbanning of political parties.

I have spent my life in the struggle for liberation. But the struggle
before us is now greater than what we were facing before 1994. We knew that
political liberation would eventually come, even if it was only to happen
after our own lifetime. In the struggle for prosperity now before us there
is no certainty of victory, and our failure would crush the hopes of a
continent and destroy our people.

Also in this respect, we must not insult the intelligence of our people.
They cannot feed their families with celebrations, whether these are
celebrations of our past victories, or the centennial celebrations of our
country’s unity, or the celebration of victories achieved on soccer or
cricket fields.

I urge the President to mobilise the immense support that he has amongst
the grassroots of South Africa for a new national struggle, calling for the
collective upliftment and individual development of our population. In
other words, it is our struggle for economic emancipation. Mr President, we
need a national effort of historical proportions, built on education, work,
education, work, education, work and more work.

Our generation sacrificed to bequeath freedom to the next generation. The
present generation must understand that with the same spirit of mission, it
must sacrifice, so that its collective hard work and dedication may
bequeath prosperity to the next generation.
My party and I want to help the President in this effort if he accepts our
call to rise to the challenge of becoming the leader of a national movement
which cuts across all the nonsense, wherever it is found, and puts us all
to work to build that better future we all have dreamed of for so many
generations.

Ingangawe Msholozi! Nxamalala! [It is all yours Msholozi! Nxamalala!]
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I’d like to remind the members of this House to address one
another as hon members, not as “ignorant”. We need to stick to the
parliamentary rules.

Adv T M MASUTHA: Speaker, Your Excellencies the President and the Deputy
President of the Republic, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, colleagues,
comrades and people at large, it gives me a deep sense of humility,
privilege and pride to be invited to speak on behalf of an organisation
that carries a proud history of struggle for the liberation of our people
through the selfless heroic sacrifices made by its cadres, both men and
women, and from all races, creeds and ethnic groups, over a protracted
period of almost a century.

Allow me, therefore, Mr President, to echo your salute of these heroes and
heroines, recognised and unsung, including those from political persuasions
other than the ANC, which I’m representing here, whose contributions,
whether large or small, helped to expedite the ultimate emancipation of our
people from  apartheid.

In particular, we take this opportunity to wish isithwalandwe, uTat’
uMadiba, who led the nation on its long walk to freedom and even longer, a
more fulfilling life filled with eternal joy, peace and satisfaction. As he
watches us all, his children, let us make his vision and dream become a
reality. This is my prayer.

His continued, tireless and selfless provision of leadership to our nation
and the world at large, even in his retirement, is most humbling and
profoundly inspirational. It is a gift for which we are eternally grateful.
[Applause.]

Your Excellency the President of the Republic, it is an observation that I
confidently share with many and I echo the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, who spoke earlier, when he said your presidency has drawn its vision
in great measure from that espoused by uTat’ uMadiba.

It is a vision of nation-building aimed at creating a nonracial, nonsexist,
democratic, united and prosperous society based on the principles of
equality, human dignity and freedom in the true spirit of our Constitution
and the Freedom Charter. The pursuit of this vision is the foundation upon
which the ANC’s very existence is hinged.
In its manifesto for the 2009 general elections, the ANC commits itself,
during the current period in office, to addressing the most difficult and
central challenges facing our nation, namely an improvement in the
provision of quality jobs and sustainable livelihoods, education, health
care, safety and security; and promoting rural development and land and
agrarian reform. Central to these objectives is the ANC’s continued role of
providing leadership and hope to our people, and its central value of
putting people first in and at the centre of all its policies.

Your Excellency, there are a number of specific measures you announced in
the state of the nation address relating to the character of the state and
the public sector into which we are determined to transform South Africa.
This demonstrates your determination to usher in a different style of
leadership. You said:


  When this administration came into office last year, we undertook to work
  harder to build a strong developmental state. We said it would be a state
  that responds to the needs and aspirations of the people and which
  performs better and faster. This year, 2010, shall be a year of action.
  The defining feature of this administration will be that it knows where
  people live, understands their needs and responds faster. Government must
  work faster, harder and smarter.

The specific measures you outlined or have already embarked upon in pursuit
of this goal include the hotline you have established for all citizens to
enjoy direct access to your Office and not only through Ministries, state
departments or even through us as public representatives. Your appearance
in person in various poverty- stricken areas of our country to get a first-
hand impression of the plight of our people has also not gone unnoticed.

You have announced the introduction of performance contracts between your
Office and Cabinet Ministers, setting out clear and agreed targets to which
they will adhere and against which their performance will be measured. The
introduction of new Ministries in your Office, particularly on policy
planning and performance monitoring and evaluation is a critical step in
the right direction towards reinforcing a focused, coherent and well-co-
ordinated effort in government policy planning and implementation.

This is so that the overarching strategic vision and direction of
government is not lost as the different departments cling to their
respective silos which, in turn, results in our people falling between the
cracks that exist in the policies and services of the various departments
as they seek help from government.

This will also obviate the past experience of policies and interventions
that appear good on the face of it and contribute little to changing the
situation of our people as a whole; or add little value towards the
realisation of our strategic vision and goals.

Key to the new approach of improving government performance and service
delivery are the principles aptly articulated in the strategic document of
the Minister in the Presidency, Comrade Collins Chabane.

These principles are: to provide principled leadership and make the tough
decisions that may be required to deliver on our mandate; to strengthen our
ability to co-ordinate across the three levels of government and work as a
single delivery machine; to build a partnership between government and
civil society so that we work together to achieve our goals for a better
life; to be completely transparent with each other, claiming no easy
victories; to just tell the truth and build on what we have achieved; to
recognise that there will always be limited funding and resources and yet
be willing to commit to doing more with less and doing it on time; and,
lastly, to develop a skilled and well-motivated Public Service that is
proud of what it does and receives full recognition for delivering better
quality services.

As the standing committee, in our engagement with the office of the Auditor-
General last year, we came to note with appreciation the Auditor-General’s
paradigm shift in the auditing of public entities with the addition to the
regular financial auditing of performance auditing, focusing on the three
“Es”, namely, efficiency, economy, and effectiveness.

The focus, therefore, is increasingly going to be on outcomes rather than
outputs. The question will be what value in real terms we are getting out
of the money spent, rather than whether we have spent the money as
prescribed. We also need to look at the sustainable use of our limited
resources in an environmentally friendly way so that posterity will not
judge us harshly.

Speaker, allow me at this juncture to turn to the important matter of
restoring good, old-fashioned values to our Public Service. The national
executive council of the ANC’s January 8 Statement presented by Your
Excellency in Kimberley last month, which outlines the marching line for
all the ANC cadres, whether deployed in government or elsewhere, clearly
and firmly articulates the ANC policy on this matter.

The ANC articulates the view that the process of building a new public
sector cadre forms part of the major tasks for creating a developmental
state. Where people are found to be incapable of performing the tasks
assigned to them, they must either be capacitated or replaced with capable
ones. To be a public sector cadre means service to the people and a caring
attitude in dealing with citizens.

The ANC is committed to transforming the state in a manner that benefits
our people. There is no room for using the resources of the state for self-
enrichment or acting from narrow self-interest. Selfishness is alien to the
values of our movement.

In this regard, hon President, you have also mentioned that the government
has resolved to eradicate fraud and corruption through the establishment of
the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Corruption, which is currently hard at
work to find new ways of eradicating corruption.

Amongst the specific areas of concern that you alluded to are corruption in
the issuing of tenders and drivers licences, social grants and identity
documents. The so-called “tenderpreneurs” who milk the state coffers of
millions of rands and yet perform a shoddy job, if at all, need to become a
thing of the past. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
the past few weeks have given us the opportunity to think back with
nostalgia to the unbanning of our liberation movements and the release of
Madiba.
The ID supports the President in thanking all those who led the fight
against apartheid, inside and outside our country. However, this is not
just an opportunity to remember how we won our freedom, but also a time to
reflect on what we have done with it.

It is, indeed, very sad for me that the millions of South Africans who
deserve the most praise for our victory over oppression, the very people
that led the battle in the streets, have yet to taste the fruits of our
democracy.

We acknowledge that 15 years is not enough to reverse 350 years of
colonialism and apartheid. But it is my belief that we could have achieved
far more. The fact that government has not followed up on its plans on
implementation and evaluation means in many ways that it has failed
Mandela's legacy. For example, the energy crisis we are facing today was
caused by the ANC, and the very same ANC stands to gain the most,
financially, from electricity tariff increases.


For the ID, it is unethical and immoral that a significant percentage of
the 35% increase proposed by Eskom will go straight into the ANC’s coffers
via Chancellor House. It is with dismay that we recall that Chancellor
House was the name of the building that housed the Mandela and Tambo law
firm.

Indeed, by straying from the higher set of ethics espoused by Nelson
Mandela, the ANC and the government have made a mockery of his legacy.
Added to this, the actions of some Ministers, who continue to make money
out of state tenders, have revealed the President’s tough talk on
corruption for what it is - just talk.

It is clear that the battle for the soul of the ANC has now morphed into a
leadership battle for state resources.

The announcement that Mr President has terminated over 30 000 fraudulent
social grants payments is very good. But when will these crooks be
arrested, charged, prosecuted and sent to jail?

The hon President also said that the Inter-Ministerial Committee on
Corruption is looking at ways to decisively defeat corruption. But, does
the President think that they will be effective when there are so many
conflicts of interest in business deals where even Ministers are involved?

The idea that Ministers can monitor themselves is both misguided and
misleading. Rather, we should be setting up a permanent commission
comprising MPs and civil society to monitor and expose corruption in
government. In some countries an anticorruption unit is set up for every
big procurement by the state.

Can the hon President also tell us when, if ever, we will see a plan from
him on how we are going to restructure the economy so that it can create
jobs? It is an indictment on the Mandela legacy that we have become the
most unequal society in the world.

It is patronising to enter into a semantic debate about what constitutes
work when over a million South Africans lost their jobs last year. The hon
President said we are turning the corner. Which corner? Where is this
corner? Millions of South Africans have been living in economic depression
all their lives. This recession, now at the end, has only worsened the
situation.

We are surprised that the hon President is only now going to establish an
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Energy to formulate an integrated energy
plan for the next 20 years, when the legislation for this was passed two
years ago. Can the hon President explain why there have been these delays
and give us an indication of when this plan will be started and when it
will be completed?

Again, he is promising that the independent power producers will be
introduced. But can he please tell us by when the policy environment will
be in place to attract them into the market? It is precisely this kind of
thinking that has led to the energy crisis in the first place.

We would also like to hear when the hon President is going to intervene in
the failing state-owned enterprises to halt the rot that has set in.

As a social democratic party, the ID believes in the strategic importance
of state-owned enterprises, but only if they fit in with our developmental
objectives, are run properly and are not a bottomless pit for taxpayers’
money.

The hon President also said last year that he would improve the monitoring
and evaluation of state-owned enterprises. I don’t know whether he has
forgotten about that.

The ID would like to welcome the wage subsidies for young people because we
had already asked for that in our manifesto last year.

I won’t even go into the delivery commitments and the performance
agreements for Ministers. We heard it in the last state of the nation
address. Now we have heard it again. Can it now be known what the delay is?
Why is it taking so long?

The ID is ready to roll up their sleeves and get their hands dirty by
working hard in order to build our country. But we will need decisive
action and leadership, and need far less repetitive talk and spin from the
hon President. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy President,
hon Ministers, hon members, I believe that hon Holomisa has already
informed you in person of his travels abroad to Korea for an international
conference of the peace federation, and of his intention to, thereafter,
join other members of the interim Defence Force Commission to the United
Kingdom. He regrets that these commitments were confirmed before this
debate.

We thank you further, Mr President, for heeding our call for more time to
participate in Parliament. We hope and trust that a further fairer
dispensation will be agreed to, for all other debates in Parliament.

At the outset, we wish to pay tribute to that great South African, Nelson
Mandela. We join you, Mr President, along with the rest of South Africa, in
celebrating the 20th anniversary of his release from prison. This event,
followed by millions of South Africans and people from all over the world,
ushered in an era of hope and regeneration. Our task is always to measure
ourselves against that sense of hope and promise.

Therefore, a state of the nation address should be about telling it like it
is, and saying how government will address the challenges facing us. With
all due respect, Mr President, we feel that your address did not meet these
criteria.

An honest assessment of the state of the nation shows that backlogs and
imbalances of the past remain with us. Economic policy at the moment is
failing to expand the economy and to increase the share of every South
African in that economy.

There seems to be no consensus on the type of economic policy required or
the instruments that are needed to grow the economy. Currently we have
various policy positions being announced and contradicted by different
individuals in the ruling party and tripartite alliance. There is no
agreement; some people talk of the developmental state, others of
nationalisation and others of the free market. It is just a disjointed
approach with no direction.

The UDM has argued repeatedly that we need to come together as a nation and
find a common agreement on broad economic policies. Our proposal for an
economic indaba should not be dismissed lest we face the perils of
widespread dissatisfaction boiling over into a genuine nationwide uprising
– I underline “genuine”.

We would suggest that there is a need in your reply, hon President, to
clarify your position in the spat between your Ministers who speak against
nationalisation, and leaders at Luthuli House who disagree with them and
threaten them with disciplinary and political repercussions within the
party.

Infrastructure is falling apart. Maintenance has been sorely neglected.
Much of the country’s infrastructure is managed by parastatals. We are
disappointed that no reference was made to the poor state of these
parastatals. The leadership and financial crises faced by most of these
parastatals need to be acknowledged and urgently addressed.

Working infrastructure enables economic growth, whereas dilapidated
infrastructure impedes economic growth. Take for instance the financial and
medical costs of using the roads, which are escalating because of the poor
state of the roads. Major highways, including the N1 in Johannesburg and
the N2 in the Eastern Cape, are riddled with dangerous potholes, not to
speak of the preposterous situation in smaller towns and rural areas. The
infrastructure maintenance units that had been phased out need to be
brought back.

Aba bantu kuthiwa ngooNolongo, mhlekazi, bamisa iintente ecaleni kwendlela
belungisa iindlela. [Hon member, these people are called Nolongo, they
pitch their tents alongside the road while Ffreeborn
repairing it.]

This would create permanent jobs and reduce government expenses.
Infrastructure maintenance is cheaper than infrastructure replacement.

Service delivery protests expose the rift within the ruling party and its
alliance partners, as well as the rift between the elite and the poor.
Whilst it is fine and well to speak about the police enforcing order in
these communities, it would be better, hon President, to speak to the
leaders of the tripartite alliance. Nine times out of 10, it is they who
are leading and instigating these protests to displace councillors and
mayors they dislike, or to pursue other political agendas.

Hon President, you can help the people and communities by disciplining
members of your political alliance, who are using the poor as cannon fodder
for their political schemes.

Linked to the question of service delivery is the issue of people
grandstanding and seeking cheap publicity. We regularly see the Minister of
Human Settlements speaking of demolishing admittedly inferior government-
built houses, but where are the new, better structures?

Could you, hon President, also take the country into your confidence and
explain the proposed tariff increases for Eskom to build power stations,
related to the Hitachi deal? The ruling party is heavily invested in that
contract, which depends on Eskom imposing tariffs that would cripple the
economy. Can we trust your Cabinet to make unbiased decisions in the best
interests of the country, when the ruling party stands to benefit directly
to the tune of billions from this Eskom deal?

Taking the above-mentioned into consideration, our assessment is that the
state of the nation is not positive, nor are we convinced that this
government is prepared and able to deal with the challenges that face us.
Since this government was elected, we have not seen any significant
delivery. The newspapers have been filled with reports of the types of cars
the leaders are driving and in front of whose homes those cars are seen.
Thank you.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Comrade President, Comrade Deputy
President, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, and hon members, I feel privileged
to participate in this debate.

Comrade President, the timing of your speech was absolutely exciting to us.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] This is because we were celebrating, remembering
those inspiring words that you took from No Fist Is Big Enough to Hide the
Sky: the Liberation of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde: Aspects of an African
Revolution, that we will be free. The African-American who visited us at
Drakenstein Prison the other day reminded us that when big people make
statements in public, such as they did, it is because the grassroots, their
people, make them do so.

So, when they said in Guinea-Bissau that no fist is big enough, there were
some who believed that that was not going to happen. They were as cynical
as those who believed that we were not going to be able to make the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup happen.
Now that it is happening, we welcome them in saying that we are going to
host a successful 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. [Applause.] Evidence shows
that we have promised and that we are delivering systematically. We do so,
knowing that that success is in no small measure because of municipalities
that are described as dysfunctional. It is perhaps often also human nature
only to see what is wrong and ignore the good that is happening right in
front of your eyes. [Applause.]

Madam Deputy Speaker and Comrade President, the ANC, which you lead and
whose 99 years of history, tradition, and customs, you carry on your
shoulders, taught this country democracy. Democracy unfortunately often
produces unpopular results, because to appreciate the importance of doing
the correct thing, we learn from our mistakes.

The ANC every five years publicly and openly discusses its internal issues,
the problems that it confronts in dealing with other problems. Our
discussion documents are circulated everywhere, for people to contribute to
civil society, including some of the opposition. We take this view during
our deliberations at our congresses and announce the results publicly.

How can they then want to claim for themselves criticism and self-
criticism? We will not allow them to claim that for themselves. We taught
them that. [Applause.] Criticism and self-criticism is our revolutionary
practice. [Interjections.]

It may not often be right and good for us, but we do it, because we know
the value of criticism and self-criticism. We do it regularly. Our
leadership does it every day. This is a crucial point, because if we didn’t
do that, people wouldn’t believe in what we are saying today. The
confidence they have in us in every election comes from that.

For 15 years we have spoken openly of government’s assessment of its own
work that we cannot continue on that trajectory. If we did so, people would
be angry with us. This is what government said. Now you can’t talk to us
about things that we know, that we ourselves do and assess, and so you give
the impression that this is strange to us. [Applause.]

I can’t resist talking about the privatisation story that Umtwana
kaphind’angene invites us to go into. President, he is correct that
Einstein said madness is often defined as doing the same thing and
expecting different results. Overwhelming evidence shows that whenever you
do that, in many instances - and unfortunately this is the truth - things
often turn out to be very expensive, if not for the consumers, then for the
state itself.

In the council properties that have been given to the private sector to
run, residents have had to endure three to four times the rent that they
used to pay in the past. This consequently pushes out the poor to the
periphery of the cities. That is not what we want to do. Is that what we
want to do?

This is not a blanket story. There are different instances of overwhelming
evidence, including respectable intellectual views, that suggest otherwise.
James K Galbraith, for example, said quite frankly that liberals should
learn from the conservatives in the USA that free markets don’t exist.
Indeed, they are an excuse to give to friends and an excuse to profiteer,
and that those who pursue these markets uncritically do so while ignoring
available evidence before them. [Interjections.]

Comrade President, your reference to the turnaround strategy, as adopted by
Cabinet, is a very important one, as a report to Parliament. Parliament is
already engaged in a process, firstly, to hear from the department leading
that process about its current state of readiness to implement it. It is
also waiting to hear from national departments and Ministers about their
views on where they are. Here we must thank the Minister of Rural
Development and Land Reform, the Minister of Water and Environmental
Affairs and the Minister of Energy for their input.

Speaking to Parliament, reacting to Parliament as an activist Parliament,
provided us with key issues that confront those departments in their
relationship with municipalities. They provided us with insights that are
very useful and that will come into play in the action we are going to take
with the turnaround strategy. The turnaround strategy is a framework that
will enable us - in other words, national and provincial departments - to
act in a manner that reinforces the effectiveness of municipalities.

The solutions to some of the problems we are talking about, including
housing, transport and some of those issues, lie elsewhere for their
effective resolution. In a sense, the remedy that we seek is not only at
municipal level; it is at national, provincial and also at parastatal
level.

We heard an excellent presentation from the Development Bank of Southern
Africa, DBSA, for example, on how and what they are doing and the resources
they are able to command and bring to bear on this. The problem is
effective institutional co-ordination, so that we pool our resources much
more effectively to bring about improvements in these areas.

This is work in progress; it is an excellent programme. The Minister for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, with his energetic rushing
across the country to interact effectively with municipalities and
traditional leaders, has put that turnaround strategy in place after having
consulted.

One of the things, of course, that we would interact with him on a regular
basis is ...

Ntate Shiceka, baholo ba re lepotlapotla le ja podi, lesisitheho le ja
kgomo. [Mr Shiceka, the elders say that when you do things in a rush you
are bound to make mistakes, but when you take things slowly you reap the
rewards.]

... slowly, slowly does it. In other words, we have to ensure that we give
the stakeholders we interact with sufficient time to pool their resources,
which includes the constituencies that they can mobilise, so that they are
able to effectively assist us in bringing about this turnaround strategy.

One of those stakeholders, Comrade President, is the government that you
lead. I am told that there is about R2 billion that various departments owe
to municipalities. Now, we don’t know for how long that has been the case.
Some of the debt might be 60, 90 or 120 days outstanding, and so on.

These are complex programmes relating to the effectiveness of the
municipalities’ ability to bill this department in time. What we are
suggesting is that it would make a huge impact if one of the things we do
is to systematically work with departments, and for them to work with
municipalities. This means they will be able to release and unlock those
resources, so that they help with the cash flow of municipalities.

What is important is our assessment of the nature of the political and
administrative problems in municipalities, those we have identified in the
past. Your leadership in interacting with municipalities and mayors across
the board has laid the foundation for what is emerging, amongst other
things, in that framework of the turnaround strategy. Therefore, you have
already given practical leadership around those issues.

We believe that with the parliamentary process that now proceeds to the
provinces we will have enough of a basis to understand the state of
readiness of the municipalities in provinces to shape themselves so that
they are able to interact effectively with these issues. We will make a big
difference to the nature of what we are going to do.

I want to return, in the last minute that I have, to where I started. If
the private sector is given an opportunity - as was the case in the United
States of America, where the crisis that we face today started - and if we
really just allow them to go ahead and do those things, we wouldn’t be
where we are today. That it necessitated state intervention to bail them
out is an important recognition of the failure on their own, without
regulation, to do business properly.

So, in a sense what we are saying, Comrade President, is that the
government that you lead must not hesitate in undertaking proactive and
very effective relationship building that recognises the weaknesses that
exist there, and also often the strength that the public sector has;
especially in line with what we call the developmental state, which we
would like to create with the features that you identified during your
speech.

It must be decisive, interventionist and inclusive in how it deals with
these issues, and not be a replication of what others want us to believe.

We are not amazed at the cynicism of others about the kind of leadership
you are providing. They cannot but do otherwise; they are opposition, and
so often what they say has no basis in reality. [Interjections.]
[Applause.] We can’t blame their confusion if, in spite of ANC conference
policy resolutions that clarify our policies, they still get confused with
the robustness of our debate elsewhere.

Our responsibility is to lead all of society in debate. Government has a
policy process and so there is no reason for us in the ANC and our allies
to claim confusion, because we know exactly where we are going. We
understand the processes of decision-making, and we are not afraid of
debate, internal and external. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, the previous
speaker spoke about the strength of our Public Service. Let’s talk about
that. But first, I would like to start my speech by handing a bouquet to
the Minister of Mining, Minister Shabangu.

Her comment, that mines would not be nationalised in her lifetime, showed,
I think, extraordinary leadership. It shows that she understands that
international capital markets are fickle, that markets like certainty,
failing which, investment capital is hesitant or comes with a high risk
premium. For this, she gets top marks. By contrast, Julius Malema is shown
to understand as much about markets as he does about woodwork. [Laughter.]

I regret that the President didn’t actually speak his mind on this vital
subject. Proponents of nationalisation have not outlined a cogent case to
show how such a move will create jobs and reduce poverty. Surely that is
this country’s highest priority? Yet the proponents of nationalisation
continue to trumpet it as the panacea for our country’s socioeconomic
problems.

These calls appear to be based on the assumption that the state has the
ability to run mines profitably and state-owned enterprises effectively.
The truth is that our state-owned enterprises have, over the last 15 years,
lurched from one crisis to another. Over the last three years, R243 billion
has been spent on rescuing parastatals.

They have been a drain on the state’s limited financial resources, rather
than a net contributor to economic prosperity. Yet these institutions are
supposed to be the vanguard institutions of the developmental state.

There are two fundamental problems that stand in the way of state-owned
enterprises advancing the ANC’s developmental state, namely financial and
governance problems – and, incidentally, they are interrelated.

Financially, SOEs lack capital and are investment hungry. Eskom’s current
funding difficulty in infrastructural expansion has clearly exhibited that
neither it, nor the government, has the capacity, hence Eskom’s endeavour
to get private sector investment for Kusile, and, no doubt, other power
stations. We welcomed this.

Secondly, the issue of governance speaks directly to the issue of cadre
deployment, as opposed to a fit for purpose approach, where merit, skill
and ability are the determining factors for appointment. It also speaks to
the fact of regular interference by political office bearers in the day-to-
day running of SOEs. Boards get turned into lame ducks as politicians
meddle in the running of these entities.

This is exemplified by the paralysis we have seen in the long list of
parastatals without chief executives. Armscor recently joined the list of
Transnet, SAA, Eskom, Denel, SA Tourism and the SABC – and we have seen the
turmoil there.

Last Thursday, the chief executive officer of the Road Traffic Management
Corporation took voluntary leave pending investigations into allegations of
gross financial mismanagement, procurement irregularities and
misappropriation of funds.

In all of these examples there is a consistent pattern - parastatals being
mismanaged into the ground or brought to their knees by political
interference and corruption, only to be bailed out and the management and
the board replaced at great cost. For a country that has yet to find a
successful formula for running existing SOEs, the creation of more SOEs in
the name of the developmental state, is laughable.

Against this backdrop, question marks must be raised over the ANC’s renewed
determination to build a bigger and even more interventionist state. The
state is currently struggling to fulfil some of its most basic functions.
Too many institutions as well as government departments are already
incapacitated and overwhelmed. To give them additional responsibility and
power of intervention when they cannot even execute their core function, is
likely to cripple them altogether.

The state lacks critical management capacity. It does not have a skilled,
efficient and meritocratic bureaucratic elite – prerequisites for a
developmental state. On the contrary, the ANC’s policy of cadre deployment
has ravaged the Public Service, fuelled corruption and stalled service
delivery.

No, Mr President, instead of government trying to nationalise or control
everything, we need to open the economy, promote opportunity, create
competition and give choice. Mr Speaker, one of the most critical tasks
facing our nation is economic growth and the creation of jobs.

Now I hear the President boasting that the government has created 480 000
Public Works job opportunities. What do opportunities actually mean: work
for one day, one week, or one month? The truth is that the economy lost
over 870 000 real jobs. The truth is that government’s capacity to create
real jobs is limited – either 500 000 supposedly for last year or 4 million
by 2014.

It is the private sector which is the engine room in this regard, yet it is
looked upon with suspicion by this government and threats of
nationalisation are thrown about.
We welcome the President’s proposal of a wage subsidy for younger workers,
but this is nothing new. Indeed, we, the DA, set out detailed proposals in
this regard in 2005 in the Budget debate. Let me read to you Mr Manuel’s
response to its introduction by me in this House. I quote:


  What you are saying is: Give a tax incentive to people to employ others
  at home. What you’re looking for is a colonial mindset. You want to be
  waited on hand and foot by black people who will carry and fetch and the
  more you employ the more the state will subsidise that lifestyle. We will
  not do it for you in our democracy.

Now you go and tell the President that, Minister Manuel. A wage subsidy is
an important intervention, but it is, at best, a palliative. We need to
grow the economy. To do this, we need increased investment and higher
productivity.

However, government is focusing on neither because tripartite unity is the
issue of primary importance and giving a strong lead on either of these two
key issues would mean confronting the protective trade unions and quashing
talk of nationalisation, all of which will threaten tripartite unity.

Mr President, we need leadership. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Deputy Speaker,
hon President, a primary school child visited Parliament and sat in the
gallery. He watched how the Speaker entered the Assembly, nodded to the
right, nodded to the left and then asked for a moment of silence for
prayer.

Back at school, he wrote an essay about his visit:

   The Speaker is as despondent about the future of South Africa as my
   father is. The Speaker walked in, looked to the right at the ANC
   government, and shook his head in dejection because he could see that
   they were not going to solve the country’s problems.

   Thereafter, full of hope, he looked to his left at the opposition
   parties, but also became despondent when he saw that there was no hope
   that they had any solutions. That’s when he said the only thing left for
   this country is prayer; let us pray together.

[Laughter.]

Now, sir, may we never reach that point, where there is no longer any hope
or solutions for South Africa’s problems.

In his state of the nation address, the President was very precise in his
proposals as to how certain problems could be resolved, but also very vague
about others. I’ll give you an example: The FF Plus welcomes the emphasis
on education, and the specific measurable objectives which have been set.
The FF Plus would like to add specific objectives for more mother tongue
education.

We would also like to congratulate the government on the fact that almost
33 000 fraudulent social grant payments to the value of R180 million have
been terminated. It’s a small but important step in eradicating large-scale
corruption.

The FF Plus welcomes the outcomes-based approach of government; it makes it
possible for opposition parties and the public to measure and evaluate the
government’s success. Many other problems were identified correctly, but
the solutions are still very vague.

Volgens meningspeilings is misdaad, en die feit dat Suid-Afrikaners nie
meer veilig in hul huise voel nie, een van die ernstigste probleme in die
land.

Rooftogte by huise het verlede jaar met 27% toegeneem, en as die syfer oor
drie jaar geneem word, is dit 54%. Moord het effens afgeneem, maar die Suid-
Afrikaanse moordsyfer is steeds 37 uit elke 100 000 van die bevolking,
terwyl die wêreldgemiddelde vyf uit 100 000 is. Dit beteken dat 50 mense
vandag in Suid-Afrika vermoor gaan word en 50 elke dag vir die res van die
jaar.

As daar na moord op plaasboere en hul werkers gekyk word, gaan die syfer op
na oor die 200 per 100 000 van die bevolking – ten opsigte van plaasmoorde
wat op die wreedste maniere gepleeg word.

As die President dan slegs enkele sinne in sy toespraak aan misdaad wy,
beteken dit daar buite dat misdaad nie ’n prioriteit van die regering is
nie.

Waarom kan moorde op plase nie as afsonderlike polisie statistiek gegee
word nie? Die boerderygemeenskap aanvaar dat die rede is dat plaasmoorde –
van wit en swart – nie vir die regering belangrik is nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[According to opinion polls, crime, and the fact that South Africans do not
feel safe in their homes anymore, is one of the most serious problems in
the country.

House burglaries increased by 27% last year, and when the figures are taken
over three years, it is 54%. Murder has decreased slightly, but the murder
rate in South Africa is still at 37 per 100 000 of the population, while
the average internationally is five per 100 000. This means that 50 people
will be murdered in South Africa today and 50 every day for the rest of the
year.

When we look at the murder of farmers and their workers, the figure rises
to 200 per 100 000 of the population – in respect of farm murders which are
perpetrated in the most brutal ways possible.

So when the President devotes only a few sentences in his speech to crime,
the perception out there is that crime is not a priority of the government.

Why can’t police statistics on farm murders be reported separately? The
farming community believes that the reason for this is that farm murders –
of white and black – are not important to the government.]

Rural development is rightly one of the priorities of the government. In my
contact with farmers throughout the country, they affirm the importance of
this and offer their assistance.

For rural development, it is important that especially commercial farmers
create more job opportunities. The commercial farmers ask me how one can
create more job opportunities and expand one’s farm, if, after 15 years,
one is still not certain that one will keep one’s farm; if one’s neighbour
is murdered and one is not certain whether one will experience a farm
attack at night; if one’s children have to be sent to a school 300 km away
because the Afrikaans school close by has been closed by the government.

If the Minister of Human Settlements then also comes and falsely accuses
farmers of being the main cause of squatter camps, the commercial farmers’
offer to help with rural development is then lost, while they have to fight
just for their own survival.

Urbanisation is an African phenomenon. Kibera, adjacent to Nairobi, is the
largest squatter camp in Kenya, with more than 600 000 people living in an
area of four square kilometres. There are no South African farmers there.

How many people have moved from the former Transkei to the Western Cape?
How many foreigners from Africa have streamed over our borders and settled
in squatter camps? Are farmers also being blamed for that?

Twenty-one African states have already made offers to lure South African
farmers to their countries. Even Mr Gaddafi, of Lybia, is promising the sun
and the moon. He is promising diesel at 50c a litre and a pipeline to make
unlimited amounts of water available. How do I answer these farmers?

The FF Plus welcomes the President’s proposal to subsidise the cost of
hiring young workers. Does this proposal include all young people or are
young white people excluded from this? For what reason can young people who
were born after Mr Mandela’s release – the so-called “freeborns” – be
excluded from this?
The black wealthy and middle class is already considerably larger than the
white rich and middle class. Affirmative action at present only takes race
into consideration and not economic capacity. For what reason should a
black millionaire’s child be advantaged by these measures, while a poor
white child is disadvantaged?

The government is making a mistake if it does not take notice of the
growing opposition and polarisation that affirmative action is causing,
especially amongst the youth. Read the letters in the newspapers and listen
to the debates on university campuses.

Let me read you a part of Selna du Toit’s letter, dated 12 January of this
year, in the Afrikaans newspaper, Beeld. She writes:

   Last year our son completed his matric. He obtained seven distinctions
   and scored 97% in the Maths paper. He cannot get a bursary to study
   computer engineering. At this point, there is bitterness in his heart
   because nobody wants to give him a reasonable chance.

I therefore direct an urgent plea to our government and all those large
companies that only give bursaries to students if it will give them points
for black empowerment: Rise above this destructive form of intimidation and
give bursaries to all deserving students in South Africa. Give everybody
hope that there is a future for all in this beautiful country.
What answer should I give Selna about her son? When will there be equal
opportunities for the young freeborns? And when will we learn not to use
the race card when we differ in opinion from someone else?

When Mr Malema differs from Mr Cronin, he calls him a white Messiah.
When Mr Jimmy Manyi differs from Mr Godsell concerning the firing of Mr
Maroga, he calls Mr Godsell a racist. When Judge Motata differs from the
person who testifies against him in his drunken driving case, he calls that
person a white racist – even though he does not know him at all.

Why should all 36 university campuses in South Africa be English? When I
argue that at least two or three of these campuses should be largely
Afrikaans, with white, brown and black South African students, it is
labelled as hidden racism by the government spokespeople.


When you host an Afrikaans cultural festival, it is suddenly racist, but a
Zulu festival in KwaZulu-Natal is not racist.

Rightly so, Mr Vavi, of all people, says:

   The using of the racial card when there really is no racism makes it
   difficult to combat real racism.

This approach forces the South African population into different camps that
oppose one another. The same happens with ill-thought-out name changes.

In his state of the nation address in June last year, the President said:

   We will ensure a common national approach to the changing of geographic
   and place names. This must provide an opportunity to involve all South
   Africans in forging an inclusive national identity, to deepen our
   understanding of our history and heritage.

But names changed without this having taken place. The FF Plus understands
that all groups’ names should be given recognition. But there is a very big
difference between a name such as Pampoenfontein, and one like Pretoria.
Names such as Pretoria, Potchefstroom, Pietersburg and Piet Retief were
named after Afrikaner heroes and carry a lot of Afrikaner history and
emotion. Why are these names specifically targeted, if it is not meant to
elicit confrontation?

The FF Plus believes that with negotiation guidelines can be developed to
manage the sensitivities around these issues. For example, names which
offend should be changed; names which have great historical value for a
specific group can only be changed in consultation with that group; names
cannot be changed after a specific cut-off date etc.

The way name changes are being approached at present will, for the next 20
years, from town to town, cause conflict between communities. It is bad for
relations and causes an ever-increasing polarisation between communities.

All kinds of compromises are possible, with examples worldwide where towns
have double-barrelled names and where both heroes and traitors are
acknowledged because they are part of history. For example, in London, at
the one end of Whitehall, you will find a statue of Charles I, the king who
was beheaded; at the other end of Whitehall you will find a monument to the
man who did it, Cromwell. Cromwell stands in front of the parliament which
he disbanded.

Sir, remember, you have not converted a man because you have silenced him
or tried to wipe out his history.

The previous government – and here is a lesson I learnt – could not change
Mr Mandela’s views with his incarceration. In the same way, no part of the
South African population can be bullied into nation-building. If they feel
accommodated it will be easy and there will be a lot of co-operation.
Nation-building is always a voluntary process. Let’s try to achieve this.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon President, hon
members, friends, colleagues and comrades, it is an honour for me to take
part in the debate on the President’s state of the nation address,
cognisant that in the imperatives and priorities outlined by the ANC in the
manifesto we’ve given our people hope.
On the evening of 11 February 2010, we celebrated the release of uTata
Nelson Mandela, when he walked out of Victor Verster Prison as a free man,
free at last. You chose that day to call a Joint Sitting of Parliament to
deliver the state of the nation address; to celebrate a watershed moment
that changed our country.

Indeed, the release of uTata Nelson Mandela was brought about by the
resolute struggle of the black people in this country. The masses of our
people in their different formations responded with determination to the
call to make this country ungovernable and apartheid unworkable.

As we celebrate Nelson Mandela’s release, we recommit ourselves to the call
that he made for reconciliation, nation-building, the unity of our people,
nonracialism and building a better South Africa, black and white together.

We are truly guided by the inspired words of Nelson Mandela, who on the
edge of death in the dock said:

  During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to this struggle of the
  African people, I have fought against white domination, and I have fought
  against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and
  free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal
  opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve.
  But if it needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.

Those were inspiring words from Nelson Mandela, on the commitment of
choosing death over any other thing like the oppression of the people of
this country.

In the President’s programme of this year of action, the ANC commits itself
also to building a developmental state, whose characteristics are similar
to those of the UDF - a caring, sustainable, democratic and people-centred
society. In celebrating our achievement in the ANC, we’ve done a number of
things in a very short period of time that an apartheid government could
not do in 400 years. [Applause.]

Today when you visit the Fifa website you will see that the destination for
the World Cup is South Africa. There is no longer a plan B. Many of the
people were caught up in euphoria about a plan B. Plan B was South Africa;
plan A was South Africa; plan Z was South Africa, and we are in that mood
today.

We are celebrating in the midst of despair and a total onslaught on the
field of play. Today we celebrate that our struggle for transformation in
sport was a just struggle and the “Age of Hope”, which the former President
Mbeki talked about, has dawned on sports in this country.

We are celebrating a better South Africa and, as the ANC, we even inspired
millions of our people. When a young South African, Roland Schoeman, was
confronted with a choice as to whether to abandon this country for money
and join other swimmers to earn millions of rands in Qutar, he took a very
bold decision that he would not leave South Africa and abandon his
citizenship. That is patriotism in the bones of this young Afrikaner.
[Applause.]

The ANC proclaimed in 1955, when our forebears, our parents, formulated the
Freedom Charter, that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and
white, and cannot be an exclusive terrain of white people with black people
pushed to the periphery. That is what we are opposed to and we’ll be
opposed to anything that pushes the white people to the periphery and black
people above them.

As we gather here today we want to join you in the call and tell the world
that as the ANC we are satisfied with the 2010 Fifa World Cup preparations.
The stadiums, training venues, accommodation, transport, security and even
logistics, fan parks, the restaurants that will serve delicious food, and
most importantly, the host cities are ready; and e can play this
spectacular event in our country at any time.

We will work together to ensure that Africa’s first World Cup will amaze
the world and us beyond expectation. We state with absolute certainty and
belief that we are ready for the world and the world is ready for our
stage.

The success of this event is not just a question of the bricks and mortar
operations. It offers an opportunity to place this moment in the context of
our country, the continent, the past struggle of all our people and our
collective future.

This event must contribute to our programme of nation-building and
asserting ourselves and our Africanness and our commitment to the world. We
often speak about our Africanness, our collective heartbeat that echoes
throughout this great continent.

This World Cup will be similar to the one in 1995; a year after the
election of a democratic country when uTata Nelson Mandela wore jersey
Number 6 of the Springbok team, celebrating and uniting our people in the
calls for a free, democratic, nonracial country on an equal basis. That is
how he led us in the celebration of that great moment when the World Cup
was won by the Springboks.

This is a difficult phrase to explain because it is not a racially
exclusive term, but because it has a history that only those who were
defiant and those who remain defiant in the face of repression can
understand.

When you are faced with a reality that says you are not good enough, you
are a third-class citizen, you can only participate within predetermined
perimeters, you still have a choice at that moment to either accept the
fate that has been assigned to you, or choose to change that fate. This is
when our Africanness moved from being a static word to being an action.

It is not rhetoric but an active reality; it is the movement that started
over many years with founding fathers of the liberation movement, the likes
of Kwame Nkrumah, Samora Machel, Oliver Tambo and Nelson Mandela.

The will to move mountains to achieve what we believe is just and fair is
part of the eternal mechanism of our Africanness. It is what drives our
constant pursuit of excellence and equality; it is also what instils the
belief that both excellence and equality are possible, simultaneously.

This is what the 2010 Fifa World Cup epitomises to us as a country. We had
to fight both internally and externally. There was pessimism and disbelief
at the tenacity of our country at the southernmost tip of Africa to host
this tournament.

We do not think any other country has had to contend with as much
negativity as we have. When we arrived in Korea, Japan, Germany and France,
all of them said this negativity comes from our country. They said that
their sister journalists are fed by Media 24 about the negativity in our
country. They asked where we thought they got this information if not from
our country.

We, journalists, and the people should be patriotic because when you ask
them where they get the information that people at O R Tambo Airport have
spears, pangas and guns, they say it is our country that feeds them with
that kind of information; but it is not real.

Those who supported the 2010 World Cup are ingrained with an Africanness.
They include Desmond Tutu, Sepp Blatter, Issa Hayatou and our own Nelson
Mandela. The new faces of Africanness have been awakened by hosting the
2010 Fifa World Cup in a few months, with almost 115 days to go.

For the entire history of Fifa it has never been on the shores of this
continent, a continent that has given so much to the world and that has
produced the likes of Ace Mabhekaphantsi Ntsoelengoe, Roger Milla, Steve
Kalamazoo Mokone, Lucas Radebe, Abedi Pele, George Weah, Michael Essien,
Samuel Eto’o, Didier Drogba - and the list is endless.

That is why we are unequivocal in calling on the country to rally against
injustice. Today we are satisfied that South Africa must heed this call,
the call that we are ready to host the 2010 Soccer World Cup because
working together has demonstrated that we can achieve more.

Today no one needs to be convinced ... Thank you. [Time expired.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, President of the Republic, Deputy
President and hon members, the ACDP joins other speakers in thanking the
President for dedicating this debate to former President Nelson Mandela for
his legacy of forgiveness, reconciliation and nation-building. One of the
positive things, which has given us hope that we might see improved service
delivery, is the President’s announcement that the work of the departments
will be measured by outcomes and that Ministers, who are responsible for a
particular outcome, will sign a detailed delivery agreement with the
President.

Questions that arise from this announcement include: Firstly, will the key
outcomes of what Ministers will be held accountable for, be made public? If
yes, when will they be made public? If no, how will people confirm that
Ministers and their departments are performing optimally and efficiently if
they do not know what the expected outcomes are?

Secondly, will the President be monitoring delivery programmes alone or
will the Cabinet Ministers, who might be tempted to protect and defend
their colleagues, be working with him; or will he appoint a body of
objective political and independent panellists to help him with the
assessments?

Thirdly, what will happen if Ministers fail to deliver? Will they be fired,
demoted or deployed to other departments as has happened many times before?

In his state of the nation address on 3 June 2009, the President said one
of the 10 priorities of the government was to intensify the fight against
crime and corruption. However, in his Thursday night speech he spoke only
about fighting crime as one of government’s five priorities.

We want to know why fighting corruption is no longer a stated priority of
government. Corruption in this country is a pandemic that seriously
undermines economic development and growth.

It was reported a few months ago that more than 2 000 corrupt public
servants rigged government tenders worth more than R600 million and that
poor procurement policies, strategies and systems were costing both the
South African private sector and the government losses amounting to more
than R25 billion each year. How can the fight against corruption not be
among government’s top listed five priorities when so much money is being
stolen by government employees?

Just recently Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan revealed in Parliament that
government, for example, pays more than private business for everything it
purchases. Some estimates indicate it is as much as 10% to 30% more,
despite government’s potential bargaining power. This is nothing but a
waste of taxpayers’ money, which the ACDP deplores.

Deputy Speaker, besides the efforts of the Finance Minister to address the
corrupt tendering system, particularly in Limpopo, we want to know what
else government is doing to stop this cancer?

We also want to know what government is doing about the frustration
expressed by the head of the Special Investigating Unit, Willie Hofmeyr,
before Scopa last month. He is reported to have said that the government
has failed to deal decisively with cases of corruption identified by his
staff.

As he identified disciplinary processes, a weakness of government, he also
said that there are cases of a really serious nature where disciplinary
action does not take place. Mr Hofmeyr concluded that the possible reason
for this lack of decisive action could be the progressive labour
legislation that is preventing government from firing corrupt officials.

The ACDP wants to know when government is going to do away with lengthy
disciplinary processes and suspending corrupt public servants on full pay.
We believe that certain labour laws must be revisited and amended to make
it easier for employers, including government, to charge thieves and
corrupt officials for their crimes and to fire lazy workers.

We have heard this past week that the Eastern Cape department of health has
overspent by almost R2 billion due to fraud, corruption, dishonesty and
financial mismanagement. As a result, there’s no money to pay health
workers and municipalities such as the Baviaans Municipality.

The mere suspension of senior officials for using an emergency aircraft
intended to ferry sick people, to go to Bloemfontein to watch a soccer
match, is disgraceful. Will the President ensure that these officials do
not just get away with a slap on the wrist in the form of a suspension with
full pay and that those who are guilty of corruption are charged and
prosecuted?

I did not understand what the President meant by saying:


   We will implement all the undertakings made on World Aids Day relating to
   new HIV prevention and treatment measures.


Does the President still believe in government’s ABC strategy, which, in
our view, he has undermined and acted against? What are the new HIV
prevention measures that the President referred to?
The ACDP further wants to know from the President what government’s latest
position is on Eskom’s proposed 35% per annum electricity tariff hike for
the next three years, particularly so because of the reported compelling
reasons to believe the ANC will benefit from the proposed tariff hikes.

Is it true, Mr President, that the ANC’s share in this deal, through
Chancellor House that holds a 25% stake in Hitachi that won a tender to
build the R20 billion Medupi boiler in Limpopo in 2005, is worth more than
R5,7 billion? If this is true, Mr President, then this would be another
form of corruption in the majority party.

To hear the ANC secretary general, Gwede Mantashe, saying there is nothing
wrong with the party holding a stake in Hitachi was shocking. We hope by
now that the treasurer of the ANC has taken steps to disinvest the ANC’s
interest in Hitachi as he promised.

If this is not done, then the poorest of the poor in our country must be
informed about the deception of this party that claims to speak on their
behalf, whilst behind their backs they actively collude with Eskom’s greed,
exploitation and self-enriching price increases.

The ACDP supports calls to invest in the unused potential of South Africa’s
coastal wind and solar resources rather than building two huge coal power
stations that would undermine our commitment to curbing greenhouse gas
emissions.

In conclusion, Mr President, may I urge you and your government to work
faster and harder, as you promised, to ensure that your administration
performs better and responds faster to the needs of our people; because the
writing is on the wall.

As you know, hon President, the ACDP objected to the opening of Parliament
at night, something that is not done in any democratic country in the
world. I believe that what happened on Thursday night, 11 February 2010,
was prophetic. The sun is setting on the ANC, Mr President. [Laughter.]

Violent protests at Balfour this past week, and your visit to the area and
after that the subsequent visit of a nine-member ministerial team, is
sending a clear message to the government. People are running out of
patience, and they want service delivery now. [Interjections.] Yes, it is
going to sink.

They are saying: Fix our roads that are in a deplorable state, eradicate
poverty, high unemployment, illiteracy, corruption and crime urgently or
you might not have another opportunity to give another state of the nation
address. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr W G JAMES: Dit is my voorreg, Speaker en eerbare raadslede, om ’n paar
idees met u te deel. [It is my privilege, Speaker and hon members of the
House, to share a few ideas with you.]

One may look at President Zuma’s state of the nation address in terms of
what he said and what he did not say. In terms of what he said, I have very
little quarrel with that and support the overall thrust: the focus on job
creation, education and health. The claim about the 480 000-odd jobs is a
fudge and it is an act of what one may term “rhetorical elision”.

I object – to use a Soviet Union-style term – to the rehabilitation of P W
Botha. I will return to Botha at the end of what I have to say if there is
time.

The main issue with President Zuma’s address is what he did not say and the
lack of ambition he indicated in word and manner for our country. Our
economy is animated by the talent, ideas, intellectual property and spin-
off entrepreneurial opportunities coming from some of our 23 universities,
Deputy Minister of Agriculture, and over 50 colleges. We have the most
advanced science, medical and technology infrastructure on this continent
by far. We are at the high end of astronomy, nuclear physics,
biotechnology, medical genetics and large-scale engineering and
construction.

Together with our science council system, we could be the powerhouse on the
continent, competing globally with the likes of India, Brazil and Chile.
But we are running at 40% capacity and we need to get to 100%. We need
hundreds of trade schools for high-end artisan training. None of this is
new to you. To get there, we require an unrelenting attention to quality.

I think of Stanford University in California, a fourth-rate institution in
the 1940s after the war. It was built up by its legendary provost paying
consistent attention to detail in hiring quality staff and attracting
quality students, and working in a well-run and properly functioning
institution on the basis of a quality infrastructure.

We certainly need to apply ourselves similarly. Careers pursued via
universities, colleges and trade schools are equally valued and important,
and we should market our aspirations accordingly.

Education should be the joyful unlocking of human potential and not a
burden to the taxpayer of head-stuffing students, who are seen as units of
information consumption. We have a great base on which to build.

Let me give you some examples of inherited nodes of the knowledge economy:
Firstly, deep-level mining produced innovations in engineering, geology,
paleontology and medicine at the University of the Witwatersrand.

The second example is the HIV/Aids infrastructure that is emerging in
KwaZulu-Natal - the University of KwaZulu-Natal together with this Wellcome
Trust-funded clinic in the northern part of KwaZulu-Natal, together with
the development of Aspen Pharmacare, which is the largest commercial
producer of antiretrovirals in the country.

Thirdly, the viticulture - the art of wine-making - department at the
University of Stellenbosch, together with plant pathology, was looking at
the development of a bottling, corking and label-printing industry. There
has emerged a knowledge economy around that very important part of the
Western Cape economy.

The fourth example is the medical devices industry; biomedical engineering
linked to heart transplant surgery and immunology at the University of Cape
Town.

The fifth is dentistry at the University of the Western Cape; UWC has been
producing dentists for the country through its practicing hospital in
Mitchells Plain. I wanted to say something about the fact that they
practice conservative dentistry, which is why most of the people there have
front teeth. [Laughter.]
The last example is the University of Pretoria’s Onderstepoort veterinary
division, where we have seen a world-class facility in animal health emerge
together with the development of the sequencing of heartwater disease and
vaccine development.

We need to move into other niche areas. We have a very long coastline and
there are opportunities for marine biology and the development
of aquaculture, which is fish farming.

We need to move into the area of carefully looking at alternative sources
of energy. We need to look at the area of what advantages the Cape Floral
Kingdom can give to plant biotechnology. But to get to 100% capacity, where
our tertiary sector pumps away at the knowledge economy, we need to deal
with some quality issues.

There are very serious governance breakdowns at our tertiary sector
institutions. I have had a very close look personally at what has been
happening at the Tshwane University of Technology, and the Minister of
Education has tried to do that as well, and what we’ve seen there is a
criminalisation of the residences at this university. And that requires
very serious security and other forms of attention.

The administrative support systems, including library management, are
hobbling, and many of the historically disadvantaged universities require
much more demanding levels of accountability and performance management.

The academic staff recruitment practices similarly require scaling up at
all our universities, but particularly at the historically disadvantaged
universities. But I want to point out that of the 41 383 academic staff at
our universities, only 16% have doctorates and 34% have masters degrees.
Therefore, half of the academic staff do not even posses a masters’ degree
and the figure for the poorer universities is even more pathetic.

So I look forward to the budgets of the Ministers of Education, Health,
Arts and Culture and Science and Technology, to see whether they will
exemplify passion and ambition for excellence and quality for all the
people who make up our nation. I have no doubt that they will try. It is my
job to hold you to account for the unrelenting pursuit of quality because
we deserve nothing less.

I do want to make one remark about P W Botha in closing. He signed the
death warrant of District Six in the 1960s. He was responsible, together
with Magnus Malan, for launching military attacks on our neighbours,
including on ANC camps. He was responsible, together with Adriaan Vlok, for
two states of emergency. He was responsible, in 1987, for tightening up the
group areas system that caused misery for many people.

He met Madiba to size him up. He did not meet him in order to see whether
he would release him. He was a belligerent, irascible bully who masqueraded
as a politician and I don’t think we should rewrite history in such a way
that it honours him. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President,
Deputy President and colleagues:


  Education is the great engine of personal development. It is through
  education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that the
  son of a mineworker can become the head of a mine, that the child of
  farmworkers can become president of a great nation.


These are the words of Nelson Mandela. When the great Nelson Mandela walked
through the gates of Victor Verster Prison 20 years ago, he was confronted
by a racially fractured education system constructed on the Verwoerdian
notion of subservience and baasskap [domination], and steeped in the
discriminatory practices of racism and sexism.

Lever and Krafchik, in an article entitled Spending on Socio-Economic
Services, which was published in 1988, clearly captured the challenges that
the system faced by stating, and I quote:

  It has been estimated that prior to 1994, around 64% of the black
  population was functionally illiterate. Numeracy and technical skills were
  widely lacking. The majority of black teachers who comprise the bulk of
  the nation's teaching corps were underqualified. The school system for
  Africans was in disarray and disorder, and most African pupils failed to
  complete more than eight years in a schooling system which was, anyway,
  highly ineffective.


  The new government inherited a ramshackle system of partially desegregated
  schooling that continued to be characterized by great racial inequalities
  in per capita expenditure from public funds. Resource constraints, both
  physical and human, made the effective implementation of the curriculum at
  most black schools highly problematic.

The postapartheid ANC government has done remarkably well in dismantling
the apartheid edifice in education, as well as extending formal access to
learners in the compulsory education phase with nearly universal enrolment.
The period after 1994 was characterised by dramatic strides in the
equalisation of education expenditure.

Today, more children are staying at school until matric. It is also
estimated that about 85% of our learner population is now receiving at
least 12 years of education, either in schools or colleges.

In addition, millions of learners are exempt from paying school fees. Also,
the national nutrition programme provides for nutrition at approximately
19 000 schools, which translates into 6 265 065 primary school learners and
about 1 million secondary school learners benefiting from the programme.
The scheme has been expanded to include learners from the poorest quintiles
in high school and we have already seen evidence of improved attendance as
a result of this intervention.

Yet we continue to be confronted by the stark realities of some 40% of our
schools being overcrowded and hundreds of schools being without water,
sanitation and electricity and schools with inadequate infrastructure or
which are unsafe. In recent months we have witnessed the effects of
tornados, storms and inclement weather, which destroyed schools in the
provinces of KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape, North West and Limpopo. This is a
matter that must be resolved swiftly as our learners cannot be exposed to
the elements.

To compound the problem, there have been instances of vandalism and theft
of school property. We cannot allow this to happen to our schools that are
our islands of hope. We must mobilise our communities to take ownership of
our schools, and to act as the custodians and protectors of our
institutions of learning.

Despite significant advances, the primary measure of quality in education,
ie learner achievement, has continued to lag behind. There are a number of
reasons for the continued underperformance of the South African schooling
system. These include poor management of schools by principals; inadequate
teaching; lack of content knowledge among teachers; lack of support to
schools by district and provincial offices; a heavy administrative burden
on teachers; limited time on task; and weak acquisition of foundational
skills by learners.

There is a growing international consensus that achieving quality in an
education system will require a clear and unrelenting focus on three main
components of the system. Mr Masutha spoke about the three Es; we shall
talk about three Ts, ie teachers, text and time.

To this I may add technology. Nic Taylor has put it very aptly, and I
quote:

  Three features of our school system combine to undermine effective
  teaching and learning: poor time management, insufficient attention to
  text, and very low levels of teacher subject knowledge. The accumulating
  evidence indicates that with respect to these three factors, our teachers
  and schools are significantly worse off than those of our much poorer
  neighbours in the region.

The Coleman Report of the 1960s in the United States found that –

   ... the in-school factor that was found to have the most significant
   effect on achievement for all students was good teachers.

The quality of teachers becomes a yardstick for the quality of an education
system. But this is well-trodden territory. Our partners in the unions will
be quick to point out that this kind of analysis could indeed easily slip
into blaming teachers for the educational woes of our country.

The simple point we are making though - supported by a range of
commentators - is that well-qualified and competent teachers who arrive on
time, are of sober mind and body, are well-prepared for their lessons and
teach for the duration of the school day, are the most critical element in
the improvement of the educational system; not only in South Africa, but
indeed across the world.

The best investment that any country can make in its efforts to improve the
quality of its education system occurs, principally, in the preschool
sector. It is here where the foundational skills in literacy and numeracy
are established. These skills prepare children for primary schooling.

The positive effects of early education for later educational success and
career progress are now universally acknowledged. Government’s vision for
early childhood development is that it will serve as the bedrock for the
holistic development of the child.

It has been scientifically and empirically established that the most
critical and significant cognitive development of a child occurs from birth
to four years. This is when a child also develops fine motor skills and
acquires attitudes which are either positive or negative. The role of
parents in this important phase cannot be ignored. To this end, the
Department of Basic Education and the Department of Social Development are
working closely together to ensure that practitioners and caregivers are
able to contribute meaningfully and purposefully towards the full
development of the child.

As the President correctly indicated, literacy and early childhood
development initiatives will go a long way toward creating employment
opportunities. But, more importantly, these initiatives will also go a long
way toward developing skills in the critical areas of education, which we
desperately need for social transformation.

For example, the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign employs 40 000
practitioners who have successfully eradicated illiteracy among just under
a million adults in the past two years. Now that is, indeed, delivery.
Fortunately, literate parents or grandparents are able to provide support
to infants and children as they grow up.
Thus, the initiatives are not only economic in nature, but have a social
dimension that benefits the recipients as well as a generation of current
and future learners.

Speaking about delivery, government has embarked on a massive drive to
expand Grade R provision. In 2003 there were approximately 320 000 learners
in Grade R classrooms in public and independent schools, but by 2008 this
number had increased to 620 000.

We obviously recognise that the consequences of this are additional
classrooms, practitioners and costs. We estimate that an additional number
of around 200 000 learners are attending community-based sites.

In January 2010, we distributed resource packs to all primary schools – Dr
Mulder, in all languages – as part of the Foundations for Learning
Campaign. These packs are based on the National Curriculum Statement for
Grade R and contain posters, storybooks, lesson plans for teachers, a
teacher’s guide with an assessment framework and a workbook for learners.

The packs have been very well received by teachers and schools and we are
optimistic that they will make a huge contribution to improving learning
and teaching in the Grade R classrooms.

The department remains committed to the provision of high-quality learning
and teaching support materials to schools and teachers in 2010 and beyond.
The department is proceeding with the development of workbooks for learners
from Grades 1 to 6 and Minister Motshekga will make an announcement in this
regard during her budget speech next month.

Minister Motshekga initiated a process last year to strengthen the
implementation of the school curriculum. She announced measures, which were
implemented from the beginning of this year, that aim to relieve teachers
of an unnecessarily heavy administrative burden in order to allow more time
for learning and teaching in the classroom.

This process of strengthening the implementation of the curriculum will
continue this year and we will take the necessary steps to ensure that all
our learners benefit from what is a sophisticated, high-skill and modern
curriculum statement.

We have also instituted a committee of curriculum experts to make
recommendations on the reduction of the number of learning areas in the
intermediate phase. It is envisaged that these recommendations will be
implemented in January 2011 and we invite the opposition to monitor our
performance in this regard.

We have taken the necessary steps to ensure that all Grade 3, 6 and 9
learners will write literacy and numeracy tests in 2010 that will be
independently moderated. Government is committed to improving the average
pass rate from the current 35% to 60% by 2014. Again we invite you to
monitor and evaluate our performance in this regard. These tests will be
internationally benchmarked and quality-assured.
Our 500 Dinaledi schools continue to demonstrate that our learners can
perform well above the national average with the necessary focus and
support.

I want you to listen very carefully to this: In three years we were able to
more than double the passes in mathematics, that is from 27 000 to more
than 63 000. In 2009, 52 779 learners passed Mathematics at 50% and above.
Out of this number, 12 213 – that is 23,7% of learners – came from Dinaledi
schools, which are located in rural and township areas that are
historically disadvantaged. They constitute only 9% of the 6 000 schools.

These interventions will provide every learner with a textbook and a
calculator. It will also ensure that we improve on the content knowledge of
the teachers, that there is additional tuition provided and that additional
learner support materials are provided to the learners.

We congratulate Mbilwi Secondary School in rural Limpopo, one of our
Dinaledi schools, which managed to obtain a 99% pass rate in both
mathematics and physical science in 2009. [Applause.] Mbilwi is interesting
because it is a rural school in a rural area and has produced more than 100
matric passes consistently over the past three years. The former Minister
of Education would in fact verify that; and they were the recipients of an
award.

The year before last, they had more than 45 distinctions in mathematics and
science and no fewer than 15 of the learners obtained 100% in mathematics
and science; so changes can be brought about if we make a change.

We shall develop a basic education plan that will form the basis of our
efforts in basic education to address the weaknesses in the education
system. This plan will seek to improve co-ordination in the system by
spelling out clearly the lines of accountability.

It will commit provinces and provincial education departments to clear,
agreed outcomes and will ensure that everyone in the system is accountable
for the attainment of these outcomes. It will be informed by the ANC’s ten-
point plan.

We also need to operationalise the National Education Evaluation and
Development Unit to ensure that we evaluate all parts of the system in
order to lay bare the constraints that are preventing the achievement of
quality in education. This includes teacher competence.

The visit by officials of the Department of Basic Education to the 27 000
schools must be understood in this context. This will form a diagnostic
analysis of the functionality of each school, from management to classroom
practice, resource provision, overcrowding, leadership and management,
discipline and infrastructure. The South African Schools Act directs each
principal to provide the head of department with a School Performance
Management Plan.

Education is the apex priority of this administration. We shall work co-
operatively with all our stakeholders, especially our teacher unions. We
certainly invite our public representatives to join us in the pledge that
the President has referred to.

The Department of Education is ready to openly and honestly tackle the many
challenges we continue to confront in education. We call on all South
Africans to join hands with us to ensure that our education system is
turned around.

Perhaps it is important for me to wish the 92 000 Grade 12 learners who are
writing their supplementary examinations the best of luck. I would like to
conclude with a quote from the speech of Mahatma Gandhi, another icon,
given that the President has alluded to the fact that we are celebrating
150 years of the arrival of Indians. He said the following:

  There will have to be rigid and iron discipline before we achieve anything
  great and enduring, and that discipline will not come by mere academic
  argument and appeal to reason and logic. Discipline is learnt in the
  school of adversity.


In conclusion, may we convey our sincere sympathy to the Ramorola and
Motshekga families on the untimely passing away of Jabulani. This explains
the absence of the hon Minister of Basic Education. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Business suspended at 12:59 and resumed at 14:01.

                              Afternoon Sitting

Ms F I CHOHAN: Good afternoon Mr Speaker and hon members. I wish to
dedicate my speech this afternoon to two fellow citizens, men, who in their
lifetime were denied the basic right to live to the fullest extent of their
God-given potential, Mr Sewsunker Sewgolum and Mr Hamilton Naki.

Mr Sewgolum was the son of an Indian indentured labourer and could not
attend school as a young man. He had a natural talent for the game of golf
and as a young man he worked as a caddie at the golf course near his
family’s home. Apartheid laws prevented him from demonstrating his talent,
and despite this, he won several golfing tournaments in “nonwhite”
competitions.
His talent was recognised by a white man he caddied for called Graham
Wulff. He was so impressed by this young man that he arranged to take him
to Europe where he won several prestigious national tournaments. He was a
three-times winner of the Dutch Open, a historic irony if ever there was
one. He was finally allowed in 1963 to play in the Natal Open where he beat
such luminaries as Gary Player and Harold Henning.

When he played in these tournaments, however, he was never allowed into the
club house. He famously had to accept his trophies outside in the rain.
Pictures of one such event were flighted in the world’s press and in
response the embarrassed apartheid government withdrew his passport and
banned him from playing in local tournaments, effectively preventing him
from earning a living. Mr Sewgolum died in an impoverished state in 1979 at
the relatively early age of 48.

The story of Mr Hamilton Naki is as follows. He was born in a small village
in the Eastern Cape in 1930. His family was poor and after completing
school up to Standard 6, he left for Cape Town and worked at the tender age
of 14 for the University of Cape Town, tending its gardens and tennis
courts.

One day Dr Robert Goetz asked him to step into his lab to hold a giraffe he
was operating on. Dr Goetz was at that stage trying to establish why
giraffes do not faint when they lower their heads to drink water. I don’t
know whether Dr Goetz came to any earth-shattering conclusions that day,
but Hamilton Naki did something to impress this doctor who had fled Nazi
Germany, and who, it was speculated, carried deep wounds about the evil
unleashed in his homeland.

Dr Goetz being a man used to looking beyond the surface of a man’s skin,
took Hamilton Naki under his wing and became a mentor to this young, 20-
something African man from the Eastern Cape. Over the years, he became
quite skilled in surgical techniques including anaesthesia and intubation,
amongst other things.

He later worked with the acclaimed professor, Christiaan Barnard, who at
the time was developing techniques to conduct open heart surgery. Professor
Barnard was later to say about Hamilton Naki that he was one of the
greatest researchers of all time in the field of heart transplants.

In 1967, 26-year-old Denise Darvall was fatally injured in a car accident.
Her death triggered an operation that made medical history. It was her
heart that Hamilton Naki is reported to have expertly removed and handed to
Professor Barnard who transplanted it into the chest of Louis Washkansy.

While the world flocked to see the man who had performed the world’s first
heart transplant, Hamilton Naki stayed in the shadows due to possible
reprisals from a racist government. In a sense, the Nakis and Sewgolums of
our abnormal past were the lucky ones. They were able to peep over the
precipice of the horizon of their destiny. And these Hamilton Nakis of our
past sustained the flicker of hope of generations who were told that they
were simply not good enough.

The higher education landscape of the early 1990s largely reflected the
discriminatory outcomes of the apartheid era. In 1990, African university
students comprised 32% of the population while white students topped 54%.
Female students were notably under-represented.

By 1996 there were twice as many African students as white students and
female students outnumbered their male counterparts. But despite these
successes, the participation of particularly African and coloured students
remained low and the reality is that there is a growing cohort of young
people between the ages of 16 years and 24 years who are unemployed and
unskilled. These facts suggest that we need to critically assess the
accessibility and flexibility of our post-schooling environment.

Accordingly, the Department of Education has been reconfigured to
establish, inter alia, a Department of Higher Education and Training, which
assumes the responsibility for government’s entire skills development
component, including private and public Further Education and Training, Fet
colleges, work-based training through Sector Education and Training
Authorities, Setas, and adult learning centres.
The overall strategy of this department accords with the human resources
development strategy led by the Deputy President, which seeks, inter alia,
to rectify the disjuncture between available skills and the needs of our
economy.

The Minister of Higher Education and Training is on record as saying that
one of his priorities is to provide a menu of opportunities to the class of
2009. The department he heads intends to pledge R500 million from the
National Skills Fund towards a special project to roll out learning
programmes this year, particularly aimed at young people who did not fare
well at school.

Those 225 000 learners, who in the most recent matric exams passed without
a university exemption, could register at universities of technology or at
one of the 50 colleges distributed across the country. Those for whom full-
time study is not an option and who wish to enter the work place instead,
are able to pursue opportunities in the Setas for learnerships,
apprenticeships and skills programmes.

Access for the poor has been enhanced by the introduction of the National
Students Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS. One hundred and fifty three thousand
students benefitted from NSFAS bursaries in the last year of reporting.

Over the last three years government has allocated a total of R600 million
to financially needy yet academically capable students for enrolment into
colleges. Seventy one thousand students are the beneficiaries of this
initiative. Access for disabled students, however, remains a big challenge
and more needs to be done at this level.

Our country is in need of diverse skills, but do we merely hope,
particularly in the sectors of scarce skills, that learners will
automatically gravitate to them? While government will continue in this
term to place emphasis on providing more access to post-schooling options
for young people, on the one hand, on the other hand a gap thus exists in
our social development and we must address it.

Apartheid has created inherently abnormal access prospects for young people
over successive generations, resulting in a paucity of role models within
many of our communities. In societies that developed free of the ravages of
apartheid and inequality there would be a host of role models inspiring
young people in all major fields of human endeavour, whether it be
academics, commerce, arts, sports, etc. Positive role models of the kind
that inspire young minds towards greater achievements and hard work are a
scarce commodity in many of our communities.

Accordingly, we require formal vocational training to be introduced in our
high schools; and this is an aspect that will require very close co-
operation between the two education departments. This should not be seen as
an insignificant matter in the larger scheme of things. Imagine, for a
moment, if Hamilton Naki did not meet Dr Goetz; imagine if Sewsunker
Sewgolum did not meet Graham Wulff, his benefactor, or indeed if a young
Nelson Mandela did not meet his mentors Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo.

We must ask ourselves what it means when we say that education is an apex
priority. For us, certainly on this side of the House, the answer must be
that we cannot have a single child fall between the cracks any longer. I
submit that we owe nothing less to the memory of the many thousands of
Hamilton Nakis who lived and died, not ever having had the opportunity to
realise their potential and who lie in our collective memories like rows of
white marble tombstones.

It is only when we have a system that prizes the worth of every single
child that we will finally have buried the legacy that was apartheid
education. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs H N NDUDE: Mr Speaker, the President and Deputy President, members of
the House, today we all wholeheartedly celebrate the 20th anniversary of
the freedom of Nelson Mandela. That is why we remember his reference to the
child Ingrid Jonker wrote about and who has been “present at all assemblies
and law giving”, peering “through the windows of houses into the hearts of
mothers”. What is the future of that child today?

Where the Mandela era gave hope to the people, this administration, under
President Zuma, is shattering the people’s hope. Where there was
international acclaim for us, there is now doom. Where international
investors were excited about South Africa, they are now worried about
whether or not the moral high ground is still there.

We are now in a morally compromised position. Where there was a clear and
decisive leadership, President Zuma is too distracted to provide any kind
of leadership, as is clearly evident to everyone.

In the Mandela period we were in a positive space; not anymore. The new ANC
has lost its moral compass. [Applause.] Today, anything goes. The high
moral standards of the Mandela and Mbeki period are no more. This is an
anything-goes regime.

Furthermore, it is now no longer the constitutional imperatives that
leaders answer to - that which they solemnly swore to advance. Cultural
imperatives can triumph over constitutional imperatives.

Mandela left an untarnished legacy. How will history judge this
administration with its moral lapses, its failure to deliver services, its
inability to discipline its host of members and officials charged with
corruption, its failure to cut back on unnecessary expenditure, its dismal
failure in pulling us out of the poverty trap? How will history judge
President Zuma who has no sense of respect for gender equality and gender
parity? [Applause.]

Mandela promised the following:

  Never, never, and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will
  again experience the oppression of one by another and suffer the
  indignity of being the skunk of the world.

He swore to reverse the pariah status of South Africa.

This administration is taking us right back to where we came from. Space
exists in the political sphere for every political leader to emulate
Mandela, and for every party to pursue his legacy.

Adv T M MASUTHA: On a point of order, Chairperson: Is it parliamentary for
the hon speaker at the podium to refer to our icon simply as “Mandela”?
Can’t she find a better way of addressing him?

Mrs H N NDUDE: May I please continue, Mr Speaker, because that is not a
point of order to me.

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon member.

Mrs H N NDUDE: The people, and the people alone, will judge who is adhering
faithfully to his teachings and moral stance. Many will be the claimants,
but only those who set themselves the highest moral and ethical standards
will take over that legacy. Everything else will be fakery.

There is another aspect of our constitutional imperative that must be given
high priority. We have to bolster our efforts to save our environment. At
Copenhagen, it was very difficult to reach a fair, binding, legal
agreement. At least, it was a start. Next year, this country will have the
privilege of hosting the 17th Conference of the Parties, COP 17. We dare
not let down future generations by failing to act. COP 17 must be the
turning point in our war against emissions of greenhouse gases.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members, order!

Mrs H N NDUDE: Trevor, please give me a chance. [Laughter.] Government’s
love affair with a ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, you must address a member as “hon member” and not
by his name.

Mrs H N NDUDE: Hon Minister, please give me a chance to speak. Government’s
love affair with coal-fired power stations is ...

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Tokolo): Speaker,
it’s not a point of order. I want to ask the hon member if she will take a
question.

Mrs H N NDUDE: Don’t waste my time, please.

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon member.

Mrs H N NDUDE: Government’s love affair with coal-fired power stations
because of financial gains that the ANC hopes to make is as short-sighted
as it is dangerous. If government will not provide the leadership, we, as
Cope, will encourage people to come together to fund a solar power station
like ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
fellow Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members of the House, ladies and
gentlemen, let me join all right-thinking South Africans in thanking the
President for his foresight in coupling the state of the nation address
with the celebrations of the 20 years of freedom of Nelson Mandela, and the
freedom of the whole country and the world at large.

The issue of the quality of health care services, specifically in the
public sector, is ever in the minds and on the lips of our people. It
appears quite frequently in our newspapers, just as it did this past
weekend. It is also echoed in the electronic media time and again.

We, as the ruling party, great as we are, are the first to publicly
acknowledge and speak about it openly, because prior to the election last
year, when we were preparing to govern, we were able to acknowledge this
issue and we identified it and that’s why we put it in our ten-point
programme.

Let me remind you of what the President said during the state of the nation
address last year:

  Fellow South Africans, we are seriously concerned about the deterioration
  of the quality of healthcare aggravated by the steady increase in the
  burden of disease in the past decade and a half.

Since then we have been dealing with this matter within the department. I
have personally addressed a series of meetings involving people in the
health sector. In those meetings this issue was thoroughly discussed.

I’ve addressed the doctors’ and nurses’ unions as well as other unions
within the health sector. I’ve addressed the CEOs of our hospitals,
including their clinical and nursing managers. I told them that as far as
the ten-point programme is concerned, the issue of the quality of
healthcare talks to them directly, more than to anybody else.

In those discussions we specifically dealt with issues such as the
cleanliness of our health facilities, safety and security of patients, the
attitude of staff towards patients, the long queues that our people are
forced to endure, availability of medicines, maintenance of infrastructure
and infection control. I advised CEOs that they are going to be judged and
evaluated on, amongst other things, these basic tenets of quality of care.

Many opponents of National Health Insurance, NHI, opportunistically cite
these problems of poor quality as a reason why NHI will not work and why it
should not see the light of day. I have personally reassured them time and
again that NHI is never going to be implemented in isolation away from the
other points in the ten-point programme.

The quality of the provision of health care services is definitely going to
be one of the criteria used before a health institution is accredited for
the purposes of NHI.

This is not going to be just a wish from the department. One of the pieces
of legislation that are going to be put before Parliament this year relates
to the establishment of the office of standards compliance, to insist on
agreed acceptable standards of quality of health care in each and every
health institution, whether public or private.

As a precursor to this office, a unit has already been formed within the
Department of Health and is working on the details of such standards.
However, we are not going to wait for the establishment of such an office
before we demand quality care in our institutions.

The assessment tool on how to audit compliance with standards will be
tested in all provinces, starting from 8 to 12 March this year. Thereafter,
all hospital and district managers will receive information on what is
expected of them in order to meet the standards. Failure to meet these
standards is not going to be without consequences.

In my budget speech last year, I elaborated on 11 different factors that
contribute to the deteriorating quality of health care. Among these factors
was the inability of individuals to take responsibility for their
commissions or omissions within the health care sector.

The office of standard compliance is going to be a legal way to impose such
responsibilities on any individual managing our health care. Hence one of
our most important activities this year is going to be the assessment of
capacity and functionality of management in each and every health
institution.

On 1 December last year, the President outlined our new battle plan against
the pandemic of HIV, Aids and TB. Let us remember that our icon, uBaba
uNelson Mandela, was also a victim of TB. [Interjections.]
The SPEAKER: Hon members, order!

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Let us remember that the National Strategic Plan on
HIV and Aids says that we must cut the rate of infection by 50% by 2011 and
make sure that the 80% of people that need to be on drugs are reached by
2011.

While the President clearly elaborated the four new treatment
interventions, he also emphasised the need to cut the rate of infection,
because the treatment of any disease starts with prevention. No amount of
treatment can successfully replace the time-honoured art of prevention of
disease. This is where the concept of primary health care emanated from,
and we shall never deviate from it.

The hon Meshoe has just asked what the President meant when he said that we
will implement all the undertakings made on World Aids Day relating to the
new HIV and Aids prevention and treatment measures. I wish to clarify this
for you, Reverend.

Immediately after 1 December last year, we formed a task team to work on
and perfect a plan to implement the new measures. The task team consists of
the following: the national Department of Health; and all the 19 sectors
that constitute the SA National Aids Council. And by the way, Reverend,
these 19 sectors include the religious sector.
The only missing sector amongst the 19 is political parties, but rest
assured, members, I’m going to engage you as political parties to be
gainfully employed in the fight against HIV and Aids, and there shall be no
period to idle. So even Cope might find something to do rather than
dreaming in broad daylight!


We also have intergovernmental agencies like the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, Unaids; The World Health Organization, WHO; and the
United Nations’ Population Development; as well as funders like the
President’s Emergency Plan for Aids Relief, Pepfar; the Department for
International Development, DFID; the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency, Sida; United States Agency for International
Development, Usaid; and a list of many others.



The teams have been working around the clock to deal with the readiness and
logistics, communication and social mobilisation of individual health
facilities. It is through this social mobilisation that I expect all
political parties to access gainful employment, for it is all South
Africans, regardless of party political affiliation, who are losing their
lives because of this merciless scourge. I’ll be communicating with members
within the coming weeks on your respective roles in this battle.

I wish to state in this House today that at least two weeks before 1 April
we shall publicly outline our state of readiness in clearer details with
respect to activities and locations, and where appropriate, even in regard
to numbers.

Furthermore, a treatment task team consisting of HIV and Aids specialists,
clinicians, researchers and practitioners has been hard at work since last
month drawing up our treatment protocols and guidelines in line with what
the President has announced.

Doctors, nurses and other health workers within our health institutions,
even in the primary health care institutions, will be workshopped in a
series of meetings. These meetings will be starting in the next ten days or
so and will be on how to apply the new measures; and work in this regard is
fast approaching completion.

I want this House to know that in our resolve to fight this pandemic, we’re
not prepared to pull any punches. We shall never give up the fight.

Let me also quote the President’s World Aids Day address, when he said:


  In another moment in our history, in another context, the liberation
  movement observed that the time comes in the life of any nation where
  there remain only two choices, to submit or to fight. That time has now
  come in our struggle to overcome Aids and let us declare now, as we
  declared then, that we shall not submit.

I am declaring again today, as the President declared on World Aids Day,
that we shall never submit – nomakanjani! [no matter what!]

I also wish to take this opportunity to inform the House about our state of
readiness to host the 2010 World Cup in so far as health is concerned. One
of our biggest nightmares is the fact that 2010 is going to be held in June
when there’s a possibility of another bout of H1N1. We all know what
happened to our country as well as the world regarding H1N1, and if many
people are going to gather in South Africa it is going to be a challenge to
us.

I am happy to announce that the department has been able to acquire 1,3
million doses of an H1N1 vaccine and we are going to be starting
vaccinations soon. It’s also my honour to announce that a day after the
President’s state of the nation address, we received a letter from the
World Health Organization telling us that they are going to donate 3,5
million doses of the H1N1 vaccine to South Africa, which will arrive in
this country by March.

This then means that we will have 4,8 million doses. We are going to be
vaccinating all the people who will be selected, starting with pregnant
women, people at the entry points, as well as people who are involved in
sports administration. We wish to inform hon members that when the time
comes, we would like your leadership to help to guide the nation. We are
aware that we’ve got 50 million people in South Africa, but we are only
going to have 4,8 million doses.

This donation from the World Health Organization has saved the country no
less than R250 million. We wish to take this opportunity to thank them as
they are working with us in the fight against HIV and Aids. They will also
work with us on this issue of H1N1, so that we have a very smooth and
successful World Cup. Thank you.

Mrs M N MATLADI: Hon Speaker, the UCDP joins the nation in celebrating the
commemoration of the release of former President Nelson Madiba Mandela on
11 February 1990. He remains a national and international hero who
sacrificed his freedom to bring change to our lives.

Kgosi Mangope, the leader of the UCDP, is one of the people who also called
for the release of this icon. It was a message that was received by the hon
former President Mandela himself and he thanked him for his input.

As we debate this state of the nation address for 2010, we are reminded of
what President Zuma said last year on 3 June. He said that between then and
December 2009, they planned to create about 500 000 job opportunities
through the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP. On Thursday last week
the hon President announced that by the end of December 2009, 480 000
Public Works job opportunities, which is 97% of the target set, were
created.

According to the bureau of the Labour department, nonfarm payroll dropped
sharply in early December. The payroll employment fell by another 524 000
in comparison to 533 000 in November. The number of unemployed persons
increased by 632 000 to 11,1 million. Furthermore, the number of the long-
term unemployed, that is 27 weeks or more, increased to 2,6 million in
December.

Statistics SA said unemployment fell to 24,3% in the third quarter with the
economy creating 89 000 new jobs during the final three months of last
year. Most of the jobs created - I want to reiterate that - were in the
informal sector and unskilled work.

This points to tough conditions existing in the formal industries. In other
words, we need to be concerned about the 2,6 million formal job employment
opportunities that South Africa still needs.
Poor service delivery has led to protests in some municipalities. The many
reasons for these protests include dissatisfaction with the delivery of
basic municipal services, such as running water, electricity and toilets,
especially in informal settlements; unemployment; high levels of poverty;
poor infrastructure and lack of houses; and corruption and nepotism.

The ousting of six mayors, Speaker, some members of mayoral committees and
MMCs in Rustenburg, Mafikeng, Mamusa, Moretele, Taung and Klerksdorp could
exacerbate the poor service delivery in the North West province. What could
the new appointees do in twelve months that the ousted ones couldn’t do in
four years of service?

These service delivery protests are symptoms of sociopolitical instability,
which could develop into a fully fledged revolt if allowed to continue over
a prolonged period. Speedy solutions to the socioeconomic conditions in
many communities are needed.

The official pass rate for the 2009 matric examinations was 60,7%; down
from 62,5% in 2008, and 65,2% in 2007. Out of all the provinces Mpumalanga
performed the worst with only 45,9% of matrics passing. According to the
department, 18 schools, half of them in Limpopo and four in KwaZulu-Natal,
had a 0% matric pass rate.

Major factors influencing the poor matric rate are: low morale of teachers,
poor quality teaching, ill discipline of teachers, inequitable distribution
of resources, poor parental support, rapid changes in school curricula,
mismanagement and lack of guidance in schools; and don’t forget the
inadequate pre-service and in-service training of teachers.

Your Excellency, you are reiterating the words of the National Commissioner
of Police when he boasted that, comparatively speaking, South Africa has
the largest police force in the world and that in the next three years you
will be increasing the force by 10%.

Hon President, what change will the large police force bring? Is it only
the visibility of the police in the streets? The present police force
cannot perform because they are either not well equipped with resources, or
are not properly trained to respond to the call of duty, or they are
irresponsible, using the lack of infrastructure and resources to do their
work as an excuse.

Police stations are poorly managed. The performance audit on 10111 and
other lines of communication revealed that police are often not available
for emergencies and sometimes turn up two to three hours later.

I would like to be a bit personal when coming to the matter. On Thursday
night during the time when the hon President was presenting the state of
the nation address my house in the North West was attacked. Attempts were
made to call 10111, three calls were made, none were answered and the
police only arrived four hours later. They found that the thugs had already
vanished. They had fled the scene.

We would like to say that these vehicles of the police should be at the
right place at the right time in order to rescue the people that are in
need of their services. I thank you.
Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Speaker, when a country’s citizens are crippled by the
fear of criminal attack, 36% of it violent, what it seeks is leadership of
the highest order. Firstly, empathy must be shown to those hundreds of
thousands of victims of crime; to the families of the 50 citizens murdered
every single day; to the 68 citizens raped every single day; and there must
be a clear indication that a cohesive direction has been determined,
followed by a national strategy to take us forward to a safer future.

Instead, this past Thursday references to this situation that haunts the
nation were made as asides, comprising less than 3% of the speech that is
supposed to detail and determine the state of the nation.

Now our citizens know that the criminal justice system is dysfunctional,
and what we looked for in the state of the nation address was a date for
the release of the long-promised review, but instead, we got nothing.

Police risk their lives to apprehend criminals, but our conviction rates
are sickeningly low – just 13% for murder last year. And then we have the
situation where innocent citizens languish for years in the most appalling
cells, as the courts grind glacially towards an outcome.

Our citizens need to be assured that, if they report crime, their calls
will be heard. Now the 10111 call centres – currently, rather like the
President’s hotline in that they are never answered – are a gigantic fraud
perpetrated to lull the citizens into believing that there is a way to call
for help.

What was needed on Thursday evening were mentions of policies, programmes
and initiatives at various levels of society, aimed at strengthening social
cohesion to motivate poorer and marginalised constituencies to feel that
they have a greater stake in our society, and an acknowledgement that there
is an underreporting of violent crime.

We needed rock-solid condemnation of violence against women and children.
We needed to hear that the importance of acting in accordance with
standards of respect and civility was a high priority in South Africa.

Where was the condemnation of the plethora of public officials who conduct
themselves without a shred of integrity, giving rise to the belief that
corruption has become the norm in this country?

Indeed, we cannot go on year after year hearing of criminality within the
SAPS. It’s bad enough that South Africa is known as both an importer and an
exporter of illegal drugs, but what happened to the 75 bags of 1 000
mandrax tablets apiece seized from druglords and stored at the Nelspruit
Police Station, which simply disappeared after a R1 million reward was
offered by those criminals for their recovery? Are there police officers
behind bars for their complicity? Not even one! This would have been a
perfect job for the Scorpions, but of course, the ANC shut them down.

Where are the specialised units we were told would be reinstated? Not a
word has been breathed. Instead we have a SAPS with a reputation for
shuffling the deck chairs on the Titanic: When criminality within is
revealed, the criminals are simply transferred to another station.

Indeed, the SAPS now only complies with 10% of the Independent Complaints
Directorate recommendations. The rest of the cases - which relate to proven
criminality, from murder to rape to armed robbery; grievous bodily harm;
assault and, of course, beating ill pensioners to death in the cells;
allegedly raping a woman in Knysna; running three students off the road and
robbing them at gunpoint in King Williams Town; and the list goes on and on
- they ignore.

What was needed here was the gravest condemnation of this situation.
Suspended members must be removed, tried, and, if guilty, jailed - not
transferred. We had hoped to hear that we would develop a police service we
could look up to and respect, that would serve us as it should and keep us
safe.
Where was the assurance that the SAPS’ top structure would cease
misinforming the Portfolio Committee on Police that there are no longer any
equipment shortages, when SAPS members inundate us during station visits,
jointly and singly, with tales of how they have shortages of virtually
everything?

Through you, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask that the National Police
Commissioner, Bheki Cele, be reminded that he is no longer a politician but
an employee. One, in fact, wonders if he is actually capable of making that
transition. He is not a much-medaled general in some tinpot dictatorship;
he is the National Police Commissioner and he has no right to come before
the Portfolio Committee on Police in his tackies and tracksuit to lambaste
us as if we were an illegitimate structure.

Mr Speaker, it is time to tell the National Police Commissioner that
Parliament will do the work it is mandated to do. His rolling mass media
campaign has been most interesting to observe, but he’ll only get away with
claiming unsubstantiated successes for just so long. If the proposed
performance management targets are to be relevant, and the SAPS does not
reach the 7% to 10% crime reduction target yet again, the SAPS management
must then be removed.

As the usual, unqualified ANC cadre deployed to do a job a career police
person should do, Commissioner Cele is clearly out of his depth, and
strikes out, for example, at criticism of the R50 million party in
Bloemfontein, where even the food ran out!

Mr Speaker, I know that under his political leadership in KwaZulu-Natal,
the police killed more suspects and citizens than in any other province,
but, really, it is time to instruct the National Police Commissioner not to
shoot and kill the messenger. [Applause.]

Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Speaker, hon President Zuma, Deputy President Motlanthe,
hon members, I am tempted to say, “Compliments of the new season!” However,
a year that is over 60 days old has no legitimate right to call itself new.
It is enough to say, “Compliments of the new week, Comrade President!”

The President’s state of the nation address had a few rays of hope. The PAC
welcomes his promise that in the next three years an additional two million
children from poor households aged 15 to 18 years will benefit from the
child support grant.
We are heartened by the President’s declaration that the economy is now
creating jobs rather than shedding them. It is equally encouraging to note
that over the next three years government will spend R846 billion on public
infrastructure.

Comrade President, the PAC has detected a deafening silence in your speech
on the role played by its leaders and members in the struggle for change.
Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe, the PAC founding president, died in the month of
February, 32 years ago, and yet not once was the name of a man with a
divine mission mentioned in your speech. We know who said Sobukwe was a man
with a divine mission. These were the words of former South African Prime
Minister, John Balthazar Voster!

This conspiracy of silence deeply worries us. It worries us more as we
prepare for the 50th anniversary of the Sharpeville and Langa massacres to
be held next month. I want to state, in no uncertain terms, that the
marches against the pass laws in Cape Town, Vereeniging, Johannesburg and
elsewhere in the country, were not spontaneous. They were planned,
organised and led by the PAC.

No one can honestly remember Sharpeville and Langa without acknowledging
the role played by Sobukwe and his followers. It is regrettable that in the
new South Africa there is insufficient recognition of non-ANC contributors
to the liberation struggle. It is sad that, over 15 years into our
democracy, we still have Zwelithini Mhlongo, Ashley Jexe and other freedom
fighters languishing in our prisons. This is unacceptable at best, and
reactionary at worst.

We are of the view that sustained rural development entails two fundamental
things, namely the redistribution of land in such a way that it mirrors the
demographics. Without land redistribution, all talk of rural development
amounts to empty political posturing.
Secondly, magoši, amakhosi cannot afford to be mere spectators in the
affairs that impact on their people and land. They must be an integral
part, if not the pioneers, of rural development.

Comrade President, your declaration of war against corruption would be most
convincing if it were accompanied by a termination of the ruling party’s
corrupt policy of cadre deployment in the organs of state, irrespective of
their know-how. This counterproductive policy compromises the effective
management of the SABC, Eskom, SAA and other parastatals. We can’t have a
political party membership card being used to bolster an individual’s
curriculum vitae.

Ge ke ruma polelo ke nyaka go laetša gore motheo wa thuto ya rena o a
fokola. [In conclusion, I would like to indicate that the basic foundation
of the education system is weak.]

The foundation of our education is weak because it promotes one colonial
language at the expense of other languages, especially the indigenous
African languages.

Mongwadi wa maemo wa Mo-Afrika, Ngugi wa Thiong’o, o re leleme la motho le
mo thuša go kwešiša segagabo. Go a swabiša gore ka nako ye ya pušo ya batho-
ka-batho dipolelo tša se-Afrika di a nyamalala. Pušong ya kgatelelo ya
maabane re bone go tšwelela dinatla tša bangwadi go swana le Thomas Mofolo,
A C Jordan, E S Madima, O K Matsepe le ba bangwe. Ba ka moka ba be ba
ngwala ka segagabobona. Bjale mmušo wa rena okare o re sehlare sa Mosotho
ke polelo ya Seisemane. Ka fase ga mmušo wo wa lehono batho ba dikadika go
bolela segagabobona [Tšhwahlelo.] Ke a leboga. [Nako e fedile.]
(Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[The most prestigious African writer Ngugi wa Thiong’o argues that a
person’s language enables one to understand his culture. It is
disappointing that now, during the government of the people by the people,
African languages are facing extinction. In the apartheid era there emerged
prominent writers such as Thomas Mofolo, A C Jordan, E S Madima, O K
Matsepe and many others. All of them were writing in their home languages.
It seems as if our government is declaring that the best remedy for an
African is the English language. Under the leadership of this present
government people are still hesitant to use their home languages. Thank
you. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

UMPHATHISWA WESEBE LEMICIMBI YAMANZI NOKUSINGQONGILEYO: Mandibulelele
Somlomo, ndibulele kuMongameli welizwe, kuSekela Mongameli nakumalungu
ahloniphekileyo. Okokuqala, ndicinga ukuba le Ndlu ifanele ukuhambisana nam
xa ndibulela uMongameli ngokusikhokela kwakhe eCopenhagen. Manditsho
kwilungu elibekekileyo uNdude ukuba asinakho ukulinda isiganeko ukuze
sikhokele. Sesiqalile ukukhokela kwaye siyaqhubeka. Ingqungquthela ebizwa
ngokuba yi-COP 17, Conference of Parties 17, iza kwenzeka kwaye iza kuba
yimpumelelo ngokukhokelwa nguMongameli uJacob Zuma.
Okwesibini, ndifuna ukuyiphinda le ndawo yamalahle. Amalahle asizi
kuwalahla, ngoba alikho nelinye ilizwe eliwalahlileyo amalahle.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS: Let me thank the Speaker,
the hon President, the hon Deputy President and hon members. Firstly, I
think this House must agree with me when I thank the President for leading
us in Copenhagen. Let me say to hon Ndude that we cannot wait for an event
to happen in order for us to lead. We have already started to lead and we
are continuing. The conference called COP 17, Conference of Parties 17,
will take place and it will be a success through the leadership of
President Jacob Zuma.

Secondly, I want to reiterate the issue of coal. We are not going to
abandon coal, for there is not a single country that has abandoned coal.]

We are going to reduce our dependence on coal, but we are not going to
abandon coal. The UK uses 40% coal in generating electricity; the United
States of America uses 50% coal in generating electricity; and Poland uses
80% coal.

Asizi kuwalahla, koko siza kuwanciphisa. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Mongameli, ndiyabulela ngeli thuba undinike lona ukuze nam ndenze igalelo
malunga nokukhululwa kwexhego lethu uTat’ uMandela. Ndiyayibulela loo mbeko
endiyinikwe liqela lam i-ANC yokuba nam ndithethe, ndiphose igade ekuthini
nangomso, Madiba. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We are not going to abandon it, but we will reduce our dependence on it.
[Applause.]

Hon President, thank you for the opportunity that you have given me so that
I can contribute with regard to the release of our old man, Mr Mandela. I
am grateful for the honour bestowed upon me by my party, the ANC, to also
speak and contribute by saying thank you to Madiba.]

As we march further in our long journey to freedom, inspired by former
President Mandela’s courageous and exemplary leadership, we are mindful
that the struggle for a better life is not over and that the conditions of
the struggle confronting us have since changed.

Indeed, the global balance of forces has changed. Climate change is
arguably the biggest challenge facing humanity in the 21st century and that
may undermine the realisation of the Millennium Development Goals. It poses
a serious threat to humanity and life on earth, because, as we know, it is
fuelled by the global carbon-intensive economy.
Over and above the natural cycles of climate, science tells us that the 150
years of historic industrialisation of the developed countries led to an
additional burden on the climate system - a burden that does not exempt the
developing world, but makes it more vulnerable to the vagaries of climate
change.

Actions to address climate change and sustainable development paths are
linked. South Africa takes a green economic growth strategic approach that
supports developing countries to identify actions that allow for
sustainable development and climate mitigation co-benefits.

In the context of a strong emphasis on mitigation actions, it is essential
for adaptation to be given at least the same priority as mitigation.
Adaptation to climate change is a concern for the most vulnerable who
happen to be the least able to deal with climate change, and also the least
culpable for the current climate change situation.

As we all know, the nations of the world met in December 2009 in
Copenhagen, Denmark, to finalise two years of negotiations aimed at
strengthening the international climate regime beyond 2012. Specifically,
our aim was to reach an international agreement that would prioritise both
mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions and the adaptation to climate change
impacts equally, and to balance both climate and development imperatives.
In this regard, it would equitably share the limited remaining carbon
space.

Ukuba ke siyawuyeka loo mnyinyiva wokusetyenziswa kwekhabhoni ... [If we
neglect that chance of carbon usage ...]

... if we drop coal, then we would be diminishing that space available for
developing countries to get a fair chance to develop on the basis of the
convention principles of equity and common but differentiated
responsibilities.

We can’t be extreme; we can’t be taking an extreme view of environmental
conservation at the expense of development. The Constitution is quite clear
that balancing development and environmental management is what we need to
be focusing on. This debate on climate change is about that.

In Copenhagen, the international community was unable to reach a legally
binding agreement on a future international climate change regime.
Formally, the conclusion reached in Copenhagen was to continue negotiations
this year, 2010, on the basis of the work of the past two years under the
Kyoto Protocol and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, UNFCCC.

However, with the active participation and leadership of hon President
Jacob Zuma, together with the leaders of 28 other countries, a political
agreement was reached. This agreement is known as the Copenhagen Accord and
it captures political agreement on some of the major and difficult issues
that have divided the international community since negotiations began two
years ago.

The particularly difficult questions addressed in this agreement relate to
the following: How to share and reflect responsibility, commitment and
action among developed and developing countries; how to verify and ensure
compliance with respective commitments; and linked to this, the question of
who pays.

South Africa is proud of the leadership role it played as part of the BASIC
group of countries – Brazil, China, South Africa and India - to ensure that
some progress was reached in Copenhagen. The Copenhagen Accord,
notwithstanding its deficiencies, outlines political agreement among
leaders on many of the major issues.

In particular, these political agreements were related to the following
issues that also present opportunities: how to record economy-wide binding
emission reduction targets for developed countries, including the United
States of America; and to simultaneously, for the first time, create a
mechanism to record the emission reduction actions at international level
by developing countries such as China, India, Brazil, South Africa,
Indonesia, Mexico, South Korea, as well as some small countries such as the
Philippines and the Maldives. At the meeting, all of these countries
submitted their commitment to act.

A third issue is how, internationally, to measure, report and verify this
action that will be supported and transparently financed by a commitment
from developed countries of US$10 billion per annum up to 2012, reaching
US$100 billion per annum by 2020.

Then there is also the question of creating a technology development and
transfer mechanism.

The hon President, in his state of the nation address, reaffirmed the
commitment of this administration to the global and national effort. South
Africa committed to potential mitigation actions leading to a 34% reduction
in greenhouse gas emissions relative to business as usual, by 2020 and 42%
by 2025. This commitment is neither additional nor extraneous to our
internationally reviewed study on the country’s mitigation potential,
namely the Long-Term Mitigation Scenarios, LTMS.

I am emphatic on this point - to allay the fears of business - this is not
an extra burden on business and the investors must please understand it in
this context. The commitment that we made is actually conditional to a
legally binding international regime and support with regard to the means
of implementation.

The extent to which this action will be implemented depends on the
provision of financial resources, the transfer of technology and capacity-
building support by developed countries. Therefore, the above action
requires the finalisation of an ambitious, fair, effective and binding
multilateral agreement under the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol at COP 15
and CMP 6 in Mexico, to enable the delivery of this support.

With financial, technology and capacity-building support from the
international community, this level of effort will enable South Africa’s
greenhouse gas emissions to deviate from business as usual, as per our
commitment.

We must note that in order to achieve this, we are already taking action in
line with our development priorities. The Department of Environmental
Affairs is currently in the process of developing a national climate change
response policy. This policy informs and in turn is informed by processes
undertaken by other government departments, such as the National Treasury,
on financial instruments to put a levy on carbon; and the Department of
Energy’s energy mix policy reflected in the Integrated Resource Plan, IRP.

The Department of Transport is investing in transport infrastructure
through programmes such as the Bus Rapid Transit, BRT, Gautrain and rail
infrastructure. The Department of Science and Technology and the Department
of Trade and Industry have made progress in the commercialisation of the
electric vehicle.

Having mentioned these initiatives, it is important to note that at the
centre of the climate debate is how the remaining carbon space is shared in
the world. International principles of engagement on climate change
recognise the potential rise in emissions for developing countries in the
short to medium term. As such, our study into the country’s mitigation
potential as well as recent publications by the Minister of Energy on the
IRP, do take into account the current coal-fired power stations.

There is no need to panic. We have included Medupe. It is part of the long-
term mitigation scenarios. Therefore, when we committed 34% and 42%, we
included Medupe.

Furthermore, to demonstrate this commitment, from the application of
expanding our power generation base, we have included the development of a
100 megawatt concentrated solar power plant, hon Ndude, rolling out solar
water heaters to a million households and supporting wind power generation
projects. [Applause.]

We are also undertaking a policy development process that seeks to achieve
the objectives of green growth, which will be informed by the LTMS study to
guide the actions we need to take to follow a low-carbon development path.
As a focal point on climate change, our department is already engaged with
sector departments in developing climate change sector plans. The problem
is that we are looking at government departments with a myopic view.

We operate as a unit, and we look at an integrated approach. So my
programme speaks to the programme of energy; it speaks to the programme of
science and technology; it speaks to all of these programmes, because
climate change cuts across them all.

Therefore, if you are myopic in looking at this, then you will see
shortcomings that are not even there. Those shortcomings will be a figment
of your imagination, but the truth of the matter is that we are looking at
an integrated approach. That is what we are implementing.

South Africa is a diverse country with regard to culture, religion and
languages. The public at large is crucial in addressing the challenge of
climate change. It is, therefore, important that we demystify climate
change into a common language that is understood by all.

It must be a language that simplifies scientific and business jargon and
traverses language barriers so that every individual South African and
institution in society understands the significance of climate change and
their respective roles in responding to it.
This is a matter for all sectors of society and not for certain sectors of
society. Whether you are educated or not - like my mother - you must
understand what it is all about.

The government of South Africa and all sectors of our society agreed to
pursue the required science scenario of the LTMS study in a bid to curb
greenhouse gas emissions. It is also important to stress the need for
adaptation since the world is committed to a certain level of climate
change that will require new coping mechanisms. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr L L BOSMAN: Mr Speaker, hon members of the House, I noticed with
interest when the hon President, in his state of the nation address,
referred to the government’s rural development programme, which, in his
view, will improve rural productivity and consequently also the lives of
people living in rural areas.

The fact of the matter is, however, that the transformation programmes,
including land reform and black economic empowerment programmes, are
failing dismally. Billions of rands of taxpayers’ money are being wasted in
this process.

My ervaring is dat die Suid-Afrikaanse regering hom die afgelope paar jaar
tot so ‘n mate met die uitdaging van transformasie besig gehou het dat hy
sy greep verloor het op dit wat nodig is om kommersiële boere in staat te
stel om mededingend en volhoubaar in ’n globale markomgewing te produseer.

Dit was met teleurstelling dat landbou weereens nie deur u as van besondere
belang vir die land se ekonomiese groei en stabiliteit uitgesonder is nie.
Die belangrikheid van die landbousektor as verskaffer van voedsel, asook as
’n werkgewer en verdiener van buitelandse valuta, word steeds nie deur die
ANC as sulks erken nie. Die gesegde lui dat enige land wat sy landbou
verwaarloos uiteindelik tot mislukking gedoem is.

Die huidige omstandighede veroorsaak alreeds dat boere en landboubesighede
in ander lande in Afrika na beleggings- en ontwikkelingsgeleenthede gaan
soek. Landboubeleid en faktore soos venynige uitsprake deur politici wat
vertroue skaad, dien as verdere stimulus vir die migrasie van Suid-
Afrikaanse burgers na ander lande in Afrika.

Dit bekommer my voorwaar dat sodanige vertroue in die land verlore moes
gaan vir boere om in ongunstige omstandighede in Afrika hulle heil te gaan
soek. Die DA sal alles in sy vermoë doen om produsente in Suid–Afrika te
hou tot voordeel van al ons mense. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[My experience has been that the South African government has been so
engaged, in the past few years, with the challenge of transformation that
it has lost its grip on those issues that would have enabled commercial
farmers to produce products competitively and in a sustainable manner in a
global market environment.

It was disappointing to note that you have once again not singled out
agriculture as being of particular importance to the country’s economic
growth and stability. The importance of the agricultural sector as a
producer of food, and as an employer and earner of foreign currency, is
still not being recognised by the ANC. There is a saying that any country
that neglects its agriculture is doomed to fail.

The current circumstances are already causing farmers and agricultural
businesses to seek investment and development opportunities in other
African countries. Agricultural policy and factors like vindictive
pronouncements by politicians which damage confidence, are giving further
motivation for South African citizens to migrate to other African
countries.

It really concerns me that such confidence in this country has been lost to
such an extent that farmers are seeking their salvation in unfavourable
conditions in Africa. The DA will do everything in its power to retain
producers in South Africa for the benefit of all our people.]

Mr President, the DA supports a united, profitable, sustainable and
thriving agricultural sector in South Africa. We believe that this is
critical for food security and job creation. As a result of government’s
confrontational stance to commercial agriculture, we have seen a huge
disinvestment in the sector.

The threats to do away with the willing-buyer, willing-seller principle and
to again review the Expropriation Bill, certainly also contribute to the
decline in investor confidence. We cannot afford to keep repeating these
mistakes.

The challenges that we now face to restore confidence and improve
production are the following: We must have a clear policy framework to
instil confidence and enhance investment in the sector. This will include
that all land redistribution under our land reform programmes will be
carried out at market-related prices and that there is an adoption of the
willing-seller principle to establish the market value of land purchased by
government.

We must overhaul our land reform programmes by ensuring that the new land
beneficiaries have adequate postsettlement support and financial support.

We need to identify people with an interest in farming and have proper
partnership agreements with former landowners for a period of at least five
years, to ensure a smooth and productive transfer.
New farm owners should have freehold title ownership to unlock the economic
potential of their assets. To minimise the cost of land to government, the
land can be bought at market value and sold back to beneficiaries at
productive value, with the Land Bank to carry the loans at reduced interest
rates.

Another crucial and critical issue, which has a vast impact on agriculture,
is the effect of natural disasters and climate change. The implementation
of a disaster risk management system with adequate funding is now long
overdue. We simply cannot carry on with ad hoc schemes, with aid reaching
farmers years after it is needed. Current examples of droughts, floods, and
fire damage like that in the Eastern Cape can be quoted.

More resources need to be allocated to infrastructure development, such as
roads, rail and communication, in order for our products to reach our
markets timeously. Roads in rural areas are virtually nonexistent, and, in
many cases, farmers maintain gravel roads themselves. The maintenance
service can be outsourced, in my opinion.

Last, but certainly not least, the high crime rate in rural areas should be
addressed as a matter of urgency. Farmers and their workers remain soft
targets, and murders are again escalating alarmingly.

The Minister of Police’s call for a gun-free country is far removed from
the reality. Guns are smuggled and are freely available on the black market
to potential criminals. The solution to protecting rural communities should
rather be found in armed guards on each and every farm to protect innocent
people from being brutally murdered.

In closing, the DA assures the President that we will work relentlessly to
ensure the successful implementation of rural development and food
production at affordable prices for all our people. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms C M P KOTSI: Mr Speaker, hon members, the state of the nation address
for the momentous year 2010, a year in which we celebrated the release of
the founding father of the democratic South Africa, simply did not meet the
occasion. It is a year in which we felt proud as Nelson Mandela,
representing the hopes of the generations that sacrificed for our future,
sat in the gallery.

This is a year in which we, through the Fifa World Cup, stand poised to
show three quarters of the universe that we too are a nation among nations.


In a year when we have to show that we are ready to face the challenges
presented by an economy suffering from recession, we have tragically
witnessed a lack of vision on a great scale. This manifested itself in the
following ways.
Firstly, we had no road map out of recession. Due to the effect of the
recession on the great majority of South Africans, the President was
obliged to focus his state of the nation address on this reality. We
believe that this is due to the fact that the President still has not
decided who of his Ministers is entrusted with this great task.

The issue of the creation of job opportunities is an admission of the ANC’s
failure to create sustainable, decent jobs. As for the promise of 500 000
job opportunities by December 2009, the President must tell the nation
about the duration of these jobs. This is because we know that Public Works
job programmes last for a few months. In fact, they last for a maximum of
merely three months. This begs the question as to whether we are serious
about growth, development and job creation.

Secondly, with regard to the much-talked about rural economic development,
why is it that the huge necessity to stamp out urban migration, remove some
people from social security systems and create an economy for many
unskilled people in the rural areas received little attention during the
state of the nation address last Thursday?

Due to its importance to the great majority of the poor, the President
cannot wait for a detailed ministerial briefing on this. It requires the
President to provide a road map for the country and for the people trapped
in poverty in rural areas.

Thirdly, the great innovation of Polokwane, the National Planning
Commission, is stillborn. This is simply because the powerful yet unelected
leaders linked to the ruling party of this country are deterring the
Minister in charge of planning. The President has allowed them to prevail.

That idea - the institution and its life - should not wait for the
ministerial briefing. It is a key message to South Africa and the world’s
investor capitals. It ought to be in the presidential state of the nation
address. Yet, again, no road map.

We were treated to the spectacle of wilful neglect of duty, reckless
stewardship of the nation and, frankly, no leadership. The second stage of
our development as a nation, which is our economic development, is an
unconvincing vision and is in limp hands. This opportunity, to inspire
South African people and investors with our economic potential, was lost
and lost miserably.

Cope welcomes the establishment of the interministerial committee on energy
that will, inter alia, look at the participation of independent power
producers. Clearly this is an invitation to investors to ensure that we
will continue to enjoy the availability of energy.
What worries us is the fact that the ANC is to start nationalisation. Can
the President assure potential investors that the energy sector – their
investment – will not be nationalised once nationalisation is enforced?

Mopresidente, o buile hanyenyane kappa ha wa bua ka basadi. Ekaba sena se
bolelang ho rona basadi? Tokolloho ya basadi e matsohong a rona. Owele hle,
re kopa tlhompho haholo ho wena ntate, jwaloka hlooho ya rona. Ngwana wa ka
ke ngwana wa hao, ha e se ke ya ba mosadi ho wena. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.]
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Mr President, you said very little or nothing at all about women. What
does this say to us women? Women’s freedom is in our hands. Please sir, we
ask for respect especially from you, sir, because you are our leader. My
child is your child, she should not be your wife. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, hon President and Deputy
President, colleagues in the House ...

... a le nna ke simolole ka go dumedisa, ke amogele motsotsonyana o wa go
bua mo Ntlong e. [... I will start off with a greeting. I am thankful for
the opportunity to speak in this House].

If there are those who harbour doubts about the sustainability of the
legacy bequeathed to us by former President Nelson Mandela, if there are
those who are still doubtful about the commitment made by hon President
Jacob Zuma to a new direction, if there is anyone who still harbours any
doubts about President Zuma’s pledge for a year of action and a focus on
outcomes by government, then the only limit to their realisation of
tomorrow will be their doubts of today.

Hon members, never before have we felt more assured of the sustainability
of our freedom and democracy since Tata Mandela took those first steps to
freedom on 11 February 1990. Tata Mandela’s cherished dream ushered in a
new dispensation that gave way to civil rights.

Tata Mandela’s leadership ushered in a dispensation of a recognition of our
political rights. It laid the foundation for the advancement of our social
rights; and hon President Zuma has outlined the path towards the fulfilment
of those social rights embodied in government’s comprehensive social
security system, of which social solidarity is a foundation.

Over the past 15 years, the ANC government, working with NGOs, faith-based
organisations, organised labour, business, and many committed South
Africans, has implemented a range of policies that have gradually taken our
country out of the untenable situation to which our people were subjected
during the apartheid era.
These policies are inspired by and seek to realise the vision of a society
that is both inclusive and attentive to the rights and the needs of the
most vulnerable in our society. The thrust of this inclusiveness has been
the building of a comprehensive social security system. Our envisaged
comprehensive social security system has three pillars: social assistance,
social insurance and voluntary savings.

Our social assistance programme, which actually stands at around 3,5% of
GDP, complemented by free basic services, is the envy of many the world
over. We provide income support to over 13 million vulnerable people and
ensure access to water - free water, I may add – electricity, sanitation,
education, health care and subsidised housing.

A new dawn is being ushered in as the President has now put us on a new
trajectory - a historic step towards bringing about a comprehensive social
security system through the extension of the child support grant to
children up to their 18th birthday.

Lest we forget, the extension of the child support grant was a resolution
taken at the ANC conference in Polokwane. It was a promise that we made in
our election manifesto. It is in the Medium-Term Strategic Framework, MTSF,
and it is a promise to South Africans, a promise that we have met.

The extension of the child support grant is also historic. While many
countries introduced family support during the 1940s, black South Africans
here in this country were excluded from those rights because we were deemed
unworthy of such investments by our society. We need to applaud the
President and his government for being bold in continuing to dismantle
discriminatory practices of the past, and to invest in the wellbeing and
future of our children.

This policy initiative paves the way for an additional 2 million vulnerable
children to access income support. Our social security programme will now
be amongst the most comprehensive programmes as compared to most countries
in Africa, Latin America and also East Asia.

Allow me to talk about the second pillar of this comprehensive social
security, before providing more details on the impact of the social grants
and other services.

While social assistance aims to alleviate poverty, the goal of social
insurance is to prevent poverty. The comprehensiveness of our social
security system is compromised by the limited contributions to social
insurance funds by those in fulltime employment. Except for the good
coverage in unemployment insurance and compensation for work injuries,
there are still extensive gaps in our second pillar of the comprehensive
social security system.

The consequence is that many employed people fall into poverty and put a
demand on the social assistance system as a result. Contributory social
insurance will require the participation of all working South Africans so
that we can pool our savings and engender support amongst workers in the
event that their employment is interrupted by disability, death, old age,
poor heath, and so on.

To build on our growing commitment to social solidarity so ably
demonstrated through the cash transfer system, it will be under the
leadership of this President, President Jacob Zuma. We will finalise work
in respect of comprehensive social insurance. This work will involve
setting up a mandatory system of social insurance to cover all South
Africans for pension, disability and survivor benefits,  health insurance,
and the reform of the Road Accident Fund.

In addition, we will reform the social security institutional arrangements,
and also integrate and consolidate the administration of social security
benefits.

Pillar three of the social security system involves voluntary contributions
to retirement and health care. We can, today, assure those who save in
these voluntary schemes. Our financial systems here in South Africa and the
regulatory arrangements have been given the thumbs up by international
financial institutions. In fact, we are rated number six globally for world-
class regulation of our financial sector. [Applause.]
Hon Speaker and members, these three aspects constitute comprehensive
social security and the envisaged reforms through which President Zuma will
lead this country during his tenure. The strategic stance adopted by
government is premised on the understanding that our services and
strategies need to speak to the needs of our people.

The President has, in a short space of time - a few months indeed - already
engaged so many of our people and has, more than anyone else, assessed the
needs of our people as they experience them on a day-to-day basis.

The visionary steps in the state of the nation address outlined the broad
range of critical interventions that are needed in education, health care,
rural development, security and many other areas. These interventions will
work together to break the cycle of intergenerational poverty.

Colleagues, employment and the growth of our economy remain fundamental in
empowering our people and are the bases for a sustained antipoverty
framework.

To complement social grants for the poor, and in partnership with the rest
of government as well as civil society and business, we will implement all
measures and policies announced by the President. These measures will, over
time, yield an economic environment conducive to the employment of greater
numbers of people.

In this area, Social Development’s discreet contribution from a strategic
perspective is our Early Childhood Development Programme, ECDP, and the
Community Development Programme, CDP. By investing in the children’s
formative years, we are laying a foundation for generations of our South
Africans to be well educated and have the necessary skills base to
transform the South African economy.

Guided by the strategic themes that seek to crowd social, human and
financial investment into the improved wellbeing of South Africa’s
children, as well as older persons and other vulnerable groups, we have
introduced a number of policies and strategies to guide our work as
government. This includes the introduction of Children’s and the Older
Persons Acts.

More children are participating in early childhood development centres than
ever before. Large numbers of care workers are providing home-based care to
mitigate the impact of HIV/Aids. In response to the enormous challenges of
substance abuse such as drugs, alcohol and other substances, we will join
forces and integrate the work that we do in prevention and rehabilitation
with the work that is being done by departments in the cluster of justice
and security.

We do believe that none of us will succeed in building our nation if the
country continues to experience an increase in substance abuse. Is there
anyone who doubts the effectiveness of our broad social security system?
“How long halt ye between two opinions?” So asks the Bible.

By extending the child support grant, the President has placed the focus on
outputs and outcomes. Through these measures, we have no doubt that during
the term of this administration, we will also stimulate participation in
the economy and improve human welfare, as the grants will lower the number
of people going hungry and help them to meet needs like transport,
schooling and clothing.

We will also assist more people to invest in the future, increase school
enrolment and upgrade housing assets. We will also enable more to engage in
labour-seeking behaviour, as local and international research suggests that
adults in households receiving cash transfers are more likely to actively
seek employment than those in household that are excluded from this cash
transfer system.

We will also support more people in saving and engaging with financial
markets, and also make it possible for more beneficiaries to save instead
of borrowing, and for others to set up their micro enterprises. More
importantly, we will continue with our work to improve the integrity of our
social security administration.

We also participate in the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Anti-Corruption.
This committee has met twice already. This Friday it held a meeting, as
opposed to what we hear: that this committee has not met. I don’t know
where we get this information.

In our environment, we will continue to work with the Special Investigating
Unit, SIU, to get rid of all those who are fraudulently on the system. In
his state of the nation address, the President mentioned that we have
removed irregular recipients and, therefore, yielded savings as a result of
these actions.
All those who signed acknowledgements of debt because they were on the
system irregularly are paying moneys back to the state. Those who wilfully
defrauded the state are being disciplined and will continue to be
disciplined.

Is there anyone who still doubts that the measures outlined by the
President will deepen the impact on creating a caring society based on the
principle of social solidarity? [Interjections.]

You have the answer. If you are a Doubting Thomas, I have told you who you
are. Solidarity-based policies and strategies have essentially built up
much of the developed world’s economy and social infrastructure, especially
after the two World Wars that crippled those continents.

Likewise, South Africa needs all its citizens and residents to develop and
implement solutions that will benefit all South Africans more than ever
before, in view of our past that largely determined the life chances of
individuals and communities. We often talk about the lack of social
cohesion in our society. We also reminisce about ubuntu. What we need to do
as a society is to bring back the spirit of caring and the values of
sharing and reciprocity.

In this regard, we will work with the National Interfaith Leadership
Council, NILC, to ensure that we continue to build values as contained in
our Constitution, as well as working together on development programmes.
Our systems should reflect our interconnectedness and ubuntu in which each
of us commits to support the other.

Samora Machel, one of the greatest freedom fighters argued, and I partially
quote:

   ... solidarity is not an act of charity. It is an act of unity ...

Our attempts at solidarity are interrupted by the Pharisees and the
Sadducees pointing fingers while they are not without sin themselves. The
Pharisees are so far from the people, squabbling in their parties. The
Sadducees are sad as they lack the support of the people.

We must focus on South Africa’s greatest challenge, for, as Kennedy said:

   If we are not able to save the many who are poor, we will not be able to
   save the few who are rich.

We welcome the President’s commitment to outputs and outcomes and the state
of the nation’s vision that will take us towards that inclusive society. We
will work towards their achievement. We look forward, Mr President, to the
signing of performance agreements as Ministers - I’m speaking for myself as
well - for in the end, we owe it to this and the future generations to
create a better life for all. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr S C MOTAU: Madam Deputy Speaker, I strongly resist going biblical as
that is very slippery ground. I’ll stay with an outstanding South African
leader, Professor Njabulo Ndebele, who had a piece in The Sunday Times
dated 7 February 2010, in which he marked the 20 years of freedom for uTata
Nelson Mandela. The piece was titled, “The long walk remains.” I quote:

  South Africa desperately needs new politics in which the actors
  understand the full implications of abundant new opportunities for the
  people to rediscover one another and to build the country. Today we know
  that the diversity in thinking is a national asset.


This country cries out for true leadership that will help us realise these
benefits; leadership which will put South Africa first in all of its
actions.

The former United States Secretary of State, General Colin Powell, in his
primer on the subject said:

  Good leadership involves responsibility to the welfare of the group,
  which means that some people will get angry at your actions and
  decisions. It’s inevitable if you are honourable. Trying to get everyone
  to like you is a sign of mediocrity; you’ll avoid the tough decisions;
  and you’ll not confront the people who need to be confronted.


Former President Nelson Mandela, manifested the requisite leadership
qualities and led this country from the front. We miss that bold,
visionary, compassionate, inclusive, unifying and moral leadership.

The country demands upstanding leaders to secure the future of our young
democracy. Our faltering and underperforming parastatals, many of them
currently without chief executive officers, yearn for quality leadership.
Such leadership can put Eskom, the avaricious energy monopoly, back on
track and secure our electricity future without the nation paying an arm
and a leg for energy.

This is critical as the nation fearfully awaits the decision of the
National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, regarding Eskom’s latest
application for a tariff increase of 35% a year for three years. We appeal
to Nersa to exercise responsible leadership in this regard. The regulator
must put the interests of South Africa above those of Eskom to dispel the
widely held view that they do the bidding of Eskom. A bad decision will
spell serious trouble for the country’s economy which is already hard-
pressed; and more misery for the poor.

It is, therefore, very important that we take special care when we fill the
critical leadership positions at Eskom and the other state- owned
enterprises. The people who are appointed must be fit for the purpose,
competent and serve those entities in the best interests of the country.
Let us, please, keep party politics out of the selection process.

In this regard, Speaker, it would add insult to injury for the people of
this country if the state were to pay Mr Jacob Maroga one red cent
following his resignation from Eskom. He failed the nation and he doesn’t
deserve what he is asking for. If the state does that, the people will not
forget.

We thus hope that the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Energy will be goal-
orientated, that it will fast-track results and not be a further stumbling
block to the entry of independent power producers onto our energy market.
This is taking too long to happen; we need action, now.

To get results calls for a Powell brand of leadership. Regrettably, what
the people get from leadership these days are huge doses of promises,
bluster, fudge, sophistry, denial and Orwellian-speak, in which wrong is
right and conflicts of interest are pooh-poohed. This is the failure of
leadership. Saying sorry does not make it right.
The ANC, Chancellor House, Hitachi, Eskom and Nexus fall into this
category.

Earlier, I referred to the nation’s fearful state regarding the outcome of
Eskom’s request to Nersa. There is, however, another pervasive fear in our
land: the fear of being mugged, brutalised, raped or even murdered in our
own homes.

The eradication of this national plague demands decisive leadership and
action. I know that in this regard I’m speaking for many people in this
House and country. Crime is slowly but surely strangling our nation. The
President has declared 2010 as the year of action. He mustn’t stop there.
Results will come only when inaction is followed by serious consequences.

General Powell reminds us of the following:


  Strategy equals execution. All the great visions and ideas in the world
  are worthless if they can’t be implemented rapidly and efficiently.


[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, His Excellency the State President of
the country and colleagues, political commentators and the media have been
unanimous in expressing a very deep disappointment in your state of the
nation address.

The Independent on Saturday in KwaZulu-Natal described your speech as
lacklustre. The South African nation was hyped up, especially after
commemorating 20 years after the release of Madiba; and looking at the
World Cup, there was definitely a widespread disappointment.

You set the targets last year and the very fact that you announced certain
mechanisms about targets, delivery, etc, is a clear indication that your
generals have not followed you, not obeyed you, and that they have let you
down.

Also, in respect of the 489 000 jobs that were created, those temporary
Extended Public Works job creation projects are not sustainable.

The great problem in our country is that our key parastatals are in crisis.
As far as the supply of power is concerned, the MF is glad that you have
changed direction on the role of independent producers. But let me express
a word of caution: I hope friends are not waiting in the wings.

The MF strongly urges the South African government to commence negotiations
with the Ambani Brothers of Reliance and Rattan Tata. Call them to this
country and ask them to build our power stations on credit. Build now and
pay later!

Mr President, we are creating jobs; we are in a period of austerity. Ask
the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to stop putting
negative factors in the path of subsistence fishermen - there is a proposed
hike of over 300% for fishing permits. There is a difference between
recreational fishermen and subsistence fishermen.

Last year, the MF made certain proposals to look at Prof Ali Awali and
learn from the success of India’s planning commission. We said
manufacturing, agriculture and infrastructure must be key factors. I want
to also ask you, Mr President, to turn your eyes to KwaZulu-Natal where
there is a lacklustre provincial government. EThekwini has no democracy.
Intercommunity relationships are in the mud. How can the ANC allow a metro
council to be run, not by democratically elected representatives, but by
three people from a particular office?

What we need is to move away from race and look at merit. Education in the
world knows no nationality, race or barriers and what this country needs is
excellent, outstanding management. We have a lot of money for education,
but are we training our youth to satisfy South Africa’s manpower needs?

The Minister for the Public Service and Administration made an announcement
that this country is looking for people from outside with 30% extra
salaries. Yet, after 16 years, haven’t we trained our own youth to satisfy
South Africa’s manpower needs?

At the tail end, Mr President, you referred to the great contributions made
by South Africans of Indian origin. Ask yourself this one question: Why
didn’t they come to see the Indian Prime Minister? Why are they apathetic?
After 1994, Indians have been marginalised. One of the greatest
announcements that can be made during the 150 years celebration is to say
to the Indian community that we now regard you as equal South African
citizens.

We are all indeed very proud of Madiba; and I am glad, Mr President, that
you paid tribute to the late Mr P W Botha. In 1993, Madiba went to visit Mr
P W Botha’s house and he told the MF leader that the reason was to pay his
respects to him because he had the courage to start a peaceful change in
our country.

Mr President, I want you to know that Madiba went to visit Mr Rajbansi. Why
did he go? Are you aware that Madiba met Mr Rajbansi 40 times when he was
the President? What we need in South Africa is to follow Madiba on the path
of peace, unity and reconciliation when he said we should join hands and
build this country together. Furthermore, we have a lacklustre Minister of
Finance and the whole country will blow up in a crisis if nothing is done.

Mr President, the department of sport and recreation in KwaZulu-Natal is in
the mud. Mr Rajbansi worked with Inkosi Albert Luthuli as a football
administrator; he is the father of football. To recognise his contribution
to the World Cup, the presidential suite at Moses Mabida Stadium should be
called the Inkosi Albert Luthuli Presidential Suite.

Are we following Madiba? All we are saying today is that we must come back
to Madiba; we must come back to Madiba’s direction. Come back to the road
Madiba has mapped out to build a great South Africa!

Mr President, you said that 2010 is a year for action to work harder,
smarter and better. However, let us be mindful of the fact that in a soccer
match it is not the dribbling that is important, but the scoring of the
goal. Let us commit ourselves, today, to wipe away the tears of suffering
from everyone’s eyes and deliver them from the shackles of poverty so that
there can be a better life for all. Let us march forward. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Madam Deputy Speaker ... e re
le nna ke ise tlotlo go Moporesitente, Motlatsa Moporesitente, Ditona le
Maloko otlhe a Palamente. Ke kopa go simolola ka go baakanya kgannyana e
nnye e e tlileng le Mme Matladi.
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[... honour be to the President, the Deputy President, Ministers and all
Members of Parliament. I will begin by rectifying what Mrs Matladi has
mentioned.]

You took us by surprise, Madam, when you said Mangope fought for the
release of Nelson Mandela. Those of us who operated in that area were
shocked. Let me remind you ... mantswe a a tshwanang le: Fa mapantiti a le
bitsa le a taboga, mme fa nna ke le bitsa ga le batle go tla. [... words
such as: when prisoners call you, you respond, but when I call you, you
defy me.]

That statement was referring to Nelson Mandela.

Mr President, when 10% of the population enjoys a 61% share of the total
national income in our country, when our economy imports too many goods and
services, when our people are less productive, when most of the shops in
the townships and villages stand empty, when our people eat from landfill
sites, when government is spending billions of rands in an attempt to
reduce the gap between the rich and the poor and yet the gap keeps on
growing, it is clear that we need a new set of rules going forward. It is
indeed time to do things differently.

We welcome your approach, sir. We know that with your vision, these
problems will be reversed and they will be things of the past, thanks to
your leadership.

As we celebrate Madiba’s legacy, may I remind the House of a special
sitting that was called on 10 May 2004 to mark 10 years of our democracy.
Former President Mandela was invited and these were amongst his last words
spoken from this podium:

   Our democracy must bring its material fruits to all, particularly the
   poor, marginalised and vulnerable. Our belief in the common good
   ultimately translates into deep concern for those that suffer want and
   deprivation of any kind.

The past 15 years of democratic rule in South Africa have been
characterised by policy-making and legislative reform aimed at meeting
constitutional imperatives. One of the central programmes of reconstruction
is the development of human resources. Many South Africans have been
excluded from the economic growth of our country because the economy
presents opportunities that are skills-based.

As the global economy turns the corner, levels of innovation and
competitiveness are certainly going to continue to grow faster, and South
Africa dare not be left behind. It follows that we need to sharpen the
skills levels of our citizens, among other things, so that our economy
increases its innovation and competitiveness levels.

Most importantly, in our quest to sharpen the skills of citizens, it is
critical to ensure that the skills make available opportunities so that all
citizens benefit fairly from the economic growth of the country. We,
therefore, need to create a cadreship of skills with the necessary capacity
to effect and sustain economic growth.

How do we achieve this? From the onset, we need to appreciate our country’s
history. Apartheid caused most of the population to be structurally
unskilled and created a reservoir of unemployable citizens.

You mentioned, Mr President, on 8 January, that our people are absent in
wealth ownership. We cannot continue on that old path where citizens are
not motivated to attain education and skills that set the economy on a
better footing to respond appropriately to skills needs that necessitate
better, faster and sustainable economic growth to benefit all.

Our Ministry is designed to have a strong domestic focus. To this end, I
embarked on provincial visits from the beginning of January this year to
understand how our policies impact on ordinary South Africans. We held
meetings with MECs and their officials and discovered that, amongst other
things, there is no co-ordination - not within provinces and/or
departments. We, therefore, need to devise a strategy that ensures co-
ordination.

To improve at domestic level, especially with regard to the productivity of
our people, a paradigm shift is needed. We need a new thinking going
forward.

We must support, promote, protect and develop our own natural resources and
ensure that more value-adding industries are created. Local products must
be supported and procured by government and other government institutions
in order to increase local procurement, thus increasing local production
and, in turn, creating more sustainable jobs. For instance, when one looks
at the 2008-09 imports reports from Sars, one realises that the bulk of
what we imported into our country could easily have been produced or
manufactured locally, provided we had increased our economy’s
competitiveness.

If we do not increase our competitiveness through, amongst other things,
skilling our human resources in the medium to long term, we shall continue
to pay billions for avoidable imports and create fewer jobs.

We, therefore, need to understand that human resources, not capital, income
or material resources constitute the ultimate bases for the wealth of our
nation. Capital and natural resources are passive factors of production.
Human beings are the active agents who accumulate capital, exploit natural
resources, build social, economic and political organisations and carry
forward national development.

Clearly, if we continue to be unable to develop the skills and knowledge of
our people and to utilise them effectively in the national economy, we will
fail in increasing our competitiveness and in keeping up with the global
economy.

Mr President, we welcome your new approach for all government institutions
not to work in silos, but to work as a collective. In the past 10 years,
there has been an emphasis on policy-making and less focus on
implementation and the capacities required to do so.

Related to this is the challenge of co-ordination between departments. Over
the years, departments have simultaneously, and more or less independently,
promulgated numerous Acts from a departmental point of view. For example,
different notions have existed between government departments regarding
SMMEs’ training needs.

Some departments favoured internships for SMMEs, while others identified
learnerships as the appropriate instrument. There has also been a degree of
policy incoherence between some departments resulting in a constrained
economy. We are happy that this is now a thing of the past.

The people of South Africa are the country’s most important asset. If all
South Africans are to participate meaningfully in economic, political and
industrial capacitation and social development, they must not only have
general capabilities such as the ability to read, count and write.

It is important that they realise that the economy is complex and changing,
characterised by increasing use of information, more complex technologies
and a general rise in the skill requirements of jobs.

We, therefore, need to assist our people to have rising levels of applied
competences. Knowledge economy is the way to go. To that end, we should
also lead by example. Let us not be scared of those little computers we
have, hon members. Some of the arguments advanced such as, “My e-mail is
broken”, do not help the cause because it never breaks.

We, therefore, call on the higher education institutions to build adequate
capacities that can absorb more learners. Not only should they build the
capacity to absorb more learners, but most importantly, the capacity to
teach and produce graduates with the essential educational foundation that
can adapt to the ever-changing needs of the economy. The institutions must
respond to the skills needs of the economy.

It follows that we need to develop and strengthen learnership programmes to
encourage graduates to understand the functioning of a growing economy
through a well-procured career guidance strategy. To this end, the use of
career guidance and employment services must be closely linked to the
economic development of the country.

We must recognise the importance of career guidance as a facilitation
process for the overall human resource development strategies if we want to
be competitive in the global markets.

A strategic career guidance programme must be introduced as a policy
response to this issue. Such a programme should facilitate school-to-work
transition in a culturally enabling environment. The role of career
guidance and employment services is important in the process of school-to-
work transition and labour market intermediation.

The delivery of these services in a developing context brings about many
challenges. These challenges need to be addressed through a co-ordinated
framework of policies and the establishment of services across the
different relevant sectors. This can only be achieved through knowledge
gained from research – research that can identify the needs of the
employers in the different sectors.
The challenge in skills development can be seen as being both policy design
or co-ordination, as well as limited implementation. Seta training
programmes must be well designed, well targeted, and rolled out fully. This
must be done efficiently by pooling financial resources and developing
cross-Seta training programmes.

The South African government has committed itself to taking concrete steps
to raise the skills profile of the labour market. In as much as government
will put an effort into ensuring that the country produces enough graduates
in the most needed disciplines, it will be in vain if private and public
sector employers are not prepared to train these graduates.

It is of great concern that both private and public sector employers have
significantly reduced the intake of graduates into their internship
programmes. If we want to build a skilled nation we cannot continue with
the practice where the economy’s critical players do not take their
rightful lead in increasing skills through on-the-job training programmes.

It is important for employers in all sectors to realise that government
ignites the fire for skills development that is geared to effect and
sustain economic growth. It is through them that the flame will continue to
burn.

Many policies, strategies and approaches have and will be put in place by
government to ensure that we create skills, but if employers are not going
to respond to government efforts by ensuring adequate on-the-job training
programmes, we are not going to create a cadreship of skills that will
effect and sustain economic growth.

Research reveals that SMMEs employ around 52% of all employees in South
Africa. If these figures are anything to go by, we dare not turn a blind
eye to this reality. It is evident that SMMEs, and to some extent co-
operatives, are amongst the best drivers that will effect faster, better
and sustainable economic growth. We, therefore, need to further encourage
the formation of successful SMMEs and co-operatives.

Currently, SMMEs and co-operatives have a major failure rate. It is not
because the owners lack the moral willingness to operate successful
businesses, but, amongst other things, they lack the fundamental skills to
do so. It follows that we need to intensify our efforts to empower
surviving SMMEs.

Given South Africa’s history, there is a strong need to address the
imbalances of the past, hence economic and industrial-driven policies are
necessary in the South African economy. Let us be strong and build a
cadreship of skills just as we did in the struggle to gain power.

Mr President, your leadership has energised the nation and there is a lot
of hope. Let us not betray the trust the nation has in us.

Apartheid did not have parents when we started here in 1994; democracy had
too many parents because people did not want to be associated with
apartheid. When the hon member from the UCDP mentioned that her party was
also fighting for Comrade Mandela, it didn’t come as a shock, because when
people come to this podium, they all claim to be heroes. The only thing
that I want to help her with is, if you need the police, you don’t phone
10999 because you will not find them, it is 10111. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M S MANGENA: Deputy Speaker, Mr President, hon members, the story is
told of a high-school boy who was fluffing his mathematics and when his
father scolded him and urged him to pull up his socks, the young man
replied: “Don’t worry, Dad, I don’t have to work so hard to get my maths
right. After all, I plan to be a weatherman when I finish school.”

Obviously the young man did not know that weather forecasters need some
knowledge of maths, geography, physics and these days, IT, to function in
their jobs. He had not heard of Antarctica; he knew nothing about aviation
and agriculture, where weather forecasting plays a vital role. To him, the
weatherman has an easy life because he doesn’t have to work hard to get
anything right.

Some of us are beginning to feel as if the philosophy and attitude of this
young man are creeping in on us as a nation; that we are slowly moving away
from the example set by the likes of Steve Biko, Onkgopotse Tiro, Mangaliso
Sobukwe and, of course, Nelson Mandela, whose legacy we honoured with the
opening of Parliament this year.

Mandela’s legacy is tough and lofty. It is a weighty blend of honour,
sincerity, sacrifice, hard work, commitment, patience, endurance,
patriotism and selfless service to others and to your country. It seems
these admirable values are fading in our public life. In their place we see
the relentless pursuit of easy or illicit riches acquired as quickly as
possible and by any means necessary.

We know that our kids learn more by watching us than taking instructions
from us. Don’t be surprised by the reply, given verbally or otherwise, when
we try to motivate them to improve their school work: “Don’t worry, mom”,
they might say, “I don’t have to work hard at school. After all, I plan to
go into tendering when I finish school.”

They would know that you don’t have to be skilled or knowledgeable to win a
tender. You need only be connected through family, political affiliation,
the golf course or social drinking. You need only be that kind of
weatherman.

As we coax our sons and daughters to do their maths with application and
diligence, they might just reply, “Don’t worry, dad, I don’t have to get my
maths right, because when I leave school I want to be a councillor or a
municipal manager.”

From where they sit, our kids might gain the impression that councillors
and municipal managers don’t have to be competent or apply themselves to
the task of delivering services to the citizens. They don’t have to be
responsible. The kids can see dirty streets, potholes everywhere,
uncollected refuse, and yet the municipal manager is living a conspicuously
good and easy life. It seems we might be nurturing a society that worships
bling, but eschews hard work, honesty, service and commitment.

Every reasonable man and woman in our country should find it easy to
embrace the five priorities adopted by government, and we pray that they
succeed. These priorities would easily be realised if every man and women
in every classroom in our schools, in every ward in our clinics and
hospitals, in every municipal chamber and office, in every government
office at provincial and national level, did his or her work with
competence, dedication and honesty.

This would only be possible if these officials and municipal managers were
appointed through a rigorous and competitive process, and they were
appointed after answering the question: What can you do? Instead of the
question: Who are you connected to?
And when every man and woman does his or her work diligently and
competently, there will be no reason for any citizen to phone the President
in order to get an ID, or to have the President talking about teachers
preparing their lessons here in Parliament. That should be a given in an
environment where things work.

The grand bonus is that when all of us do an honest day’s work, we can go
back to our sons and daughters at home and, looking them straight in the
eye, say, “My son, my girl, work hard for your future.” And being the
perceptive kids that they are, who learn by watching, they would reply,
“Yes, dad; yes, mama.” Then we would be a people worthy of Mandela, and not
a nation of weathermen. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, Your
Excellency Mr President, hon members, on 11 February the President
presented the state of the nation address as part of celebrating the 20th
anniversary of the release of former President Nelson Mandela from jail,
after serving 27 years.

During the course of his address, he made many significant pronouncements.
From where I sat, I picked up three, namely the following: one, rekindling
the nation-building project; two, the premise of service delivery to our
people, especially the poorest of the poor; and, three, the accountability
of public representatives and public servants.

In this regard, the outcome for the Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform is vibrant, equitable and sustainable rural communities. This,
of course, is the vision of the department. There are four outputs in
pursuit of this outcome, namely sustainable land reform, food security for
all, rural development and job creation that is linked to skills
development and training.

Further to the significant pronouncements that the President made in
relation to the government’s strategic focus in the next two years of the
current MTEF, he also provided some detail with regard to what he expects
the department to deliver on. Among the things he expects to be done is the
rolling out of the pilots to at least 160 wards across the country by 2014.

Secondly, at least 60% of rural households per site should meet their own
food requirements by 2014. Thirdly, he expects the integration of land
reform and agricultural support programmes, with performance measured
according to the increase in the number of small-scale farmers who graduate
into commercial entities by 2014. Finally, he expects the creation of jobs,
skills training and development opportunities for young people between the
ages of 16 and 25 years.

Given the progress that the three spheres, working together, have achieved
during the first nine months of this administration, there is no reason why
these specified and many other critical deliverables should not be achieved
in the next three years.

The detail of what is to be done in pursuit of these deliverables will be
set out in the budget policy speech. The budget policy speech will contain
a note drawn from an interesting book, written by one Steven Lewis Jr. He
states that there are three general phases of economic and social
development that countries in the world pass through.

He examines South Africa’s performance, in comparison with other countries.
According to him, the third phase of this social and economic development
is increasing the productivity of land and labour in agriculture.

In fact, he says that the factor affecting wage increases in modern sectors
in the economy is growth in productivity in agriculture in traditional
sectors. Wages in the nonagricultural sectors must grow in order to attract
people from agricultural areas in which incomes would have gone up.

In the following passage, he looks comparatively at the situation in South
Africa during the colonial and apartheid years:

   The land available to blacks has been severely restricted, and for a
   century government efforts - critical in virtually all successful
   development - have been directed almost exclusively toward white farmers,
   with the result that incomes available in the African and coloured rural
   areas have remained pitifully low, leaving people no alternative to
   seeking work in the modern sectors, including white agriculture, at
   whatever wage available.


  The subsistence sector as a provider of income to the majority of South
  Africans effectively ceased to exist decades ago: the population
  densities were simply too great to allow any but a fraction of the black
  population a genuine subsistence output; the rest have had to depend on
  wage labour in white areas of South Africa, both urban and rural.


This passage speaks to the historical 7% to 13% land divide between whites
and blacks in South Africa. The budget policy speech will delve more deeply
into this question of land reform.

Rural development and land reform is therefore not just an ordinary
programme, as the President has indicated. It is a postcolonial
reconstruction and development programme. It is at the heart of
socioeconomic transformation, where it matters most and where the most
vulnerable reside: in rural areas.

The current patchwork of land legislation that attempts to address
historical disparities in our country is admirable. It is a product of a
particular point in time in our country’s democratisation. But, sadly, it
is too fragmented to effectively address the centuries-old land question in
South Africa.

In the Green Paper that we will soon serve on this House, we are opening a
debate on the need to review the current land tenure system as a whole.
That is the proverbial elephant in the room that can no longer be avoided.
To continue avoiding this question would mean not being true to the letter
and spirit of the Freedom Charter, which states that South Africa belongs
to all who live in it, black and white.

I’d like to make a few comments and allay the fears of the hon umhlekazi
Prince Buthelezi. We have been interacting vigorously over the past few
weeks with a delegation from “Isilo nabahlali” [King Goodwill Zwelithini
and the community] around this question. The last time we were there was
Monday last week. It was the second meeting we had held in two weeks. We’re
trying to find one another around this question.

This goes to the hon leader of the PAC, who made this point about the role
of traditional leaders. The traditional leaders of Limpopo and other
traditional leaders, including the chairperson of the National House of
Traditional Leaders, are in contact with us. We’ve been discussing that.

We have addressed a congress, through the director-general, of Contralesa
that was recently held in Durban, so we interact with the traditional
leaders a great deal.

The second point, hon President, is this: I’ve given you a number of
pictures taken at Muyexe, because there is a Sunday Times article, which
was published after the President had delivered his state of the nation
address, saying there is nothing happening there. I’m shocked by that
article. It is shocking, Mr President. I’ve given these pictures to the hon
Dlodlo, and asked her to show them to the President.

I can’t understand how a journalist could have gone to Muyexe and not seen
the clinic which has been renovated. There was no clinic in operation
there, but it is now operating eight hours a day, five days a week, with
nurses. [Applause.] I don’t know how that journalist could have missed the
fact that last month the hon Mthethwa’s department established a satellite
police station where there was none, because of this work.

I cannot understand how that journalist could have missed a new pack shed
which had been built. He actually shows a picture of a forlorn old lady,
who probably did not understand what was happening, when there are 36 women
who are working full-time on 4 ha of agricultural land, which is being
extended to become 15 ha. Now they are operating with drip irrigation
because we built a pump house there and it is working. We built a pack shed
and they’re supplying Kwikspar.

I’ve given the President a picture of an example of how we fenced 150
household gardens for people to produce and eat. That’s what the President
is saying, he’s saying to us that 60% of these houses should depend on
their own gardens. That’s a beginning, it is there, it has started.
[Applause.]

The President referred to 160 wards. It will be done. We are already
operating in more than 21 wards across the country and in each of the
provinces. There’s only one province in which we don’t have a site yet and
that’s Gauteng. But we are going to Gauteng. So, Mr President, there is a
good example of what you can see there in pictures.

In Muyexe, from August 2009, we have built, through the Department of Human
Settlements, not only the 231 houses that you mentioned, but more than
that. There is no house built in the townships that matches the houses that
are being built in Muyexe. [Applause.]

He talks about water. It is true, but again, we went there to test
boreholes. Four of them are working now and are supplying water from
underground, but we are also working to bring water from the Nandoni Dam,
45 km from there to that place. I discussed it with the premier last week
and said we must make sure we are agreed that that water coming to Muyexe
won’t skip any of the villages along the 45 km from the dam. But that’s not
the only place!

When you go to Riemvasmaak in the Northern Cape, it’s the same. We are
working there and will soon be bringing water 30 km from the Orange River
to Riemvasmaak, both for irrigation and domestic usage.

We’ll do the same in the Free State at Diyatalawa. If you go to
Makgolokoeng in the Free State you’ll find that we are working there. We
are about to deliver 40 dairy cows to the community of Diyatalawa. We’re
working with Nestlé. We have a partnership that is going to buy the milk
and they are going to provide state of the art equipment to revamp that
dairy facility there.
So, hon members and Mr President, the work is being done according to how
you have asked us to do it. That article is misleading the country. Thank
you, hon Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy Speaker, Mr President, the fact that a turnaround
strategy for local government was approved is an honest acknowledgement by
the government that in South Africa there is a crisis in the majority of
municipalities. In the real state of the nation we are plagued by a
delivery crisis with more than 50 major protests at municipalities since
the election, with R58 billion in debt owed to them and a 12% vacancy rate
of senior managers. The President referred to water losses. At the 12
municipalities in Gauteng alone it amounted to a loss of R1,3 billion in
the previous financial year.

Wat ons nou nodig het, is die leierskap en politieke wil om hierdie
omkeerstrategie deur te voer. Die DA stem volkome saam met wat die
President verlede jaar in Khayelitsha gesê het: (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[What we need now is the leadership and political will to effect this
turnaround strategy. The DA completely agrees with what the President said
last year in Khayelitsha:]

   We must find ways of attracting the best technical, managerial and
   financial minds to our municipalities, even the most remote, to effect a
   turnaround.

Mr President, there is one way of attracting them: Appoint them on merit
and being fit for purpose, and stop cadre deployment! Cadre deployment, the
national democratic revolution policy of the ANC, singlehandedly destroyed
the capacity in our municipalities within 10 years of the fully democratic
local government elections in December 2000. [Interjections.]

What is the ANC councils’ idea of transformation? First, all contract
positions – the section 57 appointments, as we refer to managerial
positions – are reserved for politically connected persons who, in many
cases, totally lack the skills and, sorry to say, the integrity for the
positions they’re appointed to.

The third municipal manager of Tshwane is now under provisional suspension,
with full pay! Two municipal managers left, while under suspension, with
huge golden handshakes before disciplinary hearings were concluded.
[Interjections.]

And then, with these appointments the Peters Principle kicked in:
Incompetent managers appoint incompetent staff to protect themselves.
Another unintended consequence was that career staff, who still today do
the bulk of good work at our municipalities, have become more and more
unproductive because they see no reason why they should excel if there are
no promotion possibilities.

The number of employees who have become so despondent that they have left
local government is shocking. Civil engineering professionals, for example,
have come down from more than 2 500 to only 1 300; while the population
that must be served has grown by several million in the past decade. Let’s
professionalise staff selection, not politicise it.

Mnr die President, die DA het ook saam met u gestem toe u in Khayelitsha
gesê het:

   Secondly, we must deal with the fact that many municipalities face a deep
   crisis of governance due to political power struggles. These battles for
   control over resources render the affected municipalities effectively
   dysfunctional.

Die 8 000 raadslede in Suid-Afrika het die wonderlike geleentheid om die
potensiaal van al ons gemeenskappe te help ontluik, maar dit is tragies dat
so baie van hulle net op eie belang ingestel is.

’n Tekort aan geld is nie die groot probleem nie. Die ANC-regering moet
geloof word daarvoor dat meer geld vir infrastruktuurskepping – vanjaar is
dit R11 miljard, tesame met ander toekennings – beskikbaar is aan
munisipaliteite as wat hulle kan bestee.

Hoe is dit moontlik dat al die plaaslike munisipaliteite in die Noord-Kaap
en talle in Noordwes en die Vrystaat tegnies bankrot is, maar Laingsburg-
munisipaliteit, wat dieselfde moeilike omstandighede het, naamlik geleë in
die Karoo, wyd uitgestrek, min werkgeleenthede en baie armes, tog die een
toekennning na die ander wen?

Twee redes maak ’n verskil. Die raad, wat uit presies 50% ANC- en 50% DA-
lede bestaan, werk verstandig saam, en dan het hulle nog al die jare net
een munisipale bestuurder gehad. Terloops, hy is nie ’n wit amptenaar uit
die vorige bedeling nie, maar eenvoudig ’n goeie bestuurder op meriete
aangestel.

Wetgewing is ook nie die grootste probleem nie. Hoe is dit moontlik dat
talle munisipaliteite onder dieselfde wetgewing in Suid-Afrika wel
presteer? Mosselbaai, byvoorbeeld, het nie ’n sent leningskuld nie,
miljoene in die bank en van ’n uitkykpunt op die N2 by Mosselbaai kan ’n
mens die duisende laekoste-huise sien wat gebou moes word weens
verstedeliking en wat gratis dienste kry.

Behalwe dat die DA natuurlik daar regeer, kan ons ook sê dat die munisipale
bestuurder en burgemeester vroue is wat daarin slaag om wetgewing toe te
pas.

Die probleem bly swak, selfsugtige, moedswillige raadslede vir wie eie
belang en politieke mag primêr is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr President, the DA also agreed with you when you said the following in
Khayelitsha:

   Secondly, we must deal with the fact that many municipalities face a deep
   crisis of governance due to political power struggles. These battles for
   control over resources render the affected municipalities effectively
   dysfunctional.

The 8 000 councillors in South Africa have the wonderful opportunity to
help develop the potential of all our communities, but it is tragic that so
many of them are only focused on their own interests.
A lack of funds is not the big problem. The ANC government should be
commended for the fact that more money is available to municipalities for
infrastructure development – this year it is R11 billion, combined with
other allocations – than they can spend.

How is it possible that all the local municipalities in the Northern Cape
and many in North West and the Free State are technically bankrupt, but
Laingsburg Municipality that is experiencing the same difficult
circumstances, such as being situated in the Karoo, covering a vast area,
offering few job opportunities, and being home to many poor people, is
still winning one award after the other?

Two factors make a difference. The councillors, comprising exactly 50% ANC
and 50% DA members, work together wisely, and in all these years they have
only had one municipal manager. By the way, he is not a white official from
the previous dispensation but simply a good manager who was appointed on
merit.

Legislation is also not the biggest problem. How is it possible that many
municipalities are performing well under the same legislation in South
Africa? Mossel Bay, for instance, does not have a cent of loan debt, has
millions in the bank and from a vantage point on the N2 in Mossel Bay one
can see thousands of low-cost houses that had to be built because of
urbanisation, which are receiving free services.

Apart from the fact that it is governed by the DA, of course, we can also
mention that the municipal manager and mayor are women who have succeeded
in enforcing legislation.

The problem remains incompetent, selfish, recalcitrant councillors for whom
their own interests and political power are paramount.]

In Rustenburg the 60-odd councillors misused ratepayers’ money by voting
themselves an expensive bottle of whisky and a tailor-made blazer each for
Christmas. [Laughter.] The Speaker only sent us a Christmas card and I want
to ask the Speaker, where is our whisky!? [Laughter.]

The ANC councillors of the city of Matlosana in Klerksdorp are now in the
process of buying – listen to this – 500 World Cup Football tickets out of
the municipal budget for themselves, staff, family and friends. They don’t
even have the loyalty towards our country to support this great upcoming
event out of their own pockets. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs D M RAMODIBE: Speaker, the hon President of the Republic of South
Africa, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members,
let me start off by expressing my gratitude for the honour of being able to
participate in this important debate. May I also join my colleagues in
thanking the President for organising the celebration of the release of
Tata Madiba.
It is not a mistake to ensure the central positioning of women in different
sectors of the economy and the state machinery; in fact, it is a
fundamental necessity. When you economically empower a woman you
economically empower the whole nation, but if you economically empower a
man you economically empower an individual. This may sound like a slogan,
but the time for slogans is over.

The President has declared this year a year of action – meaning that all
theories must be put into action. Remember Margaret Thatcher when she said:


  If you want something said, ask a man; if you want something done, ask a
  woman.

[Applause.]

Patriarchal oppression was embedded in the economic, social, religious,
cultural, familial and other relations in all communities. Its eradication
cannot be an assumed consequence of democracy.

All manifestations and consequences of patriarchy - from the feminisation
of poverty, physical and psychological abuse, undermining self-confidence
and hidden forms of exclusion from positions of authority and power - need
to be eliminated.

Samora Machel once said:

  The emancipation of women is not an act of charity, the result of a
  humanitarian or compassionate attitude. The liberation of women is a
  fundamental necessity for the revolution, the guarantee of its continuity
  and the precondition for its victory.


The ANC will therefore continue to strive for the realisation of the
commitments of the Freedom Charter, that the rights of all the people shall
be the same, regardless of race, colour or sex.

Speaker, the steady growth in women parliamentarians, provincial
legislatures and councillors is a reflection of the implementation of the
ANC policies. The representation of women in Cabinet since 2004 has been
internationally cited as one of best practice.

The increase in the proportion of women in the provincial and national
legislatures and elected municipal councils has also been substantial. It
is safe to say that we still have to improve on women Speakers.

Indeed, this recognition of the interconnectedness of women’s struggles and
what needs to be done to overcome this oppression was understood when we
saw about 20 000 women marching to Pretoria in protest against carrying
pass books. They also demanded the fundamental rights of justice, freedom
and equality for their children. They gave voice to their resistance and
determination and they demonstrated their power within themselves when they
declared: Wathint’ Abafazi Wathint’ Imbokodo. [You strike a woman, you
strike a rock.]

When we established our democracy in 1994, we dismantled apartheid
legislation and put in place progressive policies. We established an Office
on the Status of Women located in the Presidency and a Commission on Gender
Equality. We fought for increasing representation of women at all levels of
government and made great strides in that respect. We have taken a gender
perspective on the implementation of development projects and programmes.

As a country, our government has taken it as its mandate to halve poverty
and unemployment by 2014. In the first 13 years of democracy, there has
been great progress in the provision of basic infrastructure, such as clean
water and electricity. We have achieved gender parity in primary and
secondary education.

In the state of the nation address the President said:


  We are building a performance-oriented state, by improving planning as
  well as performance monitoring and evaluation. We also need to integrate
  gender equity measures into the government’s programme of action. This
  action will ensure that women, children and persons with disabilities can
  access developmental opportunities.

It is for this reason that a women’s Ministry was established, a very
senior Ministry located in the Presidency, whose powers and functions
include policy and legislation, planning, co-ordination and advocacy in
areas such as poverty, which is a cross-cutting issue.

This Ministry must be able to work closely with the Ministries of planning,
monitoring and evaluation. It must exercise its authority in ensuring that
gender policies take shape in all departments without any hindrance. The
budget must also be gender-orientated to enable departments to implement
their programmes.

Speaker, regarding economic empowerment, gender roles led to women’s role
in the domestic sphere, as mothers and nurturers, being seen as of lesser
importance in value than the tasks of men. Women are said to be natural
nurturers and domestic labourers, while men are perceived to be natural
leaders and decision-makers. These roles are reinforced at home, school and
through the media, thus restricting women’s self-perceptions, disempowering
their social and economic potential and limiting the possibilities for
their future.

This has been further compounded by the system of patriarchy and its
imposition of male domination. In our history, the women of our country
have experienced various forms of gender oppression in both rural and urban
areas, in both traditional and modern contexts. Some argue that the
violence against women is an extreme form of reinforcing patriarchal
control of women.

Thus when we speak about economic empowerment of women and gender equality,
it is from the starting point that the struggle of women for emancipation
is linked to the dismantling of all systems that attempt to oppress them.
South Africa thus will not be fully free as long as women are not free.

It is abundantly clear on the African continent that women are largely
responsible for sustaining families through subsistence farming. According
to the US Agency for International Development, rural women are responsible
for half the world’s food production and produce between 60% and 80% of the
food in most developing countries. Thus women are key to agricultural
development.

The UN Economic Commission for Africa has also pointed to the need for
diversification in agriculture and pointed out that the agricultural sector
could be the main contributor to poverty reduction. It is also important to
state that women’s participation must mean that women are at the helm of
decisions that are made in this sector.

The 2006 UN Human Development Report also points out that:
  One of the greatest returns to improved access to water is in the time
  savings for women and girls and the expansion of their choices. Why does
  this matter for human development? Time is an important asset for the
  development of capabilities. Excessive time demands for essential labour
  lead to exhaustion, reduce the time available for rest and child care and
  limit choice – they reduce the substantive freedoms that women enjoy.


  Time poverty also contributes to income poverty. It reduces the time
  available for participation in income generation, limits the scope for
  women to take advantage of market opportunities and impedes their ability
  to expand capabilities and skills, reduces further economic returns.

Indeed with more and more time on our side, with improvements in standards
of living, women are putting their collective shoulders to the wheel in an
effort to improve the performance of our economy. Their efforts are helping
to create more jobs and fight poverty. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Business suspended at 16:33 and resumed at 16:49.

                               Evening Sitting

Ms E THABETHE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Jacob Zuma, the Deputy President, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, members of the executive, Members of Parliament and guests, good
evening.

We will be doing ourselves an injustice if we do not understand the
historical context in which state-owned enterprises were conceived in South
Africa by the apartheid government. At the time, the apartheid government
gave the developmental mandate to SOEs. They were used as primary tools for
industrialisation and they were an essential ingredient of government’s
industrial strategy at the time.

Through SOEs, government assumed the dominant role in the key
infrastructure industries like rail, air and sea transport,
telecommunications, water, coal-based synthetic fuels, nuclear energy as
well as iron and steel production.

The state also viewed these industries as key instruments for
industrialisation, employment creation and economic development. One should
not forget that the colour bar was in effect at the time: You had to be
white in order to get a job in an SOE.

It is so fundamental, but it’s so surprising when we hear the Leader of the
Opposition in Parliament and all the other speakers saying that SOEs are
not working due to the ANC’s cadre deployment policy. But, during
apartheid, I didn’t hear them saying the same thing, because these were
used as tools to make sure that we were further exploited, and then ...

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

Ms E THABETHE: Yes, but you never uttered a word at the time. Thanks to
democracy and the ANC, you can come here and stand up and talk about all
those things that you did not do during the apartheid era. [Applause.]

Mr President – through you, Deputy Speaker – over the last 16 years of ANC
democratic governance, it has become clear that the primary orientation of
the South African SOEs will have to fundamentally transform. An SOE
orientation that is premised on a culture of profit maximisation that
embraces a shareholder maximisation approach should be debunked in favour
of an approach that is redistributive and developmental.

As you all know our Gini coefficient, I don’t have to lecture you on that,
but the economic path of SOEs as advocated by the ANC embraces economic
growth, economic development and redistribution. The RDP integrates growth,
development, reconstruction and redistribution into these unified
programmes that the President is spearheading.

It is in this view of the ANC that integrated economic development, as
advocated in the RDP and as agreed to by all alliance partners, sees
expression.

The SOEs are primary vehicles that ensure that, this time around, skills
development is directed at especially the poor who never experienced such
empowerment during the apartheid era. But it is also aimed at job creation
and poverty alleviation. It should also be noted that the ANC is a social
movement that rejects a growth path that will marginalise the poor and
exacerbate inequalities.

It has always been the view of the ANC that elements of economic growth
should be combined with those of economic redistribution so that we can see
the economic development. It is within this context that the ANC is
convinced that it is essential that we promote a new growth path and
development in the economy.

Yes, we do agree that when we took over in 1994, some of the SOEs were not
in good shape, but those were not ANC SOEs. They were started by the
apartheid regime at that time. Some of them were on the verge of collapse,
but they were revived and now some of them are working better. Don’t paint
all of them with the same brush; they are different. Some of them are doing
a good job. An example of this would be the SA Nuclear Energy Corporation,
Necsa. It is one of the nuclear companies that provides the isotopes for
everyone locally in the hospitals, and also exports them to other
countries, but none of you talk about this.

You all talk only about Eskom and SAA. Why don’t you talk about those that
are also doing a good job? There are a lot of utilities and agencies that
are doing a good job, but you say less about those things because you are
always looking for the negative. Mongameli [President], be steadfast!

Ka Sesotho rere, lelala o shebe pele, o sebetse hobane dintho tse etswang
ke mokgatlo wa ANC ke tse sebeletsang setjhaba, le ba neng ba kene ka hara
“apartheid” ba eja, ba ntse ba eja le kajeno. [Mahofi] Empa re tshepa hore
jwalokaha ntate Lechesa a buile ha are, lepotlapotla le ja podi,
lesisitheho le ja kgomo. Ho lokisa dintho tse manyofonyofo tse entsweng
pele ANC e nka di “state owned enterprises” ho ka se nke dilemo tse 16.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[In Sesotho we say, focus and look straight ahead, do your work because the
things that the ANC does are meant to provide services to our nation, even
the ones who were benefiting during apartheid are still benefiting today.
[Applause.] But we believe that just as Mr Lechesa has already mentioned
when he says, when you do things in a rush you are bound to make mistakes
but when you do things slowly you reap the rewards. To fix all the
corruption that happened before the ANC took over state-owned enterprises
won’t take 16 years.]

Show me in the world which country has a sound microeconomy jwaloka South
Africa [like South Africa] after 16 years? Which country? Which country is
that? [Applause.]

It is through ANC policies that you can talk better today. We are in
recession, but were not affected like other countries were. This is thanks
to the leadership of the ANC, who at the time adopted good policies.
Remember that economic policies are not applied for one or two weeks; you
have to take the long view. But, in doing that, you might get people who
don’t agree with you. But the ANC took the right decision. Mr President,
you are on the right track; don’t get distracted by people who will be
talking and commenting.

O sebeditse mokgatlo wa ANC, o sebeditse o lwanetse batho, o tseba le hore
na di SOE tsena re batla ho di sebedisa ka tsela e jwang hore di thuse
batho. Ke ka hona ke reng lelala o shebe pele ba se ke ba nna ba o tshwara
ka mona le ka mona ba re ha o sebetse, mokgatlo ona o sebeditse hle! O ntse
o sebetsa ebile di ngata le tse sa ntse di tla etswa hape, le se ke la tata
bea butle. Ha o tatile haholo o a tjhaisa. Ke makala hampe ha ke utlwa moo
batho ba ema ba re he! he! kajeno re lokisitse, kajeno re tla lokisa, ba
bang ha le e so tshware puso bophelong ba lona, ba bang le hlolehile pele.
Empa le bona eka lona le tla etsa betere ha le fihla mona. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[The ANC has worked, it has worked and fought for the people. It also knows
how it wants to use these SOEs in order for them to help the people. That
is why I am saying focus and look straight ahead, they should not pull you
this way and that way and say that you are not working. This organisation
has really worked! It is still working and there are still more things that
are to be done, so don’t rush just take it easy. If you are too much in a
rush you crash. I get surprised when I see people standing up today and
saying that they fixed things and today we will also fix things and some of
them have never been in power, yet still some of you failed before but you
think that you are going to do better when you get here.]

Transformation is easier said than done. It is easy to talk outside, but
once you are there and have to do it, it is different.

E fapane, ha e tshwane feela ke a tseba hore bohle re tseba hantle hore na
re tletse eng mona, [It is different, it is not the same but I know that
all of us know what we came here for] “all of us must make sure and we
believe that Mr President” jwalokaha o boletse le ho “interview” ya rona di
sa ntsane di shejwa di “State-Owned Enterprises” hore na di ka sebetswa ka
tsela e jwang [just like you mentioned in our interview, the state-owned
enterprises are still being looked at in order to see how they can be
utilised].

Zingenziwa kanjani ukuthi zibuyekezwe ngoba sebefuna ukwazi ngaphambili
ukuthi wena uzozenza njani. Unikezwe igunya abantu baseNingizimu Afrika
ukuthi uhole lelizwe futhi sebenza ngendlela elungele ijubane lakho. Ungayi
ngabo bazokulahlekisa [Ihlombe.] Njengoba ubukade ushilo ngonyaka odlulile
ukuthi, ngiyacaphuna: “Abantu basemakhaya nabo banelungelo lokuba nogesi,
amanzi, izindlu zangasese ezigijima amanzi nemigwaqo.”

Konke lokhu uma sinama-state-owned enterprises asebenza kahle kuzaba lula.
Kodwa azange kube khona i-appetite ephumayo ngalesikhathi seminyaka
eyishumi eyedlule sesithola ama-outages. Ibhizisi azange ifune ukuma
nombuso zihlangane ukuze sibone ukuthi i-energy siyenza njani. Bamele
eceleni bagoqa izandla. Kodwa uma singena gesi bathi: hawu! Umbuso
kaKhongolose awusebenzi. Khulumani nabo phela nina bochwepheshe abazi
kakhulu ukuthi mababe ne-appetite bazokwazi ukuthi benze kodwa mina
ngikuzwe kahle Mongameli.

Uthe ama-IPPs azawusebenza. Unikeze uNgqongqoshe wethu umama uDipuo Peters
ukuthi ahole ithimba le Inter-Ministerial Committee ku-Energy. Njengoba
eshilo umama uSonjica usukhokhele kahle kakhulu eCopenhagen. Hawu!
Isithwathwa sisiqedile kodwa hayi! wafika kwalunga.[Uhleko.]

Wahola lama-Head of States amanye wathi indlela kwenziwa nje. Masiboneni
ukuthi siyasayinda manje ukuze sibe nale-accord ukube azange ufike wenze
njalo. Bebe kuphi labo abathi awenzi lutho futhi awusebenzi? Nomama
uSonjica wasibeka esimeni esikhulu kakhulu. Hawu! Wazile ukubeka lapho
Mongameli. Umama lo usebenze kakhulu eCopenhagen, kunzima kodwa sigcine
sine-accord. Phela sikhumbule sisese yizwe elisathuthuka. Asikabi yizwe
elithuthukile kepha sisebenza ngcono ngaphezu kwamazwe asethuthukile ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[What can we use  to  review  if  the  state-owned  enterprises,  SOEs,  are
working properly because the opposition parties now want to know  about  the
developments before a sufficient review time. You were  given  authority  by
the people of South Africa to lead this country and  to  work  at  your  own
pace. Do not listen to them; they will lead you astray. [Applause.]  As  you
said last year, and I quote: “The people from the rural areas also have  the
right to electricity, water, flush toilets and roads.”

If we have properly functioning state-owned enterprises  all  this  will  be
easy. But no one was eager about this, even in the  past  decade,  until  we
had problems with load shedding. Business owners did not want to  work  with
the state in order to come up with ways of dealing with the energy  problem,
but they stood aside with their arms folded. And then when we did  not  have
energy they said: Hey! The ANC government does not deliver. Scientists  with
vast knowledge must talk to them so that they may be willing to work; I  for
one heard the President clearly.

The President said the IPPs will deliver. The President gave  leadership  of
the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Energy to the Minister, Ms Dipuo  Peters.
As hon Sonjica said, you led very well at Copenhagen. Hey! The frost  almost
killed us! But you came and it is all right now! [Laughter.]

You led the heads of state, and showed them the ropes. You advised that  the
states should amalgamate in signing in order to have an accord; if  you  did
not come and do that, where would the people who say you are  doing  nothing
and you do not deliver be? Hon Sonjica raised our bar. That was a good  move
Mr President. She worked very hard in Copenhagen; it was really hard but  we
reached the accord at last. We must remember that we are still a  developing
state. We are not a developed state yet  but  we  are  working  better  than
other developed states ...]

... because of the ANC policies and nothing else.[Applause.] Fundamental to
the task of the SOEs, is assisting in fostering economic ...
[Interjections.]

I was listening to you. Thula! Shut up!

Fundamental to the task of the SOEs is their assistance in fostering
economic growth and development that wholly transforms the economy. It is
based on promoting productive, income-generating economic activities, and
it also has to ensure that growth has the resultant effect on the economy
in its entirety, not an exclusive economy and an inclusive economy.

We hope that the economic configuration will provide conditions that
encourage them to enter strategic industries. With the leadership of the
ANC policies we are going to attain ...

Mrs J F TERBLANCHE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There’s a point of order.

Mrs J F TERBLANCHE: I want to know whether it is parliamentary to say “shut
up” to members in the House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, did you say “shut up” to a particular
person?

Ms E THABETHE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I started by saying “thula” then “shut
up”. I said, “Thula!” “Shut up!” It is what I said. I withdraw, Madam
Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please continue. [Interjections.]

Ms E THABETHE: Behave what?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please behave honourably. When the
speaker has the floor don’t interrupt to the extent that the speaker has to
say “thula”, please. [Applause.]

Ms E THABETHE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I don’t think that I am to
be taught how to behave because she keeps on saying, “Behave, behave!” You
must not heckle that way; you must talk nicely, like a lady MP. Don’t say,
”Behave!” Please, I am not here to be taught how to behave by you.

This is a debate and you must debate. This is an activist Parliament and
you must debate as such and be robust. Please don’t feel the corns badly,
take it easy.

In closing, Deputy Speaker, it is the ANC’s opinion that we will make the
SOEs work. The President and the national executive committee has a plan on
how we will deal with it. There is no major crisis. People are presenting
it as a major crisis. There is no major crisis; there’s a plan and you
should wait until the plan is unveiled by the Presidency. We will make the
SOEs work for the betterment of the majority of the people, not only the
few.

I believe in slogans. I am sorry if the leader of the DA in Parliament
doesn’t believe in the slogan which says, “The people shall govern”. The
people are governing now. At the time we said that, we were led by a white
minority, but today the people are governing. I believe that working
together we can do more. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Don’t think that slogans are empty. If you think those slogans are empty, I
strongly believe it is because you never, in your life, realised that today
you’d be led by a black President. Never! You thought it would be a white
minority leading forever, but working together we can do more. We will
accelerate and we will make SOEs work better. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Hon Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy President,
members of government and hon colleagues, it is indeed refreshing and
exciting to remember the role played by one of our stalwarts in ensuring
that today we can all stand here, in this Chamber, enjoying the fruits of
his work.

In this regard Cope wants to extend a word of gratitude to the ruling party
for dedicating the state of the nation address to former President Nelson
Mandela. It is indeed befitting if we think of his contribution to the
achievement of democracy in our lifetime.

Twenty years ago South Africa was full of enthusiasm, with hope for a
better life. However, it is regrettable that, as we celebrate one of the
most important moments in the struggle for freedom, the enthusiasm we once
had is no longer there. It is further regrettable that the current
President of the Republic has betrayed and continues to betray the hopes of
the people of South Africa.

Former President Mandela was not only the embodiment of integrity, but also
struggled so that all leaders must strive and lead with integrity. The
recent events affecting the President of the Republic are the direct
opposite of what former President Mandela struggled for. Cope’s decision
not to vote for the current President of the Republic when this House voted
nine months ago is vindicated. [Interjections.]

Former President Mandela was an architect and champion of women’s
emancipation and respect. Our President does not seem to agree with this
important political position. In fact, it looks as if he has made it his
responsibility to contradict this important principle. Our President
pretends to emulate former President Mandela and yet he continues to
contradict him. Former President Mandela never bought votes with food
parcels and empty, unrealistic promises. [Interjections.] [Applause.] He
did not do this, because at all times he maintained his integrity.

When required by the laws of this country, former President Mandela
complied and subjected himself to the rule of law through our courts, and
yet the current President went through every trick available to present
himself as someone above the law. [Laughter.]

South Africa yearns for leadership and under the current President this is
nowhere to be found.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: I understand the hon member earlier indicated robust debate.
However, the hon member is making unsubstantiated allegations against the
President and I believe he is actually infringing Rule 99 of the Rules of
the National Assembly. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member ... [Interjections.] We must have robust
debate, but that debate must be general. The President, when he is in this
House, is protected, like any other member. You cannot directly accuse him;
general debate, yes, but I am asking you to refrain from accusing the
President, please. [Interjections.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Thank you very much.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Hon Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: Rule 99 is not the
applicable Rule. Hon Minister Pandor certainly quoted the wrong rule.
Secondly, I want to make the point that the hon member has freedom of
speech in this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that on the same issue?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: On the same issue. Madam Deputy Speaker,
I would just like to read Rule 99:

   A member may give notice of a motion on behalf of an absent member,
   provided he or she has been authorised to do so by the absent member.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members ...

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: I can reply. The hon member is
probably correct that I have cited the wrong Rule. [Interjections.] Hold on
a moment. Unfortunately for the hon members who cannot listen to others ...


Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a member on the floor. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: They know they are in trouble,
Madam Deputy Speaker, so they cannot allow me to speak. [Interjections.] No
member of the House can make an allegation impugning the integrity of any
person who may be removed by virtue of a vote of this House. That is in the
Rules. Find it – that is the Rule I am referring to. [Interjections.] You
well know that.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: May I ask, Madam
Deputy Speaker, that the next time I stand up on a point of order and you
rule me out of order, would you please give me the opportunity to explain
to you in exactly the same way that you have given the hon Pandor the
opportunity to explain?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will do that if you need that. But hon members, I
have ruled on this matter. Continue, hon George.

Mr M E GEORGE: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker.
It is very clear from the state of the nation address that with President
Zuma at the helm the people of South Africa are leaderless. It is very
unfortunate that this happened when we celebrated former President
Mandela’s legacy. Former President Mandela was a custodian of high moral
values and set a very good example as the head of the Republic.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Hon Speaker, on a point of
order: Is the hon member perhaps talking about defence when he says that
the country was leaderless? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Continue, hon George.

Mr M E GEORGE: It is very disturbing that the state of the nation address
is extremely quiet about this important leadership quality. It appears that
the nation is being deliberately led to lawlessness, with absolutely no
morals and respect for its people.

The first nine months of the current government under President Zuma has
been characterised by despondency, in-fighting in government, poor people
becoming poorer ...

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon member has just referred to a
deliberate action by the hon President of the Republic, and that is an
infringement of Rule 63 and Rule 66. Can you rule on that, please?
[Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

An HON MEMBER: Hon Deputy Speaker, I was wondering, when Mr Muleleki George
was speaking about morals, can he tell us what happened to the 4x4s?
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon George?

Mr M E GEORGE: The President appears to be an absent leader. This, Mr
President, cannot be allowed to continue forever.

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, I raised a point of order in line
with Rule 63 and Rule 66 of the Rules of the National Assembly, where the
hon member reflected on deliberate action from the President to lead people
to lawlessness, and I respectfully request you to ask the hon member to
withdraw the statement. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: Mr Frolick is 100%
wrong. As Members of Parliament we are entitled to freedom of speech.
[Interjections.] We certainly can reflect on the behaviour and actions of
individual members. The ANC does it to us all the time. And Mr Frolick is
jumping up and down about nothing. We have every right in this debate to
take on the President of this country. [Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, for the sake of Mr Ellis, it is “the
hon member Frolick”. But it is quite clear, Madam Deputy Speaker, in terms
of interpreting Rule 63 and Rule 66, that the member mentioned deliberate
action on the part of the President, and that is unparliamentary. It
requires a substantive motion to justify what the hon member has said.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Can we allow the hon George to continue?
[Interjections.] Order! If all of us were to stick to the Rules of this
House, we would not have the disruption that we are having. Hon Frolick, I
will check that and come back with a ruling.

Mr M E GEORGE: Hon Deputy Speaker, we call on the President and his
government to prevail in the so-called nationalisation of mines. We know,
as everyone else does, that this call is not an innocent one, but is meant
to benefit a tiny, privileged group within the ruling party.

The name of former President Mandela must not be used for mischievous
intentions, and the President of the Republic has a responsibility to
provide leadership on these matters. Mr President, when some in the
alliance attack Ministers, please prevail in this regard. We regret that
this was deliberately left out of the state of the nation address.

The nation cannot afford to spend another day discussing the so-called
private lives and uncontrollable desires of individuals. Thank you.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Hon Deputy Speaker, Mr President, HIV/Aids is still of
pandemic proportions in South Africa.

In 2009 the DA welcomed the apparent u-turn by our government on HIV/Aids,
on the occasion of World Aids Day. The government, we thought, had finally
acknowledged the reality of Aids and recognised that this was indeed a
crisis that was destroying lives and which had consequences for every South
African.

The age of denialism, which had lasted for a decade, was over, we thought.
Examples from across Africa showed that when there was political leadership
leading the charge against HIV/Aids, it did have a positive effect in
reducing new infections.

However, Mr President, you certainly do not practise what you expect the
rest of us to do. You do not consider yourself bound by the norms of safe
sex that you spoke of in December last year on World Aids Day, some 10
weeks ago. To remind you, I would like to quote a few lines. You said:


  Each individual must take responsibility for protection against HIV ... We
  can eliminate the scourge of HIV if all South Africans take responsibility
  for their actions.

The DA believes in personal responsibility, as it will only be through the
changing of the sexual habits of each individual that we will be able to
combat this scourge.

Mr President, the fact is that your actions have set us back at least a
decade in the fight against HIV/Aids. The response of millions and millions
of young, impressionable people will be: “If the President can do it, so
can I.”

This attitude undermines the entire message of the government’s HIV/Aids
programme and all the good work the Minister of Health spoke about here
today when he said that his department was working night and day to be
prepared to achieve the targets you set for them 10 weeks ago. You have
undermined all that hard work.

You, Mr President, set the tone for the rest of the nation. You need to
answer the question: Do you believe in what you said 10 weeks ago? The ANC
tolerated a president in denial for a decade. We cannot tolerate another.

Deputy Speaker, another grave concern for the DA is the ever-increasing
overspending by the provinces. Gauteng is R1,8 billion overdrawn and cannot
pay contractors. KwaZulu-Natal is at least R2,3 billion overdrawn and
technically cannot pay salaries in February; and the Eastern Cape is
overdrawn to the tune of at least R1,6 billion.

The main reasons for this financial crisis are the systemic underfunding of
the nurses’ and doctors’ occupation-specific dispensation by national
government; the R7 billion overspent by provinces in 2008-09; deferred
expenses from that year to the current year; and underbudgeting for the
Aids programme of around R1 billion.

In the last financial year, the ANC-led Free State province,
unconstitutionally and unilaterally, cut health services and stopped the
dispensing of life-saving antiretroviral medication for a month due to this
financial crisis. An additional 30 people a day died during that period.
Where is the accountability, Mr President?

Deputy Speaker, the management of hospitals needs urgent attention. Sixty-
two per cent of hospital CEOs do not have a management degree or diploma.
Two and a half years after Frere Hospital’s horrific baby deaths the same
unqualified hospital manager, who was previously an ANC councillor, remains
in charge. Where is the accountability, Mr President?

Without addressing these fundamental problems, this government is about to
embark on the new system of the national health insurance, which is so
expensive that a report published in today’s papers suggests it will cost
60% of our total national budget.

What we need to do is to get the basics right, and I am pleased to hear
that after six years of waiting, we are now going to have an office of
standards compliance, which the Minister announced today. Thank you,
Minister, but if you continue to keep employing unqualified and unfit
people in positions as managers of hospitals it won’t make any difference.

Doctors and nurses are struggling under impossible burdens because of
enormous vacancy rates. We have 12 000 vacancies for doctors and 46 000 for
nurses, at least, and all this is because we are not training enough new
health professionals. Yet we have no meaningful plan for human resources
development, and we are producing the same number of doctors today as we
did 15 years ago. You, Mr President, and the Minister failed to stipulate
how the human resources crisis in health care would be addressed.

Lastly, Deputy Speaker, another issue that affects health is good, clean
water. Without good water we cannot have good health. Only 32 of South
Africa’s approximately 970 wastewater treatment works – that is, 3% -
comply with requirements for safe discharge.

While wastewater treatment works are operated by local government, the
national department needs to take strong action against municipalities that
continually fail to address problems at so many of these plants. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Moh M T KUBAYI: Motlatšasepikara, mohlomphegi Mopresidente wa Afrika Borwa,
Maloko a Palamente, ke a le dumediša ka moka.

Setšhaba ka bophara se leboga Mopresidente ka polelo ya gagwe yeo e bego e
hlakile ebile e kwagala e laetša gore maphelo a batho ba bantši a tla
tšwela pele go ba a makaone ka fase ga mmušo wa ANC. Setšhaba se tshepa
gape gore hlogo ya naga ya rena, e lego Mopresidente wa rena Jacob Zuma, ke
Mopresidente yo a kgonago go re swara bjalo ka setšhaba le go re iša
bophelong bjo bokaone.

Re sa dutše re na le mafolofolo le tshepo ya gore ka nnete maphelo a rena a
tla ba a makaone le ka moso. Mohlomphegi George, rena re le baswa bao ba
latelago ANC re tshepa gore re tla sepela ka dinako ka moka re tshepile
gore ANC e tla re fa bokamoso bjo bo kaone.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs M T KUBAYI: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon President of South Africa, hon
Members of Parliament, I greet you all.

The nation extends a word of gratitude to the President for his state of
the nation address, which clearly indicates that people’s lives will
improve continuously under the ANC-led government. The nation also believes
that our head of state, President Jacob Zuma, is able to unify and lead us
to a better life for all.

We are still enthusiastic and hopeful that indeed our lives will be better
in the near future. Hon George, as the ANC youth we believe that at all
times we will put our trust in the ANC for a better future.]

It is important to take a historic look at where we come from as South
Africa, and at the past injustices of the apartheid government and the
extent to which it went to provide services to the people. The minority in
this country got services and infrastructure, while the majority of black
people are left without tar roads even today.

I grew up in Soweto where we used to say, “We come from the dusty streets
of Soweto.” It was not by choice, but because the services were not given
to us; the infrastructure was not there. Today, thanks to the ANC
government, all the streets in Soweto are tarred. [Applause.]

After our democratic elections in 1994, the ANC took over government with
infrastructure that was old, having been in existence for over three
decades without being upgraded, and in other areas there was nothing at
all.

When we took over as government, the ANC understood the challenges that it
was faced with. It understood that infrastructure development is important
to improve the lives of South Africans. Yes, the ANC government was aware
of the challenges and geared itself to meet them and improve the lives of
ordinary South Africans.

The situation had to be turned around to ensure that equality can be
experienced, even in the context of services provided to our people. And
yes, we heard last week Thursday of the commitment of the President, as he
told all of us that this is the year of action, but all of us must be
geared to work.

The ANC’s 52nd conference called for the rolling out of state-led
infrastructure investment programmes and the promotion of strategic
investments in productive activities. The aim of this would be to diversify
the economy and build towards an overall investment in a GDP ratio of 25%.
Critical in the development of policy drivers is the massive infrastructure
investment strategy. This strategy places the state at the centre of
investment and development of infrastructure.

While private sector investment remains critical, targeted public
investment is the only way to create a better life for all our people and
to stimulate the economy. Public sector investment must result in
accelerated growth, investment and improvement in productivity capacity
within the country.

Further, it must facilitate rural development and agrarian reform,
integrate the economy and foster equitable redistribution of wealth whilst
continuing to expand the public works programme through the promotion of
labour-intensive production methods.

Infrastructure investment for hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup has also
given the South African government an opportunity to speed up service
delivery through upgrading development of the new roads that we have seen;
improvement of the transport system with the introduction of other modes
such as the Bus Rapid Transit, BRT; upgrading of our airports; the
improvement of our railway network; building and improvement of stadia and
other sports facilities; the improvement and the upgrading of the hospital
sector; the revitalisation of hospitality and ICT infrastructure; the
improvement of our borders for access into our country; and access to
water, electricity and sanitation within a 20 km radius of the stadia.

The government of the ANC understood, when it signed the agreements and the
guarantees with Fifa, that it was not only about delivering the World Cup,
but also an opportunity to provide services to the people of South Africa.
Therefore, there is an understanding that the infrastructure is not only
going to be for 2010, but will remain as a legacy for the South African
people beyond the World Cup.

Much has been achieved and more still needs to be done. There is still a
need to ensure that the lives of our people in remote areas can be
improved. And we also need to ensure that the people within the remote
areas also get access to water, electricity and sanitation. I wish to
mention the woman who was bitten by a crocodile in KwaZulu-Natal, in the
Tugela River. That woman believes in the ANC and that it can provide a
better life for her; and yes, through the year of action, this shall be
achieved.

The role of infrastructure in improving the livelihoods of women can’t be
disputed, as the time that is spent trying to fetch water from rivers and
wood to make fire reduces the ability to become active participants in the
economy.

It is even more important that we don’t deliver services that are
substandard, that degrade people such as has been provided by the DA in the
Western Cape - the toilets that only have a roof and nothing else. That is
surely not suitable for our people; that can’t be acceptable. All these men
and women, young and old, are looking to the ANC to change their lives.

Understanding that His Excellency committed R846 billion for improving
infrastructure over the next three years, this allocation should assist us
in meeting the Millennium Development Goals. It can’t be disputed that the
major part of social infrastructure development happens at municipal level.


Therefore it is important to ensure that the Municipal Infrastructure
Grant, MIG, funding is given more attention during this term of office, so
that money allocated for infrastructure does not end up providing
infrastructure for which the funds were not allocated. It is encouraging to
hear government’s commitment to improving capacity in municipalities to
meet the demands that are there.

The majority of young people in this country are still unemployed and
without skills. Therefore, there is a need to ensure that as part of the
investment that government makes in South Africa we use and develop local
skills. We need to ensure that we don’t import skills to work on this
infrastructure development, but that we further recommit ourselves to the
development of artisan and engineering skills, which should be absorbed
during construction.

In conclusion, there is a need to review the Development Finance
Institution, DFI, so that support for government infrastructure development
is adequate. The institution, among other things, must provide cheap and
competitive rates for agri-business and the construction industry,
especially those doing business in providing public infrastructure.
I think it is important to remember, hon member George, that as you honour
the memory of our former President, Nelson Rholihlahla Mandela, you’ve
betrayed that cause yourself. [Applause.] You betrayed his memory and his
honour. Therefore, I find it very strange for you to stand here and want to
claim to be a part of that. You will know soon.

When you think about Comrade Nelson Mandela, you’ll understand his loyalty
and commitment to the ANC and to this government, hence the President’s
honouring him in this regard. This is because he belongs to the ANC and
nowhere else. You don’t have old people, acknowledge that. You can’t be
born on December 16 and think that you can have senior citizens in your
organisation; they don’t exist in Cope! Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Speaker, comrades and hon members, Comrade President, the APC
joins the House in congratulating you on the state of the nation address.

Our Constitution enjoins us, amongst other things, to honour those who
fought and suffered for freedom and justice in our country. This is meant
to ensure that future generations do not forget the enormous sacrifices
that their forbears had to make for the freedom that they enjoy. It is,
therefore, correct and fitting for us, on this occasion, to focus on the
release of former President Mandela 20 years ago, for this represented the
victory of the liberation.
It is thus equally fitting that we should remember that in this same month,
20 years ago, the liberation movement unbanned itself through the hand of
Mr F W de Klerk. We also want to honour the memory of Robert Sobukwe, that
great patriot and outstanding leader of our struggle, who passed away in
February 1978.

As we evoke the memory of our leaders today, we are challenged to reaffirm
our commitment to the vision and the values they represented. We are
challenged to assess whether we, today, still represent a continuum in
thought and in action and whether we, the leadership crop of today, can
live up to Sobukwe’s dictum on leadership. I quote:

  True leadership demands complete subjugation of self, honesty, integrity,
  uprightness of character, fearlessness and courage and above all a
  consuming love for one’s people.

Amilcar Cabral, the outstanding revolutionary, teaches us that in fighting
for freedom, the people are fighting for an improvement in their lives and
not for ideas or things in anyone’s head. This means that our freedom must
have material meaning in the lives of our people.

The APC believes that for this to happen, the state has a decisive and
central role to play. But for the state to do so, it must have the
requisite capacity and correct orientation. As things stand, the
APC believes that there is a serious challenge for leadership. We need
competent and farsighted leadership, both politically and administratively.


Whilst we welcome the performance management system that the President has
announced, the APC believes that much more needs to change in the state of
public administration to deliver timeous and quality services to our
people.

We believe that senior leaders in the departments must be permanent and
professional employees. The current arrangement of short-term contracts
leads to a lack of continuity and instability. We have a number of
departmental heads in acting capacities. This cannot be helpful as it leads
to a lot of indiscipline and noncompliance with legislation, especially on
financial matters.

Is it surprising that disciplinary cases and cases of financial misconduct
are not dealt with firmly, decisively and swiftly? Is it surprising that
financial disclosures, which are under the supervision of Ministers, are
not adhered to fully, despite the fact that our disclosure requirements are
in need of urgent amendment to make them more comprehensive?

The Minister of Finance will be presenting his budget allocation for
departments soon. In the absence of proper leadership and with weak
controls, should we not be worried about how these resources will be
managed? Twelve months down the line, departments will not be able to
properly account for the use of these resources.

We need competent and patriotic administrative cadres who are committed to
serving the public and are infused with a sense of national consciousness,
pride and national goals.

The APC believes that, as part of the measures to enhance the fight against
graft, there is now a need to look at establishing, via a legislative or
enabling mechanism, the relationship between parliamentary oversight bodies
and law enforcement agencies. As things stand, corrupt officials are let
off the hook because managers in departments have little appetite to
correct ill-discipline.

A number of state-owned enterprises, SOEs, have been in the news for all
the wrong reasons. A perception has taken root that they are badly managed
and need perpetual bailouts by the state.

The APC takes the view that SOEs must be properly aligned to the
developmental goals of the state and that people in leadership positions
must have national consciousness, pride and national goals. We think the
state can do more to provide decisive leadership and guide them in the
direction of progress.

It is our conviction that our people need alternatives for their livelihood
and self-reliance - as an antidote to handouts - through entrepreneurship
and microenterprise development. This has been proven to be effective in
all developing countries, especially for women empowerment and rural
development. Our people need to be enabled to do and think for themselves
and not be dependent or degenerate into declassed elements.

As we celebrate two decades of freedom, let’s take cognisance of the fact
that values and practices that are totally inconsistent with the lives and
ideas of Mandela, Sobukwe and Steve Biko, have taken root in our society
and threaten to devalue the glorious liberation we achieved at a great and
costly price. This is the cancer of corruption.

Unless government summons up the requisite courage and stamina to fight
this scourge, we will not succeed in our developmental goals. The challenge
as seen by the APC is not the absence of legislation, but its
implementation within government. Many cases of corruption are not acted
upon by the officers responsible within departments. Is it a case of their
being compromised? We cannot resist concluding that.

The APC reiterates its call for African unity, for only in unity can our
continent and people be lifted from the margins of world politics and
underdevelopment. We agree with the new chairperson of the African Union,
His Excellency President Bingu wa Mutharika, that the basis of Pan-
Africanism is still relevant today.

In the same tone of celebration, let us not forget the plight of the
oppressed Palestinians who, like us, are fighting for freedom and, like
every human being, deserve their freedom. We salute them for their
unwavering stand against an overwhelming combination of forces. Our country
and our government must stand shoulder to shoulder with the Palestinians
and condemn the brutality, the humiliation, the killings and imprisonment
visited upon them daily. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M H HOOSEN: Hon Speaker, in his last state of the nation address in this
House, former President Nelson Mandela said, and I quote:

  The public is justified in demanding better service, more respect and
  greater concern for their needs rather than self-aggrandisement.


It comes as no surprise, therefore, that the general response to this
year’s address has been as disappointing as the occasion itself, as it
failed to inspire a nation desperate and impatient for the promise of a
better life for all.

The ID is disappointed that the President did not find the time to provide
some semblance of hope to the millions of South Africans who are steadily
losing faith in our ability to provide decent health care, yet he found the
time to thank Dr Irvin Khoza for his contributions to soccer! [Laughter.]

There are still people dying in Mpumalanga because hospitals do not have
essential medicines in stock. The central pharmaceutical depot in Mthatha
in the Eastern Cape, which should provide life-saving medicine to hospitals
and clinics in the region, does not even have a pharmacist.

Meanwhile, overspending has become the norm in almost all provincial health
departments. Clinics in the Free State have had their electricity cut off
for nonpayment. The shortage of doctors and general health care workers has
reached epidemic proportions in the North West and KwaZulu-Natal.

In addition, more than half of the people who need ARVs in Limpopo don’t
have access to them because of a chronic shortage of funds. To top this all
off, a culture of poor planning, mismanagement, incompetence and corruption
has permeated our public health care system.

It is now time to finally prioritise the filling of all vacancies and to
adequately fund the public health care sector. This government must find
creative ways of channelling some of the resources of the private sector
into public health care and we must ensure that the administrations at all
our hospitals are held accountable to the highest standards.

Over the past 15 years we have spent more on education than most other
developing nations in the world and the ID believes we still do not have
enough to show for it. We remain concerned about the massive inequalities
in education, which have once again emerged in the recent matric results,
where schools in wealthier areas have yet again fared better than those in
poor areas.

Mr President, we have lost our sense of urgency. The previous President
stood on this very podium in 2005 and promised that within two years every
school will have electricity, water and sanitation and that no child would
be taught under a tree or in a mud hut.

Two years later, there is no more talk about this promise. Six months after
61 schools were destroyed in the Eastern Cape, children from rural
communities are still being taught under trees in the searing heat. There
are still schools in our country, 15 years after democracy, which do not
have basic facilities such as toilets and libraries.

This is the real state of the nation. As we stand here today on the verge
of destroying the dreams and the legacy of our former President Nelson
Mandela, I am reminded of the words of the journalist Amanda Ngudle, when
she wrote:
  Perhaps what has diminished the Mandela legacy is that while he planted
  the seeds, his successors didn’t water the trees.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Speaker, the President, Deputy President and hon members,
I would like to devote my time to the question of education and skills
acquisition. I believe that we are in agreement that education is the key
to uplifting the millions of disadvantaged people in this country.

We also need to say unequivocally that failure to address the shortcomings
in education is tantamount to condemning the entire new generation to
continued poverty. So when we speak about improving education, we are not
merely talking about the benefits of action, but also about the terrible
consequences of inaction. Right now, we have several million young people
in this country who are unemployed and deeply frustrated by the failure of
the education system to prepare them properly for further study or finding
employment.

Whilst we welcome the measures you have announced with regard to improving
basic literacy and assessing every school, these are ad hoc interventions.
What the UDM has advocated and still advocates - and we would plead with
you to urgently adopt it as government policy - is the reintroduction of
school inspectors who on a regular basis will visit and assess performance
in schools. That is the best way to ensure that teachers and pupils
maintain discipline and focus on schooling.

Another major benefit of school inspectors would be to identify and
continually track improvements at schools that are in desperate need of
basic facilities, such as running water and weatherproof classrooms.

We get the distinct impression that currently the Department of Education
is not completely aware of where the neediest schools are, neither is
anybody in government tracking whether these schools are benefitting from
the funding that is set aside to assist them.

The UDM is concerned that this government is failing to acknowledge that
there is a serious disparity between what is being taught at our schools
and FET institutions, and what is required for further study or employment.


The outcomes-based education policy has only exacerbated the problem.
Universities and employers in general report that matriculants and college
leavers simply do not possess the most basic skills.

This is the core of our unemployment crisis. This is why even in a growing
economy more jobs are not created: because there are not enough people who
have the skills to make such jobs viable.
We are particularly concerned about the relegation of career guidance to a
subtopic in the so-called Life Skills subject at school level. I think the
Deputy Minister of Economic Development has said a lot about this and I
want to thank her for that.

Is it any wonder that our children are ill—prepared for the rigours of
further study or the workplace? If you don’t know where you are going, any
road will take you there.

As you can see, what we are suggesting are simple measures. This is because
we fervently believe that a return to the basics is what will produce the
best results. It is not necessary to complicate matters. Teachers must
work, children must learn, inspectors must evaluate, assess and provide
guidance. [Time expired.] I thank you.

Mr K M ZONDI: Speaker, since this year’s state of the nation address, in
the main, celebrated the momentous occasion in the history of this nation –
the release from prison of our iconic former President Nelson Mandela 20
years ago – it was inevitable, fitting and proper to also reflect on former
President Mandela’s legacy of reconciliation and peace, which he bequeathed
to present and future generations of South Africans, twenty years on.

It is, however, most tragic that real and true reconciliation has eluded us
in this country for various reasons. This country needs reconciliation,
perhaps more urgently than most of us realise, to enable us to build on the
solid foundation of our achievements of yesteryear.

This reconciliation, which has eluded us for two decades after the
cessation of conflicts of the past, does not only need to take place
between white and black South Africans, but also between and among black
South Africans, and indeed between and among various political
organisations that operate in this country.

Reconciliation is not something we can afford to brush aside or postpone to
some unknown moment in the future; it is an imperative for the very
survival of our nation. It is the very cornerstone of true nation-building
that should be pursued in order to guarantee lasting peace for ourselves,
our children and generations to come.

It is for these reasons that we call on the Presidency of our country, as
an institution, and on you Mr President, as a person, to be an embodiment
of the values enunciated by such an icon of our struggle as former
President Nelson Mandela was. In particular, we call upon you, Mr
President, to take decisive initiatives to save and extend the legacy of
former President Nelson Mandela who demonstrated in word and deed that
reconciliation and peace were firm foundations upon which to build this
nation.

We mean bold and honest initiatives which go beyond mere public relations
exercises pursued for political expediency and cheap political propaganda,
driven by the temporal need to only do that which helps one score political
points over one’s adversaries.

It is for that reason that we read with horror that an ANC-controlled
eThekwini Municipality, which commissioned the erection of a sculpture of
three elephants, has now, after squandering millions of rand of taxpayers’
and ratepayers’ funds, buckled under pressure from those in the ANC who now
think it was not politically correct to have commissioned such a sculpture.
They think it will bolster the image of the hated IFP whose logo features
three elephants!

While we have a very profound appreciation for the boldness with which you,
Mr President, gave rare recognition to the positive role played by people
such as the late Mrs Helen Suzman and Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, in
particular, we are concerned at the failure of the ANC, of which you are
president, to rein in the president of the ANC Youth League, Mr Julius
Malema, who poured scorn on the positive role of former President De Klerk
in getting Mr Mandela released, while castigating the IFP in very
derogatory terms.

Mr President, Mr Malema is bad news for reconciliation in this country and
he is bad news for the survival of the legacy of reconciliation and peace
pursued by former President Nelson Mandela.

What is even more disturbing is the tacit approval and the encouragement
that he receives from some senior leaders of the ANC, including you, Mr
President. The office that you occupy does not belong to you personally. It
is not your private property or that of the ANC; it actually belongs to all
the people of South Africa. Therefore, we urge you to use it for the common
good of all the people of South Africa – those who voted for the ANC and
those who did not.

The ANC may have won election after election since the advent of our
democratic dispensation in 1994. It might perhaps continue to do so in the
foreseeable future, but that does not mean that the ANC has the monopoly on
the wisdom of all that needs to be done in this country to achieve the very
nice-sounding intentions and goals that the government has set for itself.

It will need the inputs of all people of goodwill from across the political
spectrum represented in this House to make the necessary headway. The
people of South Africa look up to the leadership of the country – which
sits in this very House – for answers to their daily problems. We cannot
fail them and we dare not fail them.

Mr President, you have committed your government to halving the loss of
water from leaking pipes by the year 2014. Mr President, as someone who
hails from KwaZulu-Natal, you know as much I do that the water of uThukela
River literally runs a stone’s throw from your home into the Indian Ocean.
It leaves behind thousands of drought-stricken and destitute people in
rural villages who cannot benefit from water, through no fault of their
own. Is there nothing that can be done to change this?

Moreover, the Jozini Dam, which is in uMkhanyakude District Municipality,
for reasons we suspect are political, does not benefit the majority of the
people of Ingwavuma, oBonjeni and the entire uMkhanyakude District. Yet,
when it is full, water is released, destroying even the people’s gardens.
This must change Mr President, if we want to save the legacy of
reconciliation in this country.

Mhlonishwa Mongameli, ngiyethemba ukuthi asibakhohlisi abantu basemakhaya
ngokuba sisho okuningi okuhle kule Ndlu, ngezidingo zabo zentuthuko kepha
sibe singaqondile ukukulandela ngezenzo ezibonakalayo ukuze basizakale
impela. Umuntu uze asole ukuthi hleze kushiwo izinto ezinhle lapha ukuze
basivotele nje kuphela kepha singezukwenza lutho oluphathekayo
ukuhlangabezana nezidingo zabo zansuku zonke. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Hon President, I hope we are not deceiving people in the rural areas by
saying all the good things in this House, regarding their developmental
needs, whereas we are not prepared to act on that so that they can really
be helped. One might suspect that good things are being said so that they
can vote for us only and that it does not have anything to do with meeting
their daily needs. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Mr Speaker, Mr President, Deputy
President and hon members, in the state of the nation address on Thursday
evening the President reminded us that we were meeting against the backdrop
of a severe global economic crisis.

This is a crisis that is not of our making. It had its origin in the
bursting of the financial bubble in the developed world – a bubble caused
by a proliferation of speculative activity, fuelled by a hands-off approach
by regulatory authorities who were mesmerised by narrow, free-market,
fundamentalist ideologies.

We, in South Africa, were largely spared the systemic financial sector
implosion some other countries went through. This was largely thanks to a
combination of prudent financial regulations; the National Credit Act,
which limited reckless lending; and the maintenance of exchange controls,
which limited potential exposure of pension funds or municipal accounts to
the kind of unsafe investments in derivatives that a number of their
counterparts elsewhere had made, with disastrous consequences.

We were not, however, able to escape the second-order, real economy,
effects of what soon became a global economic crisis. The current crisis is
sometimes referred to by commentators as the Great Recession. This term
draws attention to the fact that the world has been through the biggest
crash since the Great Depression of the 1930s and came perilously close at
critical moments to lurching into a depression no less severe than that of
the 1930s.

It has also been a crisis truly global in character. No country, not even
China, escaped the negative impact at some time and to some degree.

It is against this background that we have to record and grapple with the
consequences of the loss of around 900 000 jobs. Most of these jobs were in
mining because across the world, the crisis produced an abrupt fall in
demand and in prices for mineral products. It was also felt in
manufacturing, which experienced a 30,4% fall in physical volume of
production, and suffered 202 000 job losses between October 2008 and
December 2009.

In manufacturing, the subsectors most affected were those most integrated
into global value chains and which were producing consumer durables
dependent on credit finance for their purchase. In South Africa, as
elsewhere, this included the motor industry which, in South Africa drives
at least six to seven other subsectors; as well as the already fragile
clothing and textile sector, which nevertheless continues to provide
employment to nearly 100 000 people.

We are fortunately now officially out of recession, as is the global
economy as a whole. According to latest figures for December, manufacturing
output was 3,2% higher than in the corresponding month of 2008 - the first
annualised rise for 14 months. But there is still great uncertainty about
the durability of the global recovery, with most analysts agreeing that the
recovery is fragile and that there is still a risk of double-dip recession.

Mr President, you referred to the Framework Response agreed to in February
last year between government, business, labour and community
representatives. This response package was indeed unique, and, as such,
received much favourable comment because it was a product of social
dialogue with responsibilities assumed by all parties. It was that which, I
believe, gave it its resilience and demonstrated the meaning of our slogan,
“Working together, we can do more”.

Among the main features of the Framework Response was our commitment to
push ahead with the then R787 billion infrastructure investment programme
as our main countercyclical response. Your announcement in the state of the
nation address – that we will be spending R846 billion over the next 3
years on public infrastructure – shows that our efforts in this regard will
not all peter out once the Fifa World Cup investments have been completed.
It shows rather that we are on track to effect a major infrastructure
renewal programme that will continue for many years to come.

Other dimensions of the Framework Response include the training lay-off
programme and the R6,1 billion facility made available to distressed
companies by the Industrial Development Corporation. The training lay-off
programme basically involves supporting companies to place in training
programmes workers who can’t be employed in production due to the recession
while they continue to draw at least part of their wages.
Applications involving 2 219 workers were approved for the pilot project
and applications involving a further 831 workers are close to approval.

In addition, facilitation provided by the Commission for Conciliation,
Mediation and Arbitration, the CCMA, in terms of the framework and the
Labour Relations Act, saved a further 4 482 jobs. The IDC’s R6,1 billion
facility envisages assisting companies in distress as the result of
recession to the tune of R2,9 billion through 2010, with a further
R3,2 billion available for 2011.

Between April 2009 and January 2010 around R1 billion of assistance was
approved, resulting in 7 854 jobs being saved.

In addition, we have also developed sector-specific response packages
involving fast-tracking certain facilities and support measures, including
support packages for the motor industry, the clothing and textile industry,
and capital equipment and metal fabrication sectors.

A feature of many of these programmes is that we have insisted on
reciprocal commitments in return for any support government has made
available. Generally, this has covered undertakings on refraining from, or
moderating through negotiation, retrenchment of workers and refraining
from, or moderating, extraordinary bonuses on dividend payments to managers
or stakeholders.
Through these and other crisis response measures, we have, I believe, been
able to save many jobs, as well as strategic industrial capacity that would
otherwise have been lost, most likely irretrievably.

Besides, some of the measures in place – notably the training lay-off
programme – have strengthened the capacity of companies to position
themselves ahead of the curve in taking advantage of improved
circumstances.

It is notable, for example, that BMW, one of the major companies involved
in using training lay-offs, was among the first motor manufacturers to have
announced, since the recession, a significant investment in the manufacture
in South Africa of new-generation vehicles; in this case, through an
investment amounting to R2,9 billion. BMW did not retrench workers, but
rather used the training lay-off facility to upgrade skills needed for its
new project. [Applause.]

Mr Speaker, although our short-term response has cushioned us to some
degree from the ravages of the recession, the recession has also
highlighted the need for us to accelerate our efforts to bring about
structural change that will place our economy on a more labour-absorbing
growth path.

We need to make ourselves less vulnerable to the vagaries of cycles and
bubbles originating elsewhere. We also need to accelerate structural
changes to our growth path so that we can achieve our manifesto commitment
of creating decent work for our people.

Even before the recession, when our economy grew at the highest level for
the longest sustained period since any time post-World War II, unemployment
never fell to below 23% of the economically active population in the strict
definition. This points to the stark reality that the unemployment problem
we face in South Africa is fundamentally structural rather than cyclical in
nature.

In a nutshell, the accumulation path in South Africa under colonialism and
the early years of apartheid depended on drawing large numbers of low-paid
African people into unskilled work in mining and other primary sector
activities. The notorious migrant and contract labour systems were the most
visible manifestations of this.

From the mid-1970s onwards, however, as a result of a combination of the
gold mining industry having passed its prime and increasing mechanisation
in both mining and agriculture, we witnessed the expulsion and later
marginalisation of former unskilled migrant workers from employment.

While our economy made important advances during the past 15 years of our
democracy, we have not yet succeeded in bringing about structural change on
a scale sufficient to absorb those marginalised, structurally unemployed
people into new, productive, income-earning activities. That is the
challenge that continues to confront us.

I want to suggest that there is sufficient evidence from economic history
to support the proposition that there has been no case ever anywhere - and
the examples can stretch from the principality of Venice in the 16th
century to China today - of an economy which has moved onto a growth path
characterised by increasing, as distinct from diminishing returns, without
identifying appropriate productive activities and then mobilising support
and human energy to bring those productive activities into operation.

On Thursday this week, I will be making a statement in the House about the
2010-11 and 2012-13 Industrial Policy Action Plan, Ipap, which we will
release thereafter. Next week, we will engage the portfolio committee on
the details of Ipap 2, after which the portfolio committee will hold public
hearings.

Mr President, in the state of the nation address you indicated that Ipap
would be a mechanism, one among several others, to ...

   ... build stronger and more labour-absorbing industries, as well as to
   provide a new focus on green jobs.

The new Ipap will include a combination of cross-cutting and sector-
specific actions. It will include proposals and action plans linked to
defined timeframes aimed at bringing about a significant overhaul of
procurement legislation and practices. This is aimed, amongst other things,
at ensuring that we achieve a greater impetus for local manufacturing and
job creation from the infrastructure investment programmes that we will be
undertaking.

There will also be proposals and action plans to align the Competitive
Supplier Development Programme being undertaken by some state-owned
enterprises to a revamped national industrial participation programme; and
proposals to move a range of key purchases for infrastructure programmes to
long-term fleet procurement processes and to boost the proudly South
African campaign.

All of these, we believe, will create improved opportunities for local
industries to supply a greater proportion of the inputs needed in ways that
can boost decent employment.

In the years ahead, through these efforts, we believe we will be able to
position ourselves as a significant manufacturer of capital equipment for
infrastructure projects, not just for the domestic market, but also to
service projects on the African continent and further afield.

We will also be putting forward new proposals, linked to time-bound action
plans, to enhance access to concessional funding for industrial
development, focusing on the off-budget role of developing finance
institutions and particularly those involved in industrial and enterprise
funding.

We will be signalling in a more strategic use of trade policy instruments
and standards to support local economic development and decent work. These
proposals will be operational generally across the board, but will also be
customised to meet particular needs of specific sectors.

As you indicated, Mr President, our proposals will be focused on particular
high, labour-absorbing, value-added sectors, but Ipap will also seek to
promote more labour-absorbing and hence decent work-creating activities in
all the sectors that we work with.

You also mentioned green jobs. Moving towards a greener economy is
essential both to respond to our own domestic challenges of promoting
greater energy efficiency and to the common global challenge of mitigating
the threat of catastrophic climate change.

In our efforts to create green jobs, we will be responding to a global
trend that recognises that there are opportunities for new economic
activity and decent jobs from going greener. Through Ipap 2, we will be
proposing a number of first steps on a journey aimed at positioning
ourselves at the front end of the curve on green jobs.

Again, our approach will involve a combination of focusing on specific
quick wins for immediate attention and promoting a broader proactive
involvement in greener productive activity across the board. Further
details on Ipap 2 as well as our specific job creation targets will be
provided later in the week.

In addition to Ipap, further work from within the economic cluster will
identify a broader range of actions we need to take to place us on a growth
path capable of meeting the challenge of creating decent work for our
people. Within the Department of Trade and Industry, an additional priority
focus for us will be on enterprise development. In the course of this year,
we will be stepping up our efforts to promote SMME development.

Recognising that young people are disproportionately represented among the
unemployed, we have begun a conversation with the National Youth
Development Agency with a view to aligning our efforts with those of this
important agency. We will also be developing a new strategic thrust to
promote co-operative development following a highly productive engagement
we have been involved in with our National Economic Development and Labour
Council, Nedlac, partners. We are planning to take these proposals through
the Cabinet process in the middle of this year.

Mr President, you are a very hard taskmaster. The outcomes-based monitoring
system which your administration is developing requires of us not just to
deliver on activities of the sort that I have described, but, more
importantly, on concrete outcomes as it means
something and begins to change the lives of people.

While you have not yet finalised the outcome targets for the economic
cluster, we know that you want us simultaneously to achieve ambitious
outcomes in economic growth, increasing labour absorption and reducing
inequality. The three have not always gone together in the past.

The challenge for us to do so now will be tough against the background of a
still fragile global economy, but it is not an unattainable goal. Other
countries, and most notably in recent times, Brazil, have made progress on
all three fronts simultaneously. That is what our people need and we dare
not fail them. Siyabonga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Mr Speaker, hon President and hon members, recently an
important debate has emerged amongst the people of South Africa not only in
the media, but also, without doubt, in taverns, around braais and dinner-
tables and within a vast number of homes, schools, campuses, churches and
other places of congregation and discussion all over our country.

The hon President failed to deal with this burning issue in his speech on
the state of our nation. This is possibly because of the way in which some
of the traditional customs associated with his culture and my culture, and
the culture of all those South Africans who self-identify as amaZulu, have
recently been pushed into the spotlight in this national debate on whether
cultural identity and practice should ever be allowed to supersede our
humanity and the human rights to equality and dignity, which are enshrined
in our Constitution.

In particular, the practices of lobola and polygamy are some of the customs
practised by amaZulu that have recently been singled out for censure,
sparking a long-overdue debate on the meaning of culture in contemporary
South Africa. Within the context of this debate the words “It’s my culture”
have increasingly come to be accepted as legitimate responses to questions
probing the necessity or, indeed, acceptability of such customs.

For example, to the question, “Can we claim that women have equal rights in
a democratic South Africa, if at the same time we legitimise their exchange
between families for cattle and money?” one will often hear the response:
“It’s an important part of our culture”, and so the debate is closed.

No discussion of where we are as a nation today and where we are going can
be complete without engaging robustly with the subject of culture. Yet,
while some analysts, commentators and members of the public continue to
grapple with this subject, politicians have mostly been conspicuous by
their silence.

Given our racially divided past, the tendency towards knee-jerk reactions
on both sides of this debate is understandable. But we cannot allow
inflated sensitivities about the possible motives of those who question our
cultural practices to justify keeping in place some customs which violate
gender equality, put young people – especially girls - at risk, and deny
our humanity as a people. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, allow the speaker to be heard. Continue, hon
member.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: During the furore surrounding the revival of the Nguni
ritual of barehanded bull-killing during the annual feast of Ukweshwama,
the Sunday Times columnist, Fred Khumalo, branded the custom reprehensible
and he declared: “African culture? Not in my name.”

He argued that, as with the practice of bullfighting in Spain, or fox
hunting in the United Kingdom, about which similar debates go on in those
countries, the defensive resort to culture in order to justify these
customs and practices slows the progress of any society which claims to be
compassionate, equal and committed to doing no harm. “Why”, he asked, “for
example, was the animal not rather humanely slaughtered with a single stab
of a spear in order to spare it unnecessary pain?”

Khumalo outlined his position thus:


   Negligible beliefs, customs, traditions, all get conflated under the
   shapeless umbrella called culture. Culture is something bigger than that;
   something more potent; something more intelligent. Culture is forward-
   looking; culture is dynamic, just like humanity.

In her book, Laying Ghosts to Rest, which has already been quoted once in
this House today, Dr Mamphela Ramphele refers to what she calls “the ghost
of ethnic chauvinism”, which she argues must be named and laid to rest in
order for South Africa to embark on the road to true transformation, which,
crucially, includes the realisation of equal rights for women and the
protection of children.

Dr Ramphele, referencing Prof Thandabantu Nhlapo, identifies a series of
provisions of customary law that need urgent review, amongst them, the
levirate marriage – in which the continuation of the deceased husband’s
marriage is done through a brother of a male relative; polygamy; child
betrothal and forced marriages and lobola or bohadi.

In April of 2009, the late Minister in the Presidency, Dr Manto Tshabalala-
Msimang, visited a village in the O R Tambo District Municipality in the
Eastern Cape, where the practice of ukuthwala, the child betrothal and
forced marriage of girls as young as 12 years old, carried out by abducting
them, had reached such epic proportions that girls were dropping out of
school at the rate of 20 per month in order to be married off to men often
old enough to be their fathers.
The Minister condemned the practice, describing ukuthwala as a form of
violence against women, and acknowledged that -


  Patriarchy and patriarchal attitudes still persist in South African
  society and at times manifest themselves in negative and harmful ways
  against women and girls.

But, in its report to the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children,
and People with Disabilities in August of that same year, the SA Police
Service, SAPS, was still at pains to emphasise the need to, “uphold the law
whilst retaining respect for culture and tradition” when dealing with the
criminal matter of child abduction in this context.

So, again, the ghost of ethnic chauvinism was compelling the police to
treat the abuse of women and children’s rights with kid gloves, all in the
name of this nebulous idea of “culture”.

If I may quote Dr Ramphele once more:


  These weighty matters need to be resolved to enable us to align customary
  practices with the precepts of our Constitution.


Before this can happen in earnest, we must work hard to remove the stigma
attached to criticising African cultural practices. We must take the sting
out of that meaningless phrase, “It is my culture”. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J H JEFFERY: Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President, and hon members,
as we all know, the President delivered his state of the nation address on
11 February, the day on which the people of South Africa and the world were
celebrating the release of Nelson Mandela from prison 20 years ago.

Madiba was released from prison at a time when the majority of South
Africans had no hope of getting justice from the criminal and civil justice
system in the apartheid society. Basically, for those who did not live
through that period, or those who did but may have forgotten, judges, all
of whom were white, were appointed by the State President and were almost
entirely men who supported the apartheid regime.

There were none of the transparent and inclusive processes that we have
today with the Judicial Service Commission, JSC. The overwhelming majority
of magistrates and prosecutors were white men. The laws that the criminal
justice system was enforcing included crimes under the Group Areas Act, the
Immorality Act, the Internal Security Act, and so on. In fact, the justice
system was deliberately used to entrench apartheid policy and laws.

As this year’s 8 January Statement of the ANC stated:
  There is an urgent need to overhaul the criminal justice system, to
  ensure that levels of crime are drastically reduced.

In order to do this, government has been embarking on a criminal justice
system review. I have been informed by the co-ordinator of the criminal
justice system review, the hon Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development, Mr Jeff Radebe, who was unfortunately not able to speak in
today’s debate because he’s unwell, of some of the progress made in the
review to date.

It should be borne in mind, however, that many of the review outcomes can
only be dealt with over a period of time and have cross-cutting
implications that need to be considered, in terms of aligned budgets and
strategic planning processes. This work is continuing and includes the
establishment of sound governance through the continued development of
protocols, joint business and operational plans and improved co-ordinating
mechanisms.

Let me highlight some of the progress made in terms of the criminal justice
system review. The review process, as mandated by Cabinet, comprises
research and implementation of required interventions through a seven-point
plan. The research process is now being concluded, and the results have
been evaluated and are currently being incorporated in the implementation.

Some of the progress relating to the implementation of the plan follows
below.

A holistic vision, mission and objective statement for the criminal justice
system was developed and promoted within the justice, Crime Prevention, and
Security Cluster of Cabinet and approved by the relevant Ministers and
directors-general.

A framework for the criminal justice system performance measurement has
been developed and is presently being refined. This aims to ensure that all
the various activities across the criminal justice system have common goals
and targets, from the SAPS through to the prosecutors, courts and
correctional services.

A centre for statistics and performance management is in the process of
being established to collate all the relevant information across the
criminal justice system. An interim system, based upon existing automated
and manual systems is, however, functional.

A number of protocols and/or guidelines that will improve the performance
of the courts have been developed or are being finalised.

There are two regional court protocols, one dealing with screening
mechanisms and the trial readiness of cases, and the other dealing with
making the trial phase more efficient, such as limiting dispute issues,
improving case scheduling, etc, as well as a court protocol for legal aid
cases, dealing with improved pretrial and co-ordination aspects between the
prosecuting authority and Legal Aid South Africa, to speed up the
finalisation of cases.

Case-flow management interventions are being promoted across the criminal
justice system in general. Regulations for the implementation of the
amendments applicable to the admission of guilt for minor offences, in
terms of the Judicial Matters Amendment Act, Act 66 of 2008, are receiving
attention.

A protocol for the taking and processing of forensic samples, utilising
chemistry laboratories of the national Department of Health in criminal
investigations and trials and improving the interaction between the
prosecutors, police and Department of Health is being finalised. Also, the
issue of bail and addressing the challenges relating to bail is receiving
attention.

The Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill is currently before
this House and we hope it will be finalised shortly. This Bill deals,
amongst other things, with DNA, fingerprinting and biometric issues,
including the sharing of personal information between government
departments.

The capacity of the criminal justice system is being increased through the
employment of more personnel. In this regard, the police have increased the
number of crime scene detectives and forensic analysts. Nearly 15 000 new
constables have been allocated to the detective services after training in
the current financial year. The National Prosecuting Authority has
increased the number of prosecutors, and Legal Aid South Africa has
increased the number of legal aid representatives.

More judges and magistrates have been appointed, and operational
efficiencies are being further enhanced by the provision of step-by-step
field guides and manuals. The establishment of a branch within the
Department of Correctional Services to improve the management of remand
detainees is being fast-tracked, and improved offender rehabilitation, in
conjunction with civil society, is also receiving attention.

Moving on to the transformation of the judiciary, this is well under way.
The racial and gender composition of judges and magistrates is far more
reflective of the demographics of our country than ever before.

Recent laws passed by Parliament are in the final stages of implementation.
The South African Judicial Education Institution Act, which establishes the
SA Judicial Education Institute for the training of magistrates and judges,
will be fully operational from April 2010.

I am informed that the recent amendments to the Judicial Service Commission
Act are due for promulgation during the first half of this year. These
amendments provide for a code of conduct and regulations regarding judges’
registrable interests. In terms of this Act, the regulations and code must
be tabled within four months of promulgation, so hopefully that should be
settled before the end of this year.

Lastly, regarding the transformation of the judiciary, the Minister of
Justice and Constitutional Development is finalising the Superior Courts
Bill for introduction into this House, after considering the report of a
judges’ conference held last year.

We, however, need to review not just the criminal justice system but also
the civil justice system. We cannot have a situation where, to get justice
in civil disputes, you need to have lots of money for lawyers, as this puts
civil justice beyond the reach of the vast majority of people in South
Africa. The fact that our civil justice system is expensive, complex,
fragmented and very much adversarial, makes it less accessible to the
ordinary masses of our people.

However, we note that work is being done to ensure that the Small Claims
Courts, as per one of the resolutions of the 52nd National Conference of
the ANC at Polokwane, play a significant role in delivering justice to the
people. We commend this because of the accessibility of these courts.
Ordinary people do not have to pay money to have their matters heard, and
we hope to see more of these courts being set up throughout the country.

With regard to the administration of deceased estates and related services,
people, especially ordinary people, are still experiencing problems. The
fact that some Master’s Offices, including the one in Cape Town, insist
that you get an attorney, even in uncomplicated estates, is something that
needs to be changed. As the Receiver of Revenue helps the public with their
tax returns, so should the Master’s Office help the public with winding up
deceased estates.
More attention needs to be given to assist, in particular, women with
maintenance matters, so that where a rich father refuses to pay
maintenance, he cannot use lawyers to endlessly dispute and delay the
finalisation of the matter. Maintenance Courts need to be more user-
friendly and should be able to assist women without them being forced to
spend large amounts of money on lawyers.

We also need to look at accelerating the extension of legal aid to more
civil cases. We are pleased that the Jurisdiction of Regional Courts
Amendment Act will be promulgated this year. This Act abolishes black
divorce courts and extends civil jurisdiction to Regional Courts, which had
previously only dealt with criminal matters.

We hope that Parliament can finalise the Traditional Courts Bill, which is
currently before us this year, and provide for a system that is consistent
with the values espoused in our Constitution and that gives people in rural
areas more effective access to justice.

In conclusion, let me say that crime is one of the major challenges facing
our country. Crime undermines the safety and security of the people in
their homes and places of work and entertainment, thereby denying them the
freedom for which they fought for many years. We, therefore, welcome the
reforms being brought about by the review of the criminal system to make it
more effective and efficient, and we, as Parliament, must work together to
monitor and improve its implementation.

However, the weaknesses in the criminal justice system deny also the masses
of ordinary people of South Africa access to justice. For this reason, we
need to work together as a country to ensure that the whole justice system
is revamped and improved to deliver justice to our people, especially those
who have been denied justice for many decades.

For this reason, we request you, Mr President, to ensure that your
administration moves with speed to review the civil justice system, as this
will remove blockages and improve efficiency and effectiveness, service
delivery and public confidence in our justice system. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M S SHILOWA: Hon Speaker and hon members, the input by hon members
Dandala, Ndude, Kotsi and George of Cope all indicate that we have no
confidence in the current government and we intend to move, in due course,
for a debate of no confidence. Similar to the inputs of the rest of the
opposition parties, they all agreed that the President is not aware of the
true state of the nation.

We hope that adequate time for meaningful and substantive debate will be
made available by Parliament. I will not dwell much on the legacy of Madiba
since this has been covered by many speakers.
The hosting of the world in a free South Africa for the Fifa World Cup
tournament will be a historic tribute to the struggles and sacrifice of
this great leader. Long may this icon live.

However, I was astounded at how suddenly P W Botha, someone who killed many
of our people in raids across what were then frontline states, is now being
feted as a hero. Someone who sent countless young white South Africans
against their will to Angola and Namibia is now a hero to the party of
liberation.

This is an affront, not only to those who died, but also to those who were
sent to jail for refusing to be conscripted into the army. No wonder the
ruling party now wants to pardon Prime Evil, Janusz and Derby-Lewis!

In May 2009, Mr President, you were ushered into office amidst a huge
fanfare where even your opponents were forced by the overwhelming occasion
and its subsequent reception to reluctantly give you the benefit of the
doubt.

We wished you success in the service of our people. You arrived like a well-
oiled steam engine ready to take off with all on board. You pronounced a
destination that the Zuma train was going to take with very little evidence
that you could get there. You nevertheless seemed convincing to many.

Nine months down the line the Zuma train is still at the same station, the
same platform, with the same passengers, with exactly the same intentions.
The only promise is that it will now be faster. How is it that a train that
is at a standstill can move faster? This remains a mystery to me. The truth
is: The train has ground to a halt.

Cope warned at the time that there was an enormous difference between the
tough reality of the harsh economic conditions and a political party
fantasy. It is this reality that forced you to shy away from any
substantive input in addressing the real state of the nation. This absence
in action has been the hallmark of the last nine months, while this great
nation is crying out for inspirational and decisive leaders.

A close examination of your understanding of the state of the nation gives
an impression of a President who is not in touch with the realities of our
people. We have previously warned that we must never play politics with the
plight of our suffering people.

Whereas the ANC promised South Africans quality, decent jobs they are now
being told to be content with part-time jobs. I am not going to get into a
discussion about these part-time jobs. The truth, though, is that it is one
thing to stand on an economic platform. You can shout until you are deaf,
but the reality is that South Africans were promised, in a manifesto,
decent jobs.

When we asked for accountability, 900 000 jobs have been lost. South
Africans are told to be content with these part-time jobs of one day, one
month, three months or six months, that have been created. That is not what
South Africans were promised.

In fact, the Minister of Trade and Industry said something which I agree
with. He says:

  ... the unemployment problem we face in South Africa is ... structural
  rather than cyclical ...

Yet where is the plan that shows that we are now intending to tackle this
issue in that aspect? We are told that we must look for it somewhere. We
were looking for it in the state of the nation address.

The workers of South Africa were told that we will safeguard their jobs.
Cosatu correctly raises the issue of Zakumi. The Zakumi contract has been
given to an ANC Member of Parliament who has outsourced these needed jobs
of South African workers to China. The ANC is quiet on this matter. Why? Is
there a benefit that the ANC is getting from this issue? Why are they
quiet? Cosatu raised it. It is your ally and you kept quiet. An ANC Member
of Parliament exports jobs and we keep quiet. We shall not keep quiet; we
shall not be curbed!

The wage subsidy idea which was raised is not new. Minister Manuel knows
that it is not new and it has been raised from this podium before. It is
neither a new idea nor a new rabbit.

As regards the issue of protests we cannot rejoice when people protest. But
it is one thing to go to Balfour and say that we will sort out your problem
and then go away. People wait and then nothing happens. Because a political
solution was found to the problem in Khutsong, when people burnt schools
and said they were not going to school, the SACP and the ANC cheered and
kept quiet. Now they think that is the way to go everywhere else.

I don’t need to do so. The ANC in Gauteng has said these actions are
instigated by the SACP. That is what the ANC said. It is not me. Go and ask
David Makhura; that is what he said.

In conclusion, we don’t have to visit the Presidential Hotline call centre
to know that it is not functioning. We just have to call the hotline centre
to receive the standard answer, “We are experiencing large volumes of
calls. Please call later”.

Lastly, before I sit down, Mr President, it is important to say that the
message of ABC has been dealt a fatal blow. It is now very difficult for
all of us to speak about, “Abstain, be faithful and condomise”. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Speaker, hon President of the
Republic, Deputy President, Deputy Speaker and hon members, the Freedom
Charter says:

   There shall be peace and friendship, South Africa shall strive to
   maintain world peace and the settlement of all international disputes by
   negotiations – not war.

At the 52nd National Conference, the ANC resolved that, through government,
the ANC should ensure that the intensification of economic diplomacy leads
to changes in colonial patterns of economic relations and creates
possibilities for equitable and balanced North-South relations,
transformation and beneficiation of African national resources,
sustainability of foreign direct investment, and market access for products
from the South to generate employment and contribute to poverty
eradication.

The conference further realised a need for the ANC to develop a clear
policy guide for Parliament in their engagement with international bodies
to which they are affiliated and in the establishment of memorandums of
understanding between these bodies.

Arising from the above clause of the Freedom Charter and the ANC conference
resolutions, as Parliament we have established a Parliamentary Group on
International Relations. The role of the Parliamentary Group on
International Relations is to implement the international policy agreed to
by the Joint Rules Committee by providing policy and strategic direction on
and co-ordination of Parliament’s international engagements, including its
relations with other parliaments and its membership of and participation in
international parliamentary organisations; receiving reports from
parliamentary delegations and submiting proposals on their tabling,
referral and scheduling for debate to the Presiding Officers or relevant
parliamentary structures; and meeting with members appointed by the House
to serve on international parliamentary bodies and members of all
substructures of the group, as well as the chairpersons of the
parliamentary committees dealing with international relations and co-
operation and trade and industry, to determine strategy and evaluate
international relations of Parliament.

As Parliament, we have established focus groups and strategic bilateral
relations. The purpose of establishing the focus groups was: to analyse the
work of that particular body and guide Parliament’s engagement with that
body; to assess and evaluate reports of delegations to meetings of the body
and to identify matters which require further follow-up by Parliament; and
to embark on information-sharing initiatives for members on the work of
affiliated multilateral bodies.

Thus far the following focus groups have been established: The Focus Group
on the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum, SADC-PF;
and the Focus Group on the Pan-African Parliament. The following groups are
still on an ad hoc status, but will soon be formalised: The Focus Group on
the Inter-parliamentary Union; the Focus Group on the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association; and the Focus Group on Asseca.

Parliament will further establish friendship groups. These friendship
groups will be utilised to pursue nonstrategic relations in a purposeful
and focused manner in support of South Africa’s foreign policy objectives.

As Parliament, we are in the process of finalising the signing of the
Friendship Memorandum of Understanding with the Parliament of the Republic
of China. A number of networks and voluntary associations do exist. This is
indicative of the multiplicity of actors in international affairs and the
changes which are taking place in society. Many of these networks and
voluntary associations have members who participate in their activities. It
is important that such interaction takes place in a co-ordinated manner.

As Parliament, we have agreed that when a member receives a personal
invitation in his or her capacity as a Member of Parliament, the member
must have the approval of the Presiding Officers for such participation.

We, as Parliament, have also established specialised groups, such as the
group on South African and European Union relations, the India, Brazil,
South Africa group, and the African, Caribbean, Pacific-European Union
group. These specialised parliamentary groups act as consultative forums to
bring about regular exchanges or lobbying by parliamentary delegations.

We have further agreed to establish focus groups on conflict management,
peace and reconciliation on the African continent. During the SADC-PF
meeting held in Swakopmund it was agreed that a delegation of Speakers from
the SADC region, led by our Speaker, should go to Zimbabwe on a goodwill
mission. This took place last year in October.

Hon members, let me briefly outline the concerns raised and resolutions
taken during Parliament’s participation in international forums. The IPU
held the Parliamentary Conference on Democracy in Africa, which was aimed
at promoting awareness of the International Day of Democracy, the
fundamental principles of democracy, and major issues facing the democracy
community today.

The conference was held in Gaborone in September 2009. It was agreed that
it would identify particular roles and responsibilities of Parliament,
promote Parliament’s engagement with the African Charter on Democracy
elections and governance, and encourage action to ensure ratification and
implementation.

The SADC-PF noted with concern the following: individual and collective
challenges facing the region in relation to a diminishing natural resource
base; unfair trade practices; poverty and vulnerability; gender and
development; regional integration; and HIV and Aids.

Note was also taken of the delay by member states in signing and ratifying
various protocols which are critical for achieving regional integration and
accelerating national and regional development; eradicating ongoing hunger
and the threat of worsening poverty levels in the region; and addressing
the inability to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals,
particularly the first goal which seeks to eliminate extreme poverty and
hunger.

The following recommendations were then made. The member parliaments must
expedite the ratification of the various SADC protocols in order to realise
their intended benefits and facilitate regional integration.

Parliamentarians are to engage with their respective executive arms of
government and stakeholders in trade negotiations to appraise them, as
representatives of the people, on the dangers and benefits of signing or
not signing the Economic Partnership Agreements and its broader and
profound implications for national and regional development efforts.

The SADC-PF committed itself to play a catalytic role in lobbying for
negotiations with Europe from a regional rather than national perspective,
and ensuring that SADC’s abundant natural resources are exploited in a
sustainable manner for the benefit of SADC citizens.

Hon members, hon President and hon Deputy President, I just want to appeal
to the President that the relevant Minister should table the African
Charter and Gender Protocol in Parliament for ratification. The reason for
the appeal is that according to the report that was tabled at the SADC-PF,
South Africa has implemented 95% of the African Charter and 80% of the
Gender Protocol – but we have not yet ratified them.

In both SADC-PF and the African, Caribbean, Pacific European-Union a
recommendation was made that all HIV/Aids-infected people must be given
access to reasonably priced antiretroviral drugs. We want to thank His
Excellency the President and his team for coming up with a comprehensive
programme on HIV/Aids.

The World e-Parliament Conference is an annual forum of the community of
parliaments addressing, from both the policy and technical perspective, how
the use of information and communication technology can help in improving
effectiveness in the complex parliamentary environment.

One of the critical resolutions taken was that those parliaments that are
at an advanced stage must assist others confidentially and South Africa was
given a responsibility to lead in the African continent.

One of the recommendations taken at the World Food Summit held in Rome was
that all parliaments must ensure that women are empowered by adopting laws
that allow women to have access to land, credit and markets; and that
agricultural development is given the priority it deserves.

In the African, Caribbean and Pacific meeting it was resolved that firstly,
the African Caribbean Pacific, ACP, governments should promote a regional
fund for the improvement and propagation of co-operation techniques amongst
small-scale farmers for adaptation and mitigation programmes; and the need
to reinforce education and information campaigns on the impact of climate
change.

Secondly, the Climate Change Agreement should take into account the
existing development processes at both international and national levels.
All parties should build the necessary links between climate change and the
Millennium Development Goals by incorporating mitigation and adaptation to
climate change into projects and programmes aimed at achieving the
Millennium Development Goals and poverty reduction strategies.

As the South African Parliament, we echoed the sentiments of the President
by supporting Haiti and further request members of this House to donate
whatever they can so as to reduce the pain and suffering they are
experiencing as well as showing our solidarity.

Hon Speaker, allow me to assist hon member Hilda Ndude, who posed a
question about how the speech relates to the state of the nation address.
The President mentioned the participation of South Africa in international
programmes. He further said that we need to continue to participate in
respect of India, Brazil and China. It is also the role of Parliament to
make sure that we monitor the implementation of those agreements. The hon
member must go through the responsibilities of Parliament in terms of
monitoring and oversight. Hopefully, she will understand.

I also want to say to hon Mangena that he was given an opportunity to lead
as the Deputy Minister of Science and Technology. What did he do to assist
the weatherman during his time as the Deputy Minister?

I want to remind the hon Zondi on the issue of the Jozini Dam. We visited
Umkhanyakude while we were members of the NCOP before the elections, last
year. In terms of their Integrated Development Plan, IDP, they prioritised
building the airport rather than connecting water for the communities.
Maybe the hon member should go and assist that district to structure its
priorities according to the needs of the people.

Hon Speaker, allow me to respond to the hon Mbazima Shilowa. Hon Shilowa is
the former Premier of Gauteng. During the apartheid government, hon Shilowa
was not recognised to occupy any senior position. He was a security guard
irrespective of his education. I think he must thank Cosatu for having
recognised his talents and electing him as the secretary-general of Cosatu
– by then I was a South African Commercial, Catering and Allied Workers’
Union, SACCAWU, shop steward.

I know that it’s painful when your term of office ends. Firstly, the reason
for hon Shilowa to be in the benches of Cope is that his term of office was
about to end. And, secondly, Cope was formed based on hatred of being led
by hon President Jacob Zuma. I don’t think that we have to resort to hatred
and be bold when we are on this platform.

Mhlonishwa Mluleki George isiZulu sithi: “umenzi uyakhohlwa kodwa umenziwa
akakhohlwa.” [Hon Mluleki George, there’s an isiZulu saying which goes like
this: the person who does something wrong to you forgets but the victim
never forgets.]

When you arrived here in 1999, you were the Whip responsible for the
allocation of houses. The members who were coming from KwaZulu-Natal with
Zulu surnames, you did not allow to have houses. How is it possible for you
to change now, since your belief is based on ethnic issues? Your reason for
being against President Jacob Zuma is based on his ethnicity.

I want to say to the hon Mazibuko, including Cope members, that, firstly,
before the elections in April – hon Hilda Ndude, you must learn to listen
to other people – the slogan of the DA was, “Stop Zuma”. And Cope, with
some leaders of the DA, said they wanted to protect the Constitution. But
today they stand on this platform without respecting that Constitution,
particularly Chapter 2 of the Constitution which talks about the Bill of
Rights. I think hon members must carefully study the Constitution, the
traditions of this House and, thereafter, they can come and say whatever
they feel like saying here.

Hon members, in his state of the nation address in 2009, the President
emphasised that Parliament should do oversight and monitoring. It will
benefit our oversight work as Parliament if a regular exchange of
information and feedback takes place regarding our country’s commitment to
the implementation of the International Agreement and Protocols.

Ngaphambi kokuthi ngihlale phansi, ngiyafisa ukuthi amalungu aleNdlu ake
azinike isikhathi ehlezi emizini yawo ethunzini, abuke emgwaqeni ukuthi uma
imoto idlula kukhona imbuzi nenja - imbuzi yenzenjani - inja yenzenjani.
Uma nginganihlebela nje imbuzi ibaleka ize izephule kodwa inja ikhonkotha
imoto ize iyosithela. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Before I sit down, I would like the hon members of this House to take the
time, when they are relaxing in the shade of their trees at home, to look
at the road to see what happens when a car passes and there is a goat and a
dog in the road. I can tell you that the goat will run for its life but the
dog will bark at the car until it disappears.]

Thank you very much. [Applause.]
Mr M J ELLIS: Mister Speaker, I certainly do not intend becoming involved
in the antics of the hon House Chairperson and her attack on Cope, but
would rather address myself to what we regard as a pretty important matter
within the DA.

We were told that the ANC wanted the state of the nation address to be in
the evening at 7 o’clock, so that the entire nation could be involved as it
was to be televised live. The President, we were told, wanted to speak to
the entire nation; men, women and children. After all it was 20 years to
the day since Nelson Mandela had been released from prison.

Opposition parties were asked to endorse this decision, which we did, but
made it clear that we expected to be given an opportunity, like the
President, to speak to the nation, not just to Parliament.
We expected that the SABC would at least cover today’s debate live on one
of its channels. Regrettably, this has not happened.

In fact, to make matters worse, the first part of the debate this morning
was not even televised live on the DSTV Parliamentary Channel and we were
told that the feed from Parliament was not available when we asked why. A
question has to be asked as to why it wasn’t available, and who decided
that it would not be available.

Instead of giving the nation a chance to listen to the whole debate they
were not even given an opportunity to listen to the leaders of opposition
parties. I want to say, how grossly unfortunate for the nation; how
massively convenient for the ANC.

We do not doubt that the only reason why this could have happened is
because the ANC did not want the nation to listen to the leaders of
opposition parties. The reason for this is quite clear, because Mr
President, your speech on Thursday night was so inadequate in content and
delivery that it gave an opportunity for opposition parties to have a field
day in response and, certainly, the opposition parties have done just that.
[Applause.]

Let me say briefly to the hon Tsenoli, who said earlier today that the ANC
has taught opposition parties about democracy, that if you call preventing
opposition parties from having their share of television time democracy, we
are determined never ever to listen to that member.

But the truth is that the ANC, Mr President, has made no attempt to defend
you today. They have abandoned you in this debate and this was obvious from
the start when the list of speakers was drawn up for the first time and
given to opposition parties. The ANC has done anything but put forward an A
list of speakers today; no frontline Ministers; no senior ANC members - not
even one. It is hardly even the B list of speakers that the ANC has put
forward. It has been a parade of Deputy Ministers and relatively junior
Ministers and members. There were one or two exceptions, but generally
speaking, that is a fact.

I have to say to these ANC members who have spoken today that they must
realise that they are right down the pecking order when it comes to the
seniority list in your own party. The heavyweights have sat back and done
nothing, while the lightweights have been thrown in to defend their
President. [Applause.]

The only thing of any real consequence in this debate has been the many and
constant references to the icon, Nelson Mandela. The ANC speakers, one
after another, jumped on the bandwagon to spend a fair amount of their
speaking time on eulogising the great man, as you did yourself, Mr
President, last Thursday night. I’m sure that ANC speakers have been
remarkably relieved today to have something positive to speak about,
because certainly there was nothing from the speech on Thursday night.

When the hon Athol Trollip spoke earlier, the hon Trevor Manuel asked us
what we have been smoking. Let me say to the hon Manuel and to members of
the ANC in general, stop worrying about what the opposition parties are
smoking, but rather about what your President, your colleagues and Cabinet
have been smoking, because quite frankly what you and your colleagues are
smoking is not at all healthy for this nation. Thank you. [Applause.]


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy
President, Members of Parliament, comrades and compatriots, what is the
difference between the ANC and Cope? The difference is that it can’t be
about policies because they don’t have any. The difference is that they
hate President Gedleyihlekisa Jacob Zuma. That is the fundamental
difference. With the DA, it’s because it represents the past and
backwardness and the ANC represents progressive ideas.

We are in the year of the action-packed time of our lives ...

... mo kgabo e jang kgajwana [... where it is the survival of the fittest].

We are steadily recovering from the global economic downturn that had a
negative impact on the lives of our people; the economic phase that
welcomed us to office in May 2009. The economic situation has seen petty
crimes being committed during the first and second quarters of 2009, due to
the global problem we found ourselves in as the new administration.

Serious crime itself also showed some ugly faces; with malls in the Western
Cape and Gauteng being primary targets, especially in the first quarter of
2009. Criminals became much more sophisticated. And to win the fight
against crime, we needed to step up our game and be ahead of them – we
needed to be even more sophisticated than them.  If we don’t nip their
actions in the bud, we’ll find these criminals passing us twice on the same
job.

In response to these calculated actions by criminals, we introduced the
Tactical Response Team in an effort to combat crime. This cluster Tactical
Response Team, whose job is not to negotiate but to fight, has trained
officers who are and will always be visible in hostile situations, and
especially in our malls.

These are officers who get advanced training on how to handle crisis
situations where the hard-nut-to-crack criminals have taken over the lives
of the innocent, through ATM bombings, business robberies and random
shootings in crowded areas.

We are on track in the fight against crime. We are not going to claim easy
victories. It is all systems go, with all the necessary ammunition in our
hands to fight crime.

We understand that the fight against crime does not need a one answer that
fits all. It requires a comprehensive approach. We are proactively
responding to these dynamics and realising the prescripts of the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights, which guarantees the right to
security, life and dignity.

We are fundamentally turning around the police through a long-term results-
driven vision, coupled with efficient measures. We are repositioning the
department through a fundamental paradigm shift, enhanced optimal
excellence and unlocking productive value.

Part of our ammunition in the fight against crime is the sharpening of our
tools, to ensure that all our agencies are fully supported by the
legislation. That is why we talked about the amendment of section 49 of the
Criminal Procedure Act, and the revisiting and reworking of the forensic
Bill.

We would like to reiterate that we are not going to allow our detractors to
blackmail us through their emphasis on shoot-to-kill, as if this is a
government policy, or the amendment of section 49 as the alpha and omega.
We are not going to allow that.

We should reiterate that even before we talked about the amendment of
section 49, in our quest to sharpen and strengthen the tools for fighting
crime, the police, except in particular cases, have acted within the law
and have taught criminals a good lesson. That is why we are saying we will
deal with criminals with the agility of a cat and the ferocity of a
cornered bull.

Basopa tsotsi! Lumka tsotsi! Washa tsotsi! [Beware tsotsi!]

The 2010 Fifa World Cup is here. It is your civic duty, and mine, to ensure
that the country’s image is intact. It is our civic duty to ensure that all
the visitors are welcome in South Africa. We owe this to those who fought
for freedom and peace in our country. We owe this to the 20th anniversary
of the release of former President Mandela.

With Madiba’s smile, the country is expecting 32 World Cup qualifying
countries for this greatest showpiece in the world. For the first time on
African soil, we will be welcoming millions of people to our shores. We are
hopeful that Bafana Bafana will do us all proud!

The task ahead is enormous. The Constitution provides for us to safeguard
South African inhabitants and those within our borders.  We have a
constitutional obligation to ensure that all the guests, during this soccer
showpiece, just as has been the case with other previous major events, are
safe and are able to enjoy the game of millions.

We have undertaken serious self-evaluation of our ability to prevent any
unwanted threatening situations in our midst, especially during the World
Cup. Among other things, we have inspected the ports of entry to this
country, and we say to all South Africans that we are going forward and not
turning back. All systems go! We are ready. South Africa is the destination
for 2010 this year!

We are happy to announce that our airports have been inspected and all the
concerns raised and noted during these inspections have been addressed.
Together, working with Interpol and the Southern African regional police
chiefs, we believe and we are satisfied that it is all systems go.

Operation Washa Tsotsi has brought us successful results in reducing
violent and serious crimes that have been evident during previous festive
seasons. It is only those who don’t have ears to listen and eyes to see who
would not have seen the visibility of the police during the past festive
season.

The night raids in troublesome spots like KwaMashu in KwaZulu-Natal,
Alexandra and other areas, were efforts to reduce the number of guns in
circulation and those in wrong hands. We are happy with the outcomes of the
operation. We won’t rest until our country is free from criminality.
Operation Washa Tsotsi, like we said before, is not an event, but a
continued attack on the criminals on our streets.

The police are recording successes on a daily basis in the fight against
crime. The Directorate for Specialised Crimes Unit, the Hawks, has
identified and profiled the 10 most-wanted criminals. And we are happy to
report that seven of those have been dealt a blow and three are still on
the run, but we will find them.

Since the launch of the festive season campaign, we have seen and witnessed
successful operations by our police. We uncovered a drug syndicate that is
operating in South and North America, Africa, Europe and Asia. Security for
our inhabitants and their properties is our priority through the commitment
of the SAPS and other agencies.

We urge communities to stop buying stolen goods in the name of poverty. We
urge everyone to understand that you are really criminals yourselves if you
find yourself owning something that you don’t know how it had landed up in
the hands of those who sold it to you. That is why we are saying ...

... tlohelang dintho tsa boshodu batho ba haeso! [... please stop buying
stolen goods people!]

Someone’s house has been broken into and a television set is stolen and you
willingly buy it. We need to unite against crime and criminals. We need
positive role models in our society and within the environment in which we
live.

Everything you get should be through hard work. It is important for all of
us that we understand that message. We need to embrace the values of hard
work instead of taking short cuts to wealth, disregarding the law in the
name of materialism. Crime does not pay; this is an old saying that
continues to live within us. In many of the crimes, especially serious
crimes, like house robberies, there is a huge element of youth involvement.
These are young people who have admired the wrong role models within our
society.

The fight against crime should not and must not be delegated to the police
alone; it is a civic duty. That is why we say, when you are in the comfort
of your home with your families, remember the lives of the police, women
and men, in the streets protecting you. We ask you to pray for them every
time you pray for our streets to be rid of bad elements.

We want everyone to join the fight against crime, including “bomme ba
seaparo” [women who wear the church uniform]. We urge them, whenever they
pray for “pula” [rain], also to pray for the reduction of crime in our
midst. Through our mothers we are certain we will win.

Society should embrace and support the police. As we said before, the
police carry a heavy load and they need our undivided support. But that
does not mean that we must conceal those within the SAPS who have evil
intentions, as it has been said and lamented.

We are not lamenting or resting on our laurels; we are on top of the
situation. From now onwards, criminals in every corner of South Africa know
that they won’t have any holiday here. We are very encouraged by the fact
that we are on top of them. Police have, themselves, acted by example by
arresting criminal elements who perpetrate crimes within the police. We
need to applaud such actions. [Applause.]

Community Safety Forums are important vehicles in the fight against crime.

In November last year, this Parliament approved our request to declare, in
line with the Firearms Control Act, Act 60 of 2000, the period between 11
January and 11 April 2010 as a firearm amnesty period. We are happy to
announce that, so far, through the selfless service of our men and women in
blue as well as the active participation of our communities, more than
105 000 firearms and items of ammunition have been destroyed in Gauteng,
KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape. [Applause.]

From a crime prevention point of view, the destruction of these firearms
and ammunition translates into a direct opportunity lost to the marauding
criminals who could have laid their hands on them and directed those gun
barrels and gunpowder to rob, maim and kill the law-abiding citizens of our
country.

Through this campaign, we are also encouraging those owners of legal
firearms who feel that they no longer need the firearms, to freely
surrender them at their nearest police station. We further urge all those
with information about where any firearm, ammunition or arms cache can be
retrieved, to report the matter at their nearest police station.

It should be noted that, even though this is an amnesty period, it does not
mean that the work of police officers – to hunt and retrieve stolen and
illegal firearms and ammunition – has stopped.

We are confident that, when the World Cup finally starts in June, the
number of these weapons will be drastically reduced.

We would like to thank all those who have positively heeded our call to
surrender their unwanted firearms and ammunition, be it manufacturers,
dealers, gunsmiths, gun owners, beneficiaries or tsotsis. Of course, for
tsotsis, this will mark the beginning of yet another chapter, because each
submitted and surrendered gun will still undergo ballistic testing to
ensure proper accountability and, in the event the gun was ever used in any
criminal activities, ensure that the proper ramifications ensue.

There is currently a process to incorporate some of the reservists into the
police force as fully fledged police officers. Because we have inherited
the apartheid legacy of “bloubaadjies” [traffic police] and the “Zulu
Police” within the police force, those incorporated will still undergo
basic police training with no compromise on quality. High quality training
will ensure that the SAPS, going forward, is a mean machine.

Effective contemporary crime prevention relies on partnership and multi-
agency approaches. We are building partnerships with communities and
government.

With regard to people joining the war against crime, we have had
engagements and processes identified in the fight against crime within our
society. Everyone within society, all the stakeholders, including young
people and business, has endorsed government’s plans and has partnered with
government in the fight against crime.

I want to turn to the number of distortions that have been paraded in the
name of political intervention. Some of the things that have been said are
actually nothing more than figments of the imagination of some individuals
who have spoken before.

We need to make the point and say that when Mr Lennit Max, the DA MEC in
the Western Cape, did something we were told that his life must be
understood to be private. The only life that must not be private is the
life of the President. We need to understand that this is hypocrisy and
opportunism of the worst order and reflects the backwardness of opposition
politics in our country.

We also need to make the point that, while we have acknowledged former
President De Klerk for everything he has done, he did not wake up on 2
April 1990, decide to be kind to our people and release former President
Nelson Mandela. That was due to the tireless efforts of our people in the
streets to liberate themselves. [Applause.]

There is nothing wrong in saying that. As Julius has said, it is not the
side-stepping of history; it is the correct interpretation of history. Our
people have liberated themselves, led by their vanguard movement – the ANC.
[Applause.] Nobody can claim easy victories and tell lies, as if our people
did not have those intentions, as if, when 2 February arrived, they were
not in the streets, fighting to liberate themselves. The people have
liberated themselves, and the policies of the ANC have not actually failed.


We also need to talk about the question of the cadre policy. How is the
cadre policy not applicable to the DA? Since you arrived in Cape Town, you
have expelled everybody who is black and African and have replaced them
with your own cadres. [Applause.] You’ve got a very skewed and racist cadre
policy that you have implemented across the length and breadth of this
particular province.

You are patronising our people and you are entrenching the politics of
racism. You are implementing a policy of skewed development. Why are
Khayelitsha and Gugulethu in tatters while you continue to patronise
particular groups within the Western Cape? You have failed our people and
in no time you will be seen for what you are.

Newspaper headlines do not represent the dominant view of the South African
people. The dominant view of the South African people says, “President
Zuma, you are on track”. [Applause.] That is what you must understand. The
dominant view of the newspaper headlines is crafted by the ideological
inclination of the right-wing politics of the DA, because you write those
headlines yourselves. [Applause.]

So you are hypocritical when you say that the newspaper headlines reflect
the South African population’s view and how they feel about government. You
should go to Slumberland because you are very late for what you stand for.
[Laughter.]

That is why in the debate about morality you cannot stand tall. Among
yourselves, you can’t speak about it and opted to send the youngest, poor
hon Mazibuko. [Laughter.] You must understand that, as a young person, you
are uncouth to basically discuss the beginning of the rich African culture
on which we are not going to compromise.

Teach young people the correct history and the proper culture. Give them
the proper upbringing because this is about family socialisation. Do not
throw them in the deep end and allow them to question things that they are
not qualified to talk about. [Applause.]

To the hon Mfundisi wam, Bishop Dandala ... Mfundisi, uyihambile indlela
oyihambileyo, kodwa ke ikhona into yokuba kuthiwe umntu ukhe ahambe
alahleke. Masikubuyise sithi... [Reverend, you have made your mark in life
but sometimes a person may get lost along the way. Let us bring you back by
saying ...]

... the state of the nation address was not about poems and philosophising
about something on the distant horizon. It was about what we want to do
today. If you were not filled with hope with what President Zuma had told
you and not fed you poems ...

Mfundisi uxolo, ulahlekile tata. [I am sorry, Reverend, you have gone
astray.]

We must understand that the downturn we have found ourselves in is not of
our own making; it is an objective reality. Don’t speak about the recession
as if it is our own creation. The ANC government under the stewardship of
President Zuma is committed to the creation of jobs and there is no shift
and no retreat from that. Neither is there an apology for what we said
concerning the creation of 500 000 jobs.

What we said about what we were going to do was feasible when we said it,
but our plans are in relation to ... [Interjections.] You must understand
this in a dialectical form ... [Interjections.] Understand things in their
changing form. Nothing is static. If you live in a world where everything
is static then you live in the land of the dead whilst walking.

We must not be afraid of the nationalisation debate. The debate about
nationalisation is not the redefinition of any ANC policy. It is a debate
that is being raised by a youth organ of the ANC. We do understand your
trauma because you don’t have youth organisations like ours. [Laughter.]
Because you live in organisations where everything is alpha and omega and
you have killed your own youth. Your youth have crossed over to the ANC.
[Interjections.]

Malema is the only jewel that we have and he is the only thing that you
don’t have. [Interjections.] That is why you are crying foul because you
are actually jealous. [Laughter.] Jealousy is the enemy of success.
[Laughter.] So, when the Youth League raises nationalisation you think that
it is something new. In the ANC we have grown in the culture of vibrant
debate.

Once Helen Zille has spoken, all is said and done, “baie dankie, goeie
môre, ja ja”. [Laughter.] Everything is over. There is no vibrant voice and
that is why you go right-wing without looking backwards because you don’t
have a vibrant voice within your own organisation.

Thanks to the ANC for having created the Youth League; please continue to
defend its autonomy. They are fighting among themselves and tearing one
another asunder and yet they want to teach us about anything. The ANC has
long been. Even those who wanted to kill the ANC by forming fashionable
organisations have not actually succeeded.

uTata Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, I just want to say that we are not
making the police trigger happy. What we are saying is that we are not
fraternising with crime and criminals. That is all that we are doing. We
are empowering the police and the system to ensure that we deal correctly
and decisively with crime.

Hon Hilda Ndude, from the congress of whatever, we talk about the issue of
morality. Our President has owned up to everything that he has done.
[Interjections.] He could have chosen not to own up to everything or not
even to apologise. The moral bankruptcy that you are talking about applies
to one of those not far from your eyes who has not owned up to their
actions. [Applause.] Please, you must learn to support your own children
before you can throw stones everywhere.

The state of the nation address was not about whether the President had
done this or not, it was about the future of our country and what we
represent. It is not about the church where you are preaching. Reverend
Meshoe will disagree with you.

He was very short even on the question of morality today. You must
basically own up to what you have done. The Constitution of South Africa
provides for equal rights for all South Africans to practise their cultural
beliefs and you are reducing morality to certain cultural practices.

Moral values should be tested with the ability to build a nonracial,
nonsexist and prosperous society. [Applause.] It is what morality and moral
values should be about. The fact of the matter is that nothing is concealed
because, like the Chinese say, you must actually extract the truth from the
facts.

Time expired. [Applause.]

Order, hon members! Hon members, you will be pleased to know that that
concludes the debate. The President will reply to the debate tomorrow.

The House is adjourned. Enjoy the rest of the evening.

Debate interrupted.
The House adjourned at 19:23.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees


  (1) Mr S D Montsitsi has been elected as co-chairperson of the Joint
       Standing Committee on Defence with effect from 13 November 2009.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


CREDA INSERT - T091113E-INSERT1 – PAGES 1654-1673


                          TUESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 November
         2009:


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] (National
             Assembly – sec 77).


          b) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of Canada regarding Mutual Assistance
        between their Customs Administrations, tabled in terms of Section
        231 (3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the  Customs  Agreement  between  the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of
        Canada.

  National assembly


COMMITTEE REPORTS

1.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING ON
ITS OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THE UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH, DATED 11 NOVEMBER
2009

The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training having undertaken
an oversight visit to the University of Stellenbosch on the 13 October 2009
reports as follows:

1. Introduction
The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training conducted an
oversight visit to the University of Stellenbosch (US) as part of its
ongoing oversight function to Higher Education Institutions (HEI’s) on the
13 October 2009. The purpose of the oversight visit was mainly to interact
with the University on issues such as admission and language policy, the
transformation plan, and challenges to students.

2. Background
The committee made an analysis of the Higher Education and Training
landscape during its Strategic Workshop in August 2009. A resolution was
taken that the post -schooling system needed serious consideration given
the fact that approximately 2.7 million youth out of school were neither
employed or participating in any form of training. The committee intends to
assist the new Department of Higher Education and Training in expanding
access to Skills Development and Training during the term of the 4th
Parliament. In reality, South Africa has not reaped rewards as expected
from its investment in education over the past few years and the committee,
together with the new Department of Higher Education and Training have
embarked on a new strategy to change this perspective.

The University of Stellenbosch (US) is regarded as one of the best research
innovation Institutions in Africa. The recent launch of the Sumbandila
Satellite is the first of its kind from an African Institution which is the
testimony to the success of the University. The committee previously had
serious concerns contrary to the successes of the University. The public
perception of the University as an Afrikaans Institution in the new
dispensation negatively affected the image of the Institution with the
majority of citizens. The poor participation of black undergraduates and
the lack of cultural diversity at the Institution were among the concerns
that the committee needed clarification. The committee aimed to leave the
Institution with clarifications on its plans to improve the diversity and
public image of the University.
3. The Delegation
Mr M Fransman Chairperson (ANC), Ms M Kubayi (ANC), Mr G Lekgetho (ANC), Mr
S Makhubele (ANC), Ms F Mushwana (ANC), Mr S Radebe (ANC),  Mr G Boinamo
(DA), Dr W James (DA), Ms N Vukuza (COPE) and Ms C Dudley (ACDP).

The University of Stellenbosch
Prof R Botman: Rector  & Vice-Chancellor, Prof J Smith: Vice-Rector
(Community Interaction and Personnel), Prof M Fourie Vice-Rector
(Teaching), Prof A van Zyl Vice-Rector (Research), Prof L van Huyssteen:
Executive Director Operations and Finance, Prof T de Coning: Chief Director
Strategic Initiatives and Human Resources, Dr T Fish: Vice Dean Faculty of
Health Sciences, Prof M Karaan: Dean Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Prof
E van Harte: Dean Faculty of Military Science, Mrs M Moolman: Member of
Council, Dr L van der Westhuizen: Member of Council, Ms E Tise: Director
Library Services, Prof J Botha: Senior Director Academic Support, Dr B
Leibowitz: Director Centre for Teaching and Learning, Mr L McMaster: Dean
of Students, Mr M Shaikh: Senior Director Communication and Liaison, Mr G
Wiese: Chairperson of the  Student Representative Council and Mr T Mvlane:
Member of the SRC.

Department of Higher Education and Training
Prof C Sehoole: Chief Director for Higher Education Policy and Development
Support.

4. Summary of the presentation
Prof R Botman: Rector & Vice-Chancellor led the presentation:
The committee was informed that the new management of the University was
appointed in 2006 with the objective of making a difference with respect to
its past. The University has the second largest number of rated researchers
and is the third best performing University in terms of academic success in
the country. It supports poor communities through the implementation of
various projects aimed at alleviating poverty and it supports government in
terms of policy advice.

Achievements
    ▪ Launch of the Sumbandila Satellite into space
    ▪ Host three of the seven National Research Fund Centres of Excellence
      above any other University in the country
    ▪  One of the top academic and research Institutions in the country
    ▪ Average success rate of 82% per annum
    ▪ The only Institution with a Faculty of Military Sciences in the
      country
Challenges
    ▪ Only 4% of academic staff are black and 76% of undergraduates are
      whites
    ▪ Low throughput rate of black undergraduates
    ▪ Lowest recipient of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
      (NSFAS) funding compared with other Universities in the country
    ▪ Limited infrastructure to accommodate more academic staff
    ▪ Insufficient strategy to attract more black prospective
      undergraduates to the University

5. The following formed part of the discussion
    ▪ The committee was concerned that most senior management posts were
      occupied predominantly by white academic staff and the participation
      of black undergraduates was low. It was argued that the vision of 2015
      of the Institution was mediocre and its recruitment strategy raised
      concerns. It was questioned as to whether the Institution and its
      Council were supportive of the vision of 2015 and why the Institution
      failed to attract more black undergraduates.
    ▪ It was argued that the nature of the Institution did not relate to
      its vision of 2015 given the challenges relating to employment equity
      and access of black undergraduates to the Institution.
    ▪ A concern was raised regarding the lack of a database containing the
      details of all the drop-outs of the Institution. It was enquired as to
      whether there were any other mediums of instruction besides English
      and Afrikaans and how many students were assisted by the NSFAS
      bursary.
    ▪ The University was commended for its TB-HIV Integration Project
      aimed at assisting poor communities in fighting the epidemics. It was
      enquired whether the University had developed a vaccine to stop the
      spread of TB.
    ▪ It was observed that the public perception of the University was not
      positive since it was still regarded as an Afrikaans Institution and
      that there was under-representivity of black undergraduates and
      academic staff. It was questioned as to whether the culture of the
      Institution was conducive to black students and academic staff.
    ▪ A concern was raised regarding the University Council’s role in
      monitoring the adherence of the Institution to its policy documents.
    ▪ The committee commended the University on the absence of any crisis
      caused by students or academic staff as a result of its challenges.
      The committee enquired about the role and responsibilities of the
      Military Academy at the Institution.

6. Responses
    ▪ The University acknowledged the fact that its transformation had
      been delayed and that not enough had been achieved to change the
      public perception of its image as an Afrikaans Institution. The major
      challenge of the University is the infrastructure capacity to
      accommodate more black academic staff on its premises.
    ▪ It was noted that the University had requested more funds from NSFAS
      to extend its support to low income students and some students were
      awarded top sliced bursaries that could not meet their expenses.
    ▪ The committee was informed that the process of costing
      multilingualism is very expensive and the Institution would like
      further assistance to increase the number of mediums of instruction to
      include African languages at the Institution.
    ▪ It was argued that there were various contributing factors to the
      low participation of black undergraduates. Firstly, most low income
      students could not afford to study at the Institution given the low
      percentage of the NSFAS bursary awarded to the Institution annually
      and some were excluded due to the medium of instruction of the
      Institution.
    ▪ The University Council indicated that it supported the vision of
      2015 and the Rector created enthusiasm in all faculties to work
      towards the implementation of the 2015 goals. It further argued that
      it was unfortunate that the language issue received a negative public
      response.
    ▪ The Military Academy provides specialised military training to
      students who aspire to be in the South African National Defence Force
      (SANDF)

7. Meeting with Student Organisations
The committee was interested to know what were the key challenges of
students, the role of student leadership on Campus, the student’s culture
at the Institution, the relationship between black and white students
especially in residences, whether student organisations were consulted
before fees were increased, students’ opinion on the language issue and
whether black students participated in sporting activities.
The committee urged students to assist each other equitably and to promote
a non racial Institution for prospective students. It further highlighted
that in future a public forum would be created where all stakeholders of
the Institution would be involved in debating its challenges.
Issues and responses raised by students
    ▪ The SRC leadership created a Portfolio of Maties campaign as a
      symbol of integration amongst all students. The campaign was very
      successful since it was accepted by the majority of students.
    ▪ It was argued that most black and non Afrikaans speaking
      undergraduates have a challenge with the use of Afrikaans as one of
      the mediums of instruction since it is the mother tongue of the
      majority students.
    ▪ It was said that student leadership was consulted when fees were to
      be increased. However, other critical decisions were taken without
      consultation with student leadership.
    ▪ It emerged that some lecturers spent most of their time in
      undertaking their research commitments than lecturing and thus
      affecting students negatively.
    ▪ It was noted that fear of management was the main challenge of
      student leadership and a solution was required urgently to resolve
      this matter.
    ▪ The students emphasised clearly that the Institution did not promote
      racism at all. The challenge was the dominant cultural background of
      some students which has attached itself to the Institution.
    ▪ The idea of a public forum to discuss the challenges of the
      Institution was supported by the student leadership, since their
      engagement with the University management was minimal.


8. Findings
The following formed part of the committee’s critical findings:
    ▪ The vision of 2015 targets for black academic staff and students
      were too low
    ▪ The SRC voted against the usage of a parallel medium of instruction
    ▪ The true impression of the Institution was not highlighted in its
      presentation and documents presented to the committee
    ▪ The Institution required more funding from NSFAS to support low
      income students
    ▪ Development and under-representivity of black and coloured students
      in  student leadership bodies remained a major challenge
    ▪ The cause of the delay in employing black academic staff was due to
      limited infrastructure capacity  and lack of funds
    ▪ The institution attracted more black post graduates than
      undergraduate students
    ▪ Student leadership bodies were not transparent with management
      regarding challenges they raised with the committee


9. Summary
The oversight visit offered the committee an opportunity to interact with
both management and student leadership regarding challenges faced by the
University. It was clear from the presentation and documents supplied to
the committee that the pace of the transformation process was very slow.
There was little sense of urgency to speed up the process, the major
reasons being expressed were insufficient infrastructure capacity and
limited funds. On the contrary, the success of the University is undisputed
given the strong academic capacity that is entrenched within the
Institution. The committee expressed the need for further interaction with
the Institution and the implementation of a public forum where relevant
stakeholders would be involved in the decision making processes.

10. Recommendations
The following formed part of the critical recommendations:
      ▪ The vision of 2015 document needed urgent review if the
        institution desired a complete transformation
      ▪ An inclusive Human Resource development strategy was required in
        order  to attract more black academic staff, without reducing white
        academic staff already in existence
      ▪ Special emphasis should be placed on attracting more black
        undergraduates and academic support should be strengthened to
        ensure their success
      ▪ The NSFAS should increase its allocation to the University to
        assist more needy students with full bursaries

Report to be considered

                         THURSDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) South African Postbank Bill [B 14 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees
    (1)     The following changes have been made to the DA membership of
        the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans:

        Appointed:

        Coetzee, Mr T W (Alt.)


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of International Relations and Co-operation

    (a)     Amendments to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
        the use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be
        excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate effects (CCW),
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution of the
        Republic of South Africa, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the  Convention  on  Prohibitions  or
        Restrictions on the use of Certain Conventional Weapons  which  may
        be deemed to be excessively Injurious  or  to  have  Indiscriminate
        effects, also known as the Certain Conventional Weapons  Convention
        (CCW).


 1. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Represented Political
        Parties’ Fund for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2008-09 [RP 248-2009].

    (b)     Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2008-
        09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies in  Trust
        kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2008-09 [RP 230-2009].


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation
        of Supply Chain Management Practices within the R200 000  Threshold
        [RP 127-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES  ON  ITS  5
AND 6 AUGUST OVERSIGHT  VISITS  TO  POLLSMOOR  AND  MALMESBURY  CORRECTIONAL
CENTRES IN THE WESTERN CAPE, DATED 17 NOVEMBER 2009

1.    Introduction
1.1   On 5 and 6 August 2009 a delegation  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
      Correctional Services undertook the Committee’s  first  official  site
      visits when it  visited  the  Pollsmoor  and  Malmesbury  correctional
      centres in the Western Cape.
1.2.  Most of South Africa’s correctional  centres  pre-date  1994  and  the
      facilities  are  not  conducive   to   the   implementation   of   the
      rehabilitation and reintegration ideals and  strategies  contained  in
      the 2005 White Paper on Corrections. Central to the success  of  these
      strategies is the unit management concept, which requires the division
      of correctional centres  into  small  manageable  units  accommodating
      small groups of offenders that can be easily supervised and monitored.
      This  not  only  limits  security  risks,  but  also  facilitates  the
      implementation  of  the  necessary  development   and   rehabilitation
      programmes, while ensuring that detention is safe and secure and  that
      the treatment and care of offenders  fall  within  the  parameters  of
      South Africa’s human rights framework.
1.3   The report comprises an overview of particularly the occupancy at  the
      centres at the time of the visit, a number of  the  Committee’s  major
      observations as well as comments and recommendations. It is  important
      to note that more than anything the visits were aimed  at  giving  the
      Committee opportunity to acclimatise and get to know what the  day-to-
      day operation of a  correctional  facility  involves,  and  the  major
      challenges impeding successful service delivery by the  DCS.  Much  of
      what was observed  reflect  challenges  experienced  in  most  centres
      across the  country,  and  will  serve  in  giving  direction  to  the
      Committee’s own oversight programme and objectives for the coming four
      years.

2.    Delegation
2.1    The  delegation  that  visited  Pollsmoor  Correctional   Centre   on
      Wednesday, 5 August comprised the following Members:
      Mr V Smith (ANC) (Chairperson), Ms W Ngwenya (ANC), Ms M Mdaka  (ANC),
      Mr A Fritz (DA), Mr J Selfe (DA) and Ms C Blaai (COPE).
2.2    The  delegation  that  visited  Malmesbury  Correctional  Centre   on
      Thursday, 6 August comprised the following Members:
      Mr V Smith (ANC) - Chairperson, Ms W Ngwenya (ANC), Ms M Mdaka  (ANC),
      Mr A Fritz (DA) and Mr J Selfe (DA).

3.    Context
3.1   The Judicial Inspectorate for  Correctional  Services  (JICS)  in  its
      2007/08 Annual Report identified a number of challenges  prevalent  in
      South Africa’s correctional system. Chief  amongst  these  is  chronic
      prison overcrowding: the 237 operating correctional centres  in  South
      Africa were designed to accommodate 114 559 offenders, but at the  end
      of January 2008 were approximately 45% overcrowded, accommodating  165
      987 offenders, the bulk of whom were remand  detainees.  Overcrowding,
      coupled with, amongst others, the fact that most of the  centres  pre-
      date  1994,  and  were  designed  to  merely  imprison,   means   that
      implementing programmes necessary to promote rehabilitation and social-
      reintegration as envisioned in the White Paper on Corrections is  near
      impossible.  Prisons  built  to  “warehouse”  offenders  do  not  lend
      themselves to the splitting up of  offenders  into  manageable  units,
      bringing about security challenges, and impeding service delivery.
3.2   The centres identified for the  Committee’s  first  site  visits  were
      selected because they provided the opportunity  to  contrast  the  old
      “Apartheid” style warehouse-type correctional centres, and  the  newer
      more modern centres designed with the principles of unit management in
      mind. Pollsmoor, the older of the two centres  was  approximately  75%
      overcrowded at the time of the visit, and  Members  experienced  first
      hand how  overcrowding  impacted  on  the  DCS’  service  delivery  to
      inmates. The Medium A centre at Malmesbury on  the  other  hand  is  a
      Centre of Excellence (CoE) that at the time  of  the  visit  was  only
      overcrowded by 10 inmates and illustrated  the  positive  impact  unit
      management had on the delivery  of  rehabilitation  and  reintegration
      programmes, as well as on the maintenance of discipline and security.

4.    Pollsmoor Correctional Centre
4.1   The Pollsmoor Management Area is situated in Tokai and  comprises  the
      following five centres:
    ➢ Admission Centre, accommodating largely adult  male  remand  awaiting-
      trial detainees, and those offenders with further charges;

    ➢ Female Centre is a Centre of  Excellence  (CoE)  accommodating  female
      children, juvenile, adult unsentenced (awaiting-trial)  and  sentenced
      offenders as well as pregnant women and mothers with babies;

    ➢ Medium A, accommodating male child and juvenile offenders as  well  as
      those juveniles with further charges;

    ➢ Medium B,  accommodating  male  sentenced  offenders  and  those  with
      further charges; and

    ➢ Medium C, the pre-release centre accommodating  those  male  offenders
      who will be released/paroled within the next two years [not visited by
      the delegation].

4.2   The Pollsmoor management  area  can  accommodate  a  total  of  4  336
      inmates, but on 3 August housed 7 525,  4  892  of  whom  were  remand
      detainees.

5.    Malmesbury Correctional Centre
5.1   The Malmesbury correctional  centres  visited  fall  within  the  West
      Coast Management Area and are situated  in  Malmesbury,  approximately
      65km outside of  Cape  Town  in  the  Swartland  District.  Of  the  3
      correctional centres in the area, only the following two were visited:
    ➢ Medium A, which is a Centre of  Excellence  (CoE)  accommodating  only
      male sentenced offenders; and

    ➢ Medium B, accommodating male remand detainees.




5.2.  The Medium A centre started operating in  1997  and  was  designed  in
      accordance with  unit  management  principles.  It  comprises  amongst
      others an  admission  centre,  six  housing  units  (cell  blocks),  a
      hospital unit, a pre-release unit, textile  workshops,  sports  fields
      and classrooms. The Medium B centre, a much older structure, was  213%
      overcrowded at the time of the visit. It has none  of  the  facilities
      available at the Medium A centre and the remand detainees housed there
      spend most of their time in the grossly overcrowded cells. The  Medium
      A centre, designed to house 1 338, housed 1 348 sentenced offenders at
      the time of the visit, while the Medium B  centre  designed  for  175,
      housed 382 remand detainees.

6.    Observations
6.1   Pollsmoor Correctional Centre
6.1.1 The Admission  Centre,  housing  male  remand  detainees  was  grossly
      overcrowded with one of the cells visited sleeping 80  despite  having
      been designed to accommodate 35. The  Centre  can  accommodate  1  619
      detainees, but on 3 August 2009  housed  4  200.  The  conditions  are
      unhygienic and unhealthy with detainees spending most of their day  in
      the cells, sharing not only the single shower and toilet per cell, but
      many also sharing beds.

   2. At the time of the visit, the Medium A centre  housed  45  unsentenced
      and 12 sentenced male child offenders, and the Female Centre housed  5
      unsentenced and 1 sentenced female child offender, aged  15.  Children
      are accommodated separately from the juvenile  and  adult  population.
      Many of the child and juvenile remand detainees  have  been  sentenced
      for petty crimes but their parents or guardians either refuse  or  are
      unable to pay the small bail amounts or fines that have been  set  for
      them. Some children were serving sentences as short as 5 days, and the
      process of tracing their addresses often took too much time for it  to
      be a pointless exercise. Where it  is  not  possible  to  trace  their
      parents or the children refuse to provide physical addresses, the  DCS
      has no choice but to detain them. While much is done  to  ensure  that
      they are placed in the Department  of  Social  Development  -  managed
      secure care  centres,  placement  is  not  always  possible  as  these
      facilities also have limited bed space.

   3. Only 291 of the 1 246 male juveniles had been sentenced,  and  742  of
      the 955 unsentenced male juveniles had no  bail  for  various  reasons
      including that they were flight risks, had  committed  serious  crimes
      and  were  repeat  offenders.  The  female  section  accommodated   64
      juveniles, of whom 39 were  unsentenced.  As  with  the  adult  remand
      detainees, the unsentenced juvenile detainees did not  participate  in
      any educational, development or work programmes. Alarmingly 183 of the
      male juveniles had bail of less than R 1 000, and only one had bail of
      more than R2 000. Although the Committee is  pleased  that  through  a
      number of interventions introduced since Parliament’s  last  visit  in
      October 2007 the figures have been reduced by 15.39%,  the  number  of
      juveniles still remained too high.

   4. At the time of the visit one foreign national was being detained after
      having been arrested for not  having  the  necessary  travel  permits.
      Pollsmoor had no  facilities  to  detain  foreign  nationals  awaiting
      repatriation and such individuals are detained  with  other  awaiting-
      trial detainees. The  region  transports  illegal  immigrants  to  the
      Lindelani  repatriation  centre  in  Johannesburg  every  two   weeks,
      provided there are sufficient numbers to be transported by bus.  While
      the management of the centre acknowledged the  trauma  detention  with
      the ordinary remand population might expose illegal immigrants to,  it
      was clear that given the gross overcrowding  at  the  Centre  and  the
      inadequacy of the facilities, little can currently be done to  address
      the situation.



   5. The Committee found that the hospital section was  well  equipped  and
      fairly well managed. At the time of the visit 58  sentenced  offenders
      and 35 remand detainees were being hospitalised. Two wheel-chair bound
      sentenced offenders were permanently  accommodated  in  this  section.
      Inmates with multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR TB) were  admitted
      to an isolation ward. Some of the inmates hospitalised were ill enough
      not to pose a threat to society  and  could  have  been  conditionally
      released to the care of a hospice or their families. Detaining someone
      who was wheelchair-bound or so ill he or she could  not  function  was
      contrary  to  the  principles  of  humane  detention.  The   Committee
      acknowledges that the cost of hospice care and the fact that  many  of
      the offenders’ families are so poor they are unable to care for  their
      ill relatives, makes conditional release nearly impossible.




   6. Officials informed the delegation that sexual violence and gangsterism
      was particularly prevalent in the overcrowded Admission and  Medium  A
      centres,  but  that  it  was  under-reported.  The  area  did  have  a
      comprehensive anti-gang strategy  but  the  challenge  persists.  Upon
      admission offenders are made aware of the dangers  of  joining  prison
      gangs, but the fact that many offenders are already gang members  upon
      their incarceration makes it difficult to prevent their gang activity.



   7. Nutrition services at  the  centre  are  outsourced  and  the  kitchen
      appeared to  be  well  run  and  hygienic.  In  line  with  the  legal
      requirements, inmates received 3 nutritionally-balanced meals a day.



   8. Both sentenced male and female offenders can elect  to  take  part  in
      education and/or  work  programmes.  Providing  programmes  to  remand
      detainees was not possible as they were not sentenced,  and  could  be
      released at any time, making participation and completion  of  courses
      difficult. All offenders can participate in work  programmes  provided
      they  met  certain  requirements,  and  depending  on  their  security
      classification  and  willingness,  but  some   complained   of   being
      arbitrarily prohibited from working. These  complaints  were  disputed
      but the centre management nevertheless undertook to  follow  them  up.
      Overcrowding, staff shortage, inadequate facilities and an  inadequate
      budget impacted on the delivery of work programmes. It  was  envisaged
      that once the Department has fully converted from a 5 day to a  7  day
      work week, more staff would be available and that more work programmes
      would then be rolled out to inmates.



   9. The management of the centre complained that many offenders  were  not
      willing to attend educational programmes and could not be forced to do
      so. The Department of Labour (DOL) provided funds for programmes,  but
      because offenders needed to  have  ID  numbers  to  participate,  many
      refused for fear that should they apply for identity  documents,  they
      would  be  linked  to  other  crimes.  The  roll  out  of  educational
      programmes was also limited due to the lack of facilities and shortage
      of teachers.



  10. In the female section many offenders complained  of  not  having  been
      visited by their families. This was reported to be a challenge  across
      all of the Pollsmoor centres and was the result of “an  administrative
      bottleneck” that prevented visitations.



  11. Of the 166 remand detainees in the female section for whom no bail had
      been set, 80% were repeat offenders. The vast majority of women spoken
      to had committed theft or fraud.




  12. At the time of the visit Pollsmoor accommodated 8 women with babies: 1
      remand detainee accused of murder and with no bail,  and  7  sentenced
      offenders, most having committed economic crimes. There  were  also  9
      pregnant offenders: 2 sentenced and 7 remand detainees, one with  bail
      of only R200 which she was unable to raise. The youngest baby  at  the
      centre was 7 weeks old, and the oldest 14 months. At least two of  the
      women were repeat offenders who felt that they had no  choice  but  to
      steal in order to provide for their children and families.  While  the
      women agreed that being raised in prison had adverse effects on  their
      babies, none of them felt able to release their children to  the  care
      of their families who were in economic dire straits already, and  were
      not willing to have their babies fostered until their  release.  While
      all mothers with babies were accommodated in single cells,  the  state
      of the cells was a matter of concern. As lock-up time  was  at  14h30,
      mothers and babies are confined to their tiny cells for  much  of  the
      day.




  13. Some offenders in the female section had complained of searching being
      done in  a  manner  that  violates  their  rights.  Centre  management
      explained that searching was done in line with what was prescribed  by
      the legislation. Thorough searching of offenders returning from  court
      is vital as contraband is often smuggled into the Centre via offenders
      who had spent the day at court waiting  to  have  their  cases  heard,
      giving them ample opportunity to interact with other  members  of  the
      public as well as other offenders.



6.1.14      The Committee is pleased that efforts are  underway  to  upgrade
      the Pollsmoor Correctional Centre and hopes that this will  result  in
      improved security and delivery of services to offenders.  In  addition
      three new generation  correctional  centres  are  due  for  completion
      within the next year: Vanrynsdorp (April 2010), Brandvlei (July/August
      2010), Ceres (July/August 2010). These centres that are being built in
      accordance  with  unit  management  principles  will  create   2   000
      additional bed spaces in the area.


6.2   Malmesbury Correctional Centre
6.2.1 The Committee was impressed by the pre-release centre where  offenders
      are accommodated prior to their release and where they attend a number
      of programmes aimed at facilitating their reintegration into  society.
      These included work programmes,  weekend  parole  and  day-orientation
      programmes. A restorative justice programme run by a  local  religious
      leader and a  social  worker  assists  with  reconciling  victims  and
      offenders.
6.2.2 Educational programmes are run in small groups  designed  for  maximum
      success. Although a total  of  375  offenders  had  enrolled  for  the
      various educational programmes at the start of 2009, that  number  had
      been reduced to 266 due to gangsterism, loss of interest and  offender
      transfers to other centres. The Centre currently  employs  4  teachers
      and 8 custodial staff who are also trained teachers, but who have  had
      no success in having their status transferred to that of teachers.  At
      the moment there are 5 vacancies and  the  shortage  of  teachers  has
      resulted in the Centre not being able to implement the new curriculum.
      The  management  of  the  Centre  explained  that  the  moratorium  on
      appointments affected teachers too and that until that was lifted  the
      DCS will not be able to appoint more educationalists.
6.2.3 The Centre had both a textile and a production workshop.  The  textile
      workshop provided centres across the  country  with  prison  uniforms.
      Offenders also received training in basic occupational skills such  as
      cabinet-making. The activity of the workshops depends  on  the  demand
      for the products and if centres in other management areas do not place
      orders, activity at the workshops is affected.  Offenders  received  a
      very small gratuity for their participation in work programmes.
6.2.4 The management area has received approximately R5,5 million  from  the
      DOL to train offenders in various courses aimed  at  increasing  their
      employability upon release. Despite the availability of funds the DCS’
      implementation of such programmes is hampered  by  its  difficulty  to
      attract and retain artisans. Officials indicated that as was the  case
      across the country the management area has  difficulty  filling  their
      artisan vacancies. Artisans fell  outside  the  occupational  specific
      dispensation (OSD) for engineers and it was hoped that  when  the  OSD
      for artisans was finalised the situation would improve.
6.2.5  The  area’s  care  programmes  comprise  social  work,  psychological
      services, spiritual and moral development, health  care  and  HIV/AIDS
      programmes. Although the intention to roll these out and deliver  them
      is there, shortage of funds, particularly the very small allocation to
      the development programme, was seriously impeding delivery.
6.2.6 The Medium B Centre was  grossly  overcrowded.  As  was  the  case  at
      Pollsmoor many of the detainees complained of courts postponing  cases
      and inadequate  legal  representation.  Some  reported  that  although
      charges against them had been withdrawn by the  victims,  some  judges
      refused to withdraw their cases. As was the case at Pollsmoor many  of
      the detainees had bail set,  but  were  unable  to  afford  it.  While
      complaints from offenders were dealt  with  internally,  the  Judicial
      Inspectorate for Correctional Services also had its role to play where
      complaints were lodged with them.
6.2.7 Both sentenced  inmates  and  remand  detainees  made  allegations  of
      assault, intimidation and torture against  correctional  officials  at
      the Centre. These were disputed and Members were  assured  that  while
      inmates might not always receive the kinds of responses to  complaints
      they wanted no assaults by officials  were  tolerated.  The  Committee
      nevertheless considers  the  allegations  serious  enough  to  warrant
      further investigation by the DCS.
6.2.8 Offenders in the pre-release unit complained of  unfair  treatment  by
      officials and that certain offenders were given special treatment, and
      allowed to stay in  the  pre-release  centre  although  they  did  not
      qualify for it. This allegation was disputed and the management of the
      Centre explained that the  inmates  allegedly  receiving  preferential
      treatment were in fact working at the Centre, have release  dates  but
      have been rejected by their  families  and  therefore  have  no  fixed
      address to be released to.
6.2.9 Unlike at Pollsmoor where  nutrition  services  were  outsourced,  the
      Malmesbury  correctional  centres  provided  nutrition  services   and
      prepared food themselves. Offenders complained  that  meals  were  not
      nutritious. Staff explained that as they got their  meat  supply  from
      local  abattoirs,  they  could  not  always  predict   the   cuts   of
      particularly red meat they would get.

7.    Comments and Recommendations
7.1   Overcrowding
7.1.1 Much of the overcrowding observed at both centres  was  due  to  large
      numbers of remand detainees, and the Committee is aware that  this  is
      the case at correctional centres across the country. It is clear  that
      should  remand  detainees  be  removed   from   correctional   centres
      overcrowding would be radically reduced, leaving the DCS able to focus
      on the implementation of its  core  mandate  –  the  secure  care  and
      rehabilitation of sentenced  offenders.  The  Committee  welcomes  the
      interventions emanating from the criminal justice review  process  and
      will have a series of interactions with experts  and  stakeholders  to
      better  understand  the  causes   of   and   possible   solutions   to
      overcrowding. While it realises that much of  the  responsibility  for
      reducing the number of remand detainees lies with the  judiciary,  the
      Committee emphasises that the DCS must impress the impact overcrowding
      has  on  the  delivery  of  rehabilitation  programmes  upon   cluster
      partners, and should if necessary  take  the  lead  in  finding  joint
      cluster solutions to the situation. The Committee will closely monitor
      the conversion of the 11 centres earmarked to become  remand  centres,
      and the DCS is to provide the Committee with regular  updates  on  the
      progress on this and other interventions.
7.1.2 The above-mentioned intervention  must  be  accompanied  by  increased
      efforts by the DCS to improve on its community corrections system thus
      making it an attractive and feasible  alternative  sentencing  option.
      Increasing the use of non-custodial sentencing will not  only  further
      reduce overcrowding, but will also spare those offenders  who  do  not
      pose a threat to society from the trauma of incarceration and, in  the
      long run, reduce recidivism.

   2. Health care

   1. The Committee feels strongly that seriously ill inmates should not  be
      incarcerated, not only  because  it  is  inhumane,  but  also  because
      detaining inmates who, due  to  their  medical  conditions  could  not
      possibly pose a threat to society comes at a huge cost to  the  state.
      Where  possible  those  inmates  who  are  seriously  ill  should   be
      conditionally released to hospices and the DCS should increase efforts
      to build partnerships in  this  regard.  The  Committee  welcomes  the
      intended review of the medical parole system, and hopes that  it  will
      bring relief to seriously ill inmates too, and not only those who  are
      terminally ill.

   2. The Committee is very  concerned  about  the  spread  of  communicable
      diseases such as TB among offenders and remand detainees  accommodated
      in extremely overcrowded cells. Extra special care should be taken  to
      prevent the spread  of  such  diseases,  and  infected  offenders  and
      detainees should be isolated from the healthy population  until  there
      is no further risk of contamination.

   3. Many of the inmates complained that they were sometimes denied medical
      care and were at times not referred to  a  medical  professional  when
      they  reported  that  they  needed  medical  attention.  The  relevant
      legislative provisions and policies regarding care of  inmates  should
      be adhered to at all times and offenders who request medical  care  or
      lodge complaints during the daily requests and  complaints  roll  call
      should be assisted.


7.3   Education and development programmes
7.3.1 The Committee was most concerned that because  remand  detainees  were
      not sentenced offenders, they could  not  participate  in  school  and
      development  programmes.  While   the   Committee   acknowledges   the
      difficulty in coordinating such programmes for a  population  that  is
      constantly  in  flux,  it  hopes   that   the   recently   constituted
      interdepartmental task  team  headed  by  the  DCS  and  charged  with
      developing a strategy for the care and treatment of remand  detainees,
      will develop a workable solution which will ensure that time spent  in
      remand detention will be spent much more productively.
7.3.2 Much more should be done to ensure that more  offenders  sign  up  for
      education   and   skills   development   programmes.   The   Committee
      acknowledges the limitations placed on the  DCS  by  the  teacher  and
      trainer shortage, and feels that innovative solutions should be  found
      to ensure that the necessary skills are attracted and retained.  Where
      possible  existing  partnerships  with  other  departments  and   non-
      governmental organisations (NGO) should be strengthened and  new  ones
      forged to ensure delivery of these important development programmes.
   3. As stated in the Committee’s report on the  DCS  2009/10  budget,  the
      funds allocated to the care and development programmes do not speak to
      the DCS rehabilitation and reintegration goals. More funds  should  be
      allocated to such programmes, and  strategic  partnerships  should  be
      made with NGOs  and  other  experts  to  ensure  greater  delivery  on
      programmes aimed at providing offenders with the skills  necessary  to
      get employment or better still become self-employed.


7.4   Women with babies
7.4.1 The 2008 amendments to the Correctional Services legislation  provides
      that babies will be allowed to stay with the mothers until they are  2
      years old, and thus considered old enough to be separated  from  their
      mothers. While the lowering of the age from 5 to 2 years is  welcomed,
      the  Committee  believes  that  further  research  on  the  impact  of
      incarceration on very  young  children  should  be  conducted  and  if
      necessary stricter guidelines should  be  developed  for  their  care.
      Pending the outcome of such studies mothers and their babies should as
      far as possible be accommodated in facilities that are as near  normal
      as  possible  to  ensure  that  the   negative   impact   on   babies’
      socialisation is kept to the bare minimum.

7.5   Undocumented foreign nationals
7.5.1 The Committee recommends that greater effort be made  to  ensure  that
      undocumented foreigners are transported to repatriation  centres  more
      regularly, or if that is not possible,  they  be  detained  separately
      from remand detainees until they can be taken to repatriation centres.
      If necessary the DCS  should  consult  with  the  Department  of  Home
      Affairs to ascertain how the current system can be improved to  ensure
      that undocumented foreigners are not unduly exposed to the  trauma  of
      incarceration and are assisted so that they can receive the  necessary
      services as soon as possible.

7.6   Inmate labour and privileges
7.6.1 More inmates should be  involved  in  productive  activities  for  the
      greater part of the day. The Committee recognises that the legislation
      currently places certain limitations on the DCS as far as its  ability
      to  enforce  participation  in   work   programmes   and   educational
      programmes, and recommends that  future  reviews  of  the  legislation
      consider these sections carefully to ensure  greater  productivity  on
      the part of offenders. Increased inmate productivity will not only  be
      of value for their rehabilitation and reduce idleness  but  will  also
      assist the DCS in becoming more self-sufficient.
7.6.2 The Committee feels strongly that privileges should be well  monitored
      and should only be granted  as  part  of  a  reward  system  for  good
      behaviour and possibly participation in  educational  and  development
      programmes.

7.5   Social re-integration
7.5.1 Successful  reintegration  is  vital  to  prevent  recidivism  and  is
      dependant  on  a  number  of  factors   including   the   success   of
      rehabilitation and care programmes, the experience an offender has  in
      prison, the effectiveness of  the  parole  and  community  corrections
      system and  most  importantly  society’s  willingness  to  accept  ex-
      offenders upon their release. All  offenders  met  during  the  visits
      complained of the stigma attached to having  been  incarcerated.  Many
      feel that taking  part  in  work  programmes  and  skills  development
      programmes is of no use, if upon their release, the fact that they had
      been in prison is held against them and  they  are  unable  to  secure
      employment. More should be done to raise awareness among  the  general
      public around  social  reintegration  efforts.  Both  the  public  and
      private sectors should be engaged and  dissuaded  from  discriminating
      against a person who had committed a crime and had served his sentence
      for it. Continued stigmatisation leads  to  isolation  and  eventually
      recidivism thus continuing the cycle of crime.
7.5.2 Inmates should be encouraged to maintain contact with  their  families
      while incarcerated so as to ensure that they  have  a  family  support
      system  upon  their  release.  Such  a  support  system  is  vital  to
      preventing  recidivism.   The   administrative   bottleneck   limiting
      visitation at Pollsmoor Correctional Centre should be addressed  as  a
      matter of urgency.
7.5.3 Offenders should be discouraged from  having  their  bodies  tattooed,
      especially their  faces,  hands  and  arms.  Many  offenders  in  both
      Malmesbury and Pollsmoor correctional centres had elaborate tattoos on
      areas of  their bodies that were visible and it is feared  that  these
      ‘prison tattoos’ will further hamper reintegration.

7.6   Restorative Justice
7.6.1 Despite the  acknowledgement  in  the  White  Paper  that  restorative
      justice was vital to reducing and preventing recidivism, many  inmates
      complained of very  little  being  done  by  parole  boards  and  case
      management committees to assist them to contact the victims  or  their
      families in order to try and restore relationships.  The  White  Paper
      envisages the State as the intermediary in restorative justice efforts
      and victim involvement in the parole process is one possible avenue of
      furthering those ideals.
7.7   Treatment
7.7.1 Internal processes for maintaining  discipline  should  never  violate
      offenders’  human  rights   and   should   be   administered   fairly,
      consistently and within the prescripts of  the  correctional  services
      legislation. It should not be  administered  arbitrarily  and  no  one
      should  receive  preferential  treatment.  Assault  by  officials  was
      unacceptable and such cases should be investigated and where necessary
      the appropriate action should be taken.

7.8   Children and Juvenile offenders
7.8.1 Children should  be  diverted  or  where  there  is  no  other  option
      detained in secure care centres designed especially for them  so  that
      their  specific  needs  can  be  met.  While  the  Committee  welcomes
      interventions put in  place  to  reduce  the  number  of  incarcerated
      children, there remains a need for  greater  cooperation  between  the
      departments  of  Social  Development,   Justice   and   Constitutional
      Development and Correctional Services.

7.9   Integrated and co-ordinated Justice Cluster programmes
7.9.1 Far too many offenders and remand detainees  are  incarcerated  simply
      because they cannot afford  bail  amounts  or  fines  set  by  courts.
      Considering  that  it  costs  approximately  R198  to  accommodate  an
      offender for one day, detaining people with fines or bail  amounts  as
      little as R300 who have committed petty  crimes  and  do  not  pose  a
      threat to society for any period  is  scarcely  justifiable.  The  DCS
      should ensure that heads of prisons make use of  section  63A  of  the
      Criminal Procure Act allowing them to  apply  to  the  court  for  the
      release of suspects on a warning rather than bail, or  to  have  their
      bail conditions changed. The 2008 Cabinet-approved bail  protocol  was
      aimed  at  further  promoting  the  use   of   this   provision,   but
      unfortunately it appears  still  to  be  under-utilised  by  heads  of
      centres.

7.10  Facilities
7.10.1      The Committee acknowledges the  considerable  pressure  outdated
      facilities place on the delivery of services to inmates as well as  on
      security within centres. It welcomes the plans to revamp some parts of
      the Pollsmoor Correctional Centre,  and  especially  the  soon  to  be
      completed new generation centres referred to above. It  is  impossible
      for the DCS to replace all existing prisons with new generation  ones,
      but everything must be done to ensure that maintenance of the existing
      structures  is  not  neglected.  The  Committee  recommends  that  the
      relationship between DCS and  Department  of  Public  Works  (DPW)  be
      strengthened so that maintenance is done speedily and  that  on  their
      part, facilities are preserved.

8.    Conclusion
8.1    If  anything  the  visits  made  clear  that  the  solutions  to  the
      challenges faced by the DCS will depend on the  level  of  cooperation
      between relevant departments,  and  particularly  a  well  functioning
      integrated justice system as well as increased  societal  involvement.
      The White Paper on Corrections emphasises corrections  as  a  societal
      responsibility and therefore the DCS must, through measures  including
      strategic  partnerships  with  the  NGO  sector  and   community-based
      organisations, increase its efforts to create public awareness  around
      parole, social reintegration and the impact of stigmatisation  of  ex-
      offenders. The Committee, recognising its own responsibility  in  this
      regard will do its best to facilitate public participation in  debates
      around correctional services-related issues.

9.    Acknowledgement
      The Committee would like to  express  its  appreciation  for  the  co-
      operation of the management of the Department’s  Western  Cape  region
      and specifically that of the officials at the centres visited.
      Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Trade  and  Industry  on  the
appointment of the Chairperson and Board Members for the National  Lotteries
Board, dated 6 November 2009:

The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having received  the  request
from the Minister of Trade and Industry (the Minister),  dated  9  September
2009, that the relevant Assembly committee recommends a  suitable  person(s)
for appointment as chairperson of the National Lotteries Board in  terms  of
section 3(3) of the Lotteries Act, 1997 (Act No. 57  of  1997)  (hereinafter
referred to as “the Act”), and a further request from  the  Minister,  dated
19  September  2009,   that  the  relevant  Assembly   committee   recommend
candidates who comply with  section  3(1)(c)  and  3  (2)  of  the  Act  for
appointment as members of the National Lotteries Board, reports as follow:

The Minister invited nominations of persons as candidates  to  be  appointed
as members of the National Lotteries Board as contemplated in section  3  of
the Act (see Government Gazette, Notice  756  of  2008  and  Notice  874  of
2009).

During deliberations on the short-listing for the  position  of  chairperson
of the National Lotteries Board by the Committee, it  became  apparent  that
there were several issues arising based on discrepancies  in  the  Act.  The
Committee resolved to establish a sub-committee to address these issues  and
recommend a way forward. The  Committee  nominated  Mr  Sisa  Njikelana,  Ms
Seeng Lebenya and Mr Andricus van  der  Westhuizen  to  serve  on  the  sub-
committee and the Chairperson:

The following terms of reference for the sub-committee  were  agreed  to  by
the Committee. The sub-committee should:
1. Identify possible  conflicts  within  current  legislation  in  terms  of
   appointing Board members and the chairperson of the Board, including  the
   streamlining of the appointment  of  the  members  of  the  Board  before
   appointing a Chairperson.
2. Determine the possibility of amending the legislation  before  appointing
   the Chairperson.
3. Get clarity on the Minister's position with regard to his preference  for
   either a full-time or a part-time chairperson.
4. Determine whether the Committee’s  recommendations  are  binding  on  the
   Minister.
5. Develop the process and criteria for appointing the Chairperson.
6. Facilitate the short-listing process.

The sub-committee met on 16  September  2009  and  submitted  the  following
recommendations for consideration by the Committee on 23 September 2009:

1. Given the request by the Minister that the  relevant  Assembly  committee
   recommend candidates who comply with sections 3(1)(c) and 3  (2)  of  the
   Act for appointment as members  of  the  National  Lotteries  Board,  the
   Committee should proceed to nominate board members as well  as  a  person
   for appointment as Chairperson and make the necessary recommendations  to
   the Minister.


2. The Committee should thoroughly review current legislation as a  separate
   process which should include amendments related to the appointment of the
   members of the Board and  the  Chairperson,  the  recourse  and  possible
   removal of non-performing Board members and a further  extension  of  the
   Board’s term to allow for the change over between Boards.

3. The Committee should consider the proposed process and criteria  for  the
   appointment of the Board, including the Chairperson.
4. The Committee, upon  adoption  of  the  sub-committees’  recommendations,
   should determine whether to establish a sub-committee to finalise a short-
   list and develop an  interview  questionnaire  for  presentation  to  the
   Committee.

On 23 September  2009,  the  Committee  agreed  that  the  multi-party  sub-
committee consisting of Mr Sisa Njikelana, Ms Seeng Lebenya and Mr  Andricus
van der Westhuizen be retained and be requested to:

1. Prepare a shortlist of candidates  using  the  criteria  adopted  by  the
   Committee, including a representivity issues such  as  race,  gender  and
   people with disability as well as individuals with  an  understanding  of
   rural areas;
2. Develop a set of questions; and
3. Submit the shortlist and questions to the Committee for consideration.

The Department of Trade and Industry submitted CVs of 84 candidates for  the
sub-committee to consider. On 14 October 2009, the  sub-committee  submitted
its  shortlist  and  questions  to  the  Committee  for  consideration.  The
Committee agreed  to  the  questions  and  the  following  shortlist  of  23
candidates for the position of  Chairperson  and  members  of  the  National
Lotteries Board.

1. Ms Mangwashi Victoria Phiyega
2. Mr Ratha Krishnan Nayager
3. Mr Johannes Collen Weapond
4. Mr Govindasamy (Govin) Reddy
5. Mr Petrus Jacobus (Pieter) Badenhorst
6. Mr Kgabo Gabriel Mapotse
7. Mr Mandla Ambrose Letlape
8. Ms Gaylene Anne Deiner
9. Mr Lionel Brenner
10. Prof Ntshengedzeni Alfred Nevhutanda
11. Mr Muzi Nkosi
12. Mr Marshall Mthetho Mncedisi Swana
13. Mr George Maanda Negota
14. Ms Ndileka Eumera Portia Loyilane
15. Mr Jerry Dimotana Thibedi
16. Mr Maropeng Stephens Bahula
17. Mr Thembela Andrew Simelane
18. Mr Sonwabile Mancotywa
19. Ms Kealeboga Elizabeth Moloto-Stofile
20. Mr Vusumuzi Reuben Sinky Ngobe Nkosi
21. Mr Alan David Beesley
22. Mr Obed Muzikayifani Shabangu
23. Ms Mathukana Mokoka

Prior to the commencement of the interviews, Mr Alan  Beesley  declined  his
nomination due to the fact that he is  currently  employed  by  a  NGO  that
would be submitting funding requests in future  to  the  National  Lotteries
Board.

After  having  considered  and  adopted   the   shortlist,   the   Committee
interviewed the candidates on 27, 28, 30 October 2009 and 2 November 2009.

On 3 November 2009, the Committee began its  deliberations  on  the  matter.
The Committee continued its deliberations on 4 November  2009  during  which
four nominees, Prof N Nevhutanda for position of Chairperson,  Mr  G  Negota
to fulfill the requirements  for  a  legal  practitioner,  Ms  M  Mokoka  to
fulfill the requirements for a chartered accountant,  and  Mr  G  Reddy  was
agreed to. Two further candidates had yet to be decided upon.

On 6 November 2009, after  vigorous  deliberations  by  the  Committee,  the
Democratic Alliance indicated that they could not continue with the  process
and withdrew. The  nominations  were  duly  moved  and  seconded  for  Mr  O
Shabangu and Ms N Loyilane. In the absence of  any  other  nominations,  the
motion was adopted. The IFP noted its objections.

The  Committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  following   candidate   be
appointed as Chairperson of the National Lotteries Board:

Prof Ntshengedzeni Alfred Nevhutanda

The Committee further recommends that the following candidates be  appointed
as members of the National Lotteries Board:

Mr George Maanda Negota
Ms Mathukana Mokoka
Mr Govindasamy Reddy
Mr Obed Muzikayifani Shabangu
Ms Ndileka Eumera Portia Loyilane

                          FRIDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Amendment Bill [B 12 –
         2009] – Act No 19 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on
         24 November 2009).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a  performance  audit  of  the
        rehabilitation of abandoned mines at the Department of Minerals and
        Energy [RP 257-2009].


    (b)     Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  a  performance  audit  of
        projects that are funded by the  National  Development  Agency  [RP
        258/2009].


     c) Report of the Public Protector  on  Systematic  Investigation  into
        allegations of poor  service  delivery  by  the  Compensation  Fund
        [Report No 28 of 2009-2010].


   2. The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


    (a)     Government Notice No R. 466 published in Government Gazette  No
        32185 dated 29 April 2009: Draft Regulations on the National Forest
        Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998)


   3. The Minister of Energy


    (a)     Membership of  South  Africa  to  the  International  Renewable
        Energy Agency (IRENA), tabled in terms of  section  231(2)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Membership of South Africa to the
        International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

   (a)      Reply from the Minister of Finance to recommendations in the
       Joint Report of the Standing Committee on Finance and the Portfolio
       Committee on Economic Development on Budget Vote No 7: National
       Treasury, and the 2009-12 Strategic Plan (Update) of National
       Treasury and the 2009-12 Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue
       Services (Sars), as adopted by the House on 25 August 2009.


       Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance and the Portfolio
       Committee on Economic Development.


    b) Letter from the Minister of Higher Education and Training dated 26
       November 2009, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining
       the delay in the submission of the Annual Report of the National
       Student Financial Aid Scheme for 2008-2009.

       Late Tabling of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme Annual
       Report for 2008/09


       The Annual Report of the NSFAS for the 2008/09 financial year has
       not been tabled in Parliament by 30 September 2009, as required in
       terms of section 65 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
       (PFMA). The reason for the delay in submitting the Annual Report was
       due to the late finalisation of the Audit Report by the Auditor-
       General in the interest of improving accountability and finalising
       internal processes to ensure high quality standards of reporting are
       maintained. The delay was acknowledged by the Auditor-General on
       page 51 of the annual report.


       However, the annual report which included the financial statements
       and audit report was submitted to Parliament on 30 September 2009.
       Due to the Parliamentary recess from 28 September 2009 to 2 October
       2009, the annual report could only be tabled on 16 October 2009.




       Yours sincerely

       signed
       Dr B E Nzimande, MP
       Minister of Higher Education and Training

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Mineral  Resources  on  the
oversight  visits  in  four  Provinces   to   investigate   illegal   mining
activities, dated 18 November 2009:

The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources,  having  undertaken  oversight
visits on 11 – 14 August 2009  in  four  Provinces  to  investigate  illegal
mining activities, reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources, on 7 and  8  July  2009,  held
public hearings in Parliament to investigate the death in  early  June  2009
of over 86 suspected illegal miners at Harmony Gold  Mine  in  Welkom,  Free
State. Major stakeholders, including the Department  of  Mineral  Resources,
the Chamber of Mines, mine houses, trade  unions  and  civic  organisations,
participated in the  hearings.  Arising  from  the  hearings  the  Committee
agreed to undertake oversight visits on 11- 14 August, 2009, to some of  the
affected mines.

     2. Composition of Delegation:


    • Mr F Gona (Chairperson and Leader of Delegation) (ANC)
    • Ms F Mathibela (ANC)
    • Prof  L B G Ndabandaba  (ANC)
    • Ms L Moss (ANC)
    • Mr L C Gololo (ANC)
    • Mr E J Marais (DA)
    • Mr E J Lucas (IFP)
    • Mr J Ramrock ( Committee Secretary)
    • Mr K Lobi (Committee Assistant)
    • Ms L Molefe ( Parliament Media Officer)

3.          Harmony Gold Mine, Welkom, Free State Province


   3.1            Officials present


   The Department of Mineral Resources (DMR) was represented by:


      • Mr Thabo Gazi: Chief Inspector of Mines,
      • Mr David Msiza: Deputy Inspector of Mines,
      • Mr J Bezuidenhout: Principal Inspector of Mines,
      • Mr Aubrey Tshivhandekano
      • Mr Deon Mathee, and
      • Mr Zakhele Hlongwane: Parliamentary Officer.

The South African Police Services (SAPS) was represented by:
    • Provincial Commissioner A Mashego,
    • Commissioner N Mojafe
    • Director S Tshimane
    • Senior Superintendent A Foley, and
    • Captain K Hibert.

Harmony Gold Mine was represented by:

    • Mr Johan Hennop,
    • Mr Wessel Cronje,
    • Mr Ambrose Khuzwayo,
    • Mr Enock Moalosi,
    • Mr Anton Buthelezi,
    • Ms Estelle Cilliers,
    • Mr Lebohang Shabe and
    • Mr Melville Crafford.


   The National Union of Mineworkers was represented by:


      • Mr Lucky Mazibuko,
      • Mr E M Olehile,
      • Mr M Mataboye.
      • Mr Eric Gcilitshane
      • Mr James Mbantwa
      • Mr Patrick Hlabizulu
   Solidarity Union was represented by:


      • Mr Paul Mardon: Head: Occupational Health and Safety

3.2   Overview and Proceedings

Harmony Mines presentation

Harmony representatives made a presentation to the delegation on the  extent
of  illegal  mining  activities  at  the  mine.  Frequent   joint   security
operations involving SAPS and mine security have been conducted to  try  and
‘flush-out’ illegal  miners  from  their  underground  hide-outs.  This  has
unfortunately produced minimum results. The  inter-linking  of  shafts  from
one mine to another makes it very  difficult  to  control  and  contain  the
problem. An additional concern, to the company,  is  the  increasingly  high
number of Harmony employees participating in these illegal activities.  More
than 29 employees, including management, were  charged  and  disciplined  in
July 2009 bringing the total figure to 150. This is in comparison to  64  in
2007 and 80 in 2008. Overall figures also show  a  tremendous  rise  in  the
number of arrests of illegal miners. In 2007, 473  were  arrested;  in  2008
the number almost doubled to 757 and the current figure  in  July  2009  was
894. A similar trend is evidenced in the number of illegal miners killed  in
underground activities: 36 in 2007  and  105  in  July  2009.  Most  of  the
illegal miners are foreigners from  neighboring  countries  recruited  under
false promises who end up being trained at hostels like  G-hostel.  G-hostel
has been raided by special units of  SAPS  a  number  of  times,  but  still
remains the main hub for these illegal mining activities.

The participation of members of SAPS and their crime  intelligence  unit  in
these criminal activities was also highlighted by Harmony and  confirmed  by
officials of SAPS at the presentation. Future security  operations  will  be
conducted by SAPS units from outside the Free State because of suspicion  of
the involvement of  the  local  SAPS  in  criminal  mining  activities.  The
involvement of mine security personnel and supervisors in these crimes  have
led to a  number  of  them  being  arrested  and  others  face  disciplinary
actions.

The company also screened a video tape to the  Delegation  that  showed  how
mine employees were intimidated and viciously beaten by illegal miners.  The
tape also showed how corrupt employees  were  caught  with  food  and  other
items strapped to their waist, to be  sold  underground  to  the  criminals.
Some illegal miners remain underground for up to six months before  emerging
to the surface.  Young  boys  and  women  are  also  taken  underground  for
prostitution by these criminals.

SAPS, in their briefing, mentioned that the real targets behind the  funding
of these criminals are based in Johannesburg and are  not  affected  by  the
arrest of individual criminals. The kingpins, who represent  the  top  level
of the criminal hierarchy, remain untouched, whereas  the  lower  levels  of
these syndicates bear the brunt of the  law.  These  syndicates  are  highly
organised and dangerous.  The  SAPS  stated  that  the  illicit  product  is
purchased by legal gold selling houses and sold on the international  market
unhindered.

The Delegation was prevented by Harmony Mine officials from going  down  any
of the shafts. The company claimed that they were  not  made  aware  of  the
request and  therefore  prior  security  arrangements  were  not  made.  The
Delegation  was  not  satisfied  with  this  response.  The  Delegation  was
provided with inadequate protection and advised, therefore, by the  DMR  not
to proceed to the shafts because of potential  health  and  safety  hazards.
The Department received an intelligent  alert  that  Members  will  be  held
hostage by the criminals if they go underground.

3.3   Visit to Masimong shaft
The Delegation was also taken to one of the main entrance shafts  (Masimong)
at Harmony and shown how the security system has been upgraded  to  try  and
control access to the mine. Biometrics hand scanners  have  been  introduced
and the clocking system was upgraded. CCTV is operational at  all  turnstile
gates and a scanner will be installed at the main intake  center  to  screen
all new recruits and prevent convicted  persons  from  being  employed.  The
illegal miners used closed small  goods  locomotives  to  exit  shafts  with
stolen goods.

3.4   Visit to G-hostel

Members of the Provincial Portfolio Committee on  Public  Works  joined  the
Delegation on their visit to G-hostel and undertook to do further  oversight
work in the area and share the outcome with the Delegation. The  Delegation,
escorted by the SAPS, made a short visit  to  G-hostel  to  try  and  get  a
better  perspective  on  the  activities  related  to  illegal  mining.  The
criminals were able to scatter a few seconds before the police could  pounce
on them. In their haste to escape  they  abandoned  their  equipment,  which
included trays  filled  with  stolen  gold  bearing  material  ready  to  be
processed.
The Delegation saw the problem first hand when one person was  arrested  for
being in possession of narcotics. G-hostel  is  owned  and  managed  by  the
municipality and is supposed to accommodate municipal  employees  and  their
families. The hostel residents complained to the Delegation that  the  local
authorities were not concerned with  their  problems.  The  retrenchment  of
mine workers and  others  in  the  area  resulted  in  a  huge  increase  of
residents. Foreigners practicing criminal  activities  also  contributed  to
the increase in numbers. According to the SAPS many  of  the  residents  are
involved in illegal activities, including  the  illegal  selling  of  drugs,
liquor and firearms. The living conditions of residents are  very  poor  and
most of the roads are strewn with sewerage  and  potholes  are  evident.  G-
hostel also poses serious health hazards to the inhabitants and  contributes
to low levels of learning in schools in the area and those schools  situated
nearby.
   4. Impala Platinum Mine, Rustenburg, North West Province


   The visit to Impala Platinum Mine in Rustenburg was informed by the death
   of nine mine workers in an incident in late July 2009. The  incident  was
   still under investigation during the visit.


   4.1            Officials present


   Impala Platinum Mine was represented by:


      • Mr. Paul Dunne: Operations Executive
      • Mr. Frikkie Holl: General Manager
      • Mr. John Siemens: Mine Manager


      Health and Safety Representatives

   The Department of Mineral Resources was represented by:


    • Mr. Thabo Gazi: Chief Inspector of Mines
    • Mr. David Msiza: Deputy Chief Inspector of Mines
    • Mr. Thabo Ngwenya: Principal Inspector of Mines
    • Mr Zakhele Hlongwane: Parliamentary Officer

The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) was represented by:

    • Mr. Lucky Mazibuko,
    • Mr. Edwin M Olehle,
    • Mr. M Mataboye,
    • Mr. D M Mokgetsi,
    • Mr. M D Madiketsi,
    • Mr. G N Melakotso,
    • Mr. T L Setlhabi,
    • Mr. D L Rampou,
    • Mr. T M Masilo,
    • Mr. P Moilwa,
    • Mr. S Dokolwana,
    • Mr. S Rasolo, and
    • Mr. I C Lesunye.

Solidarity Union was represented by:

    • Mr. Paul Mardon: Head: Occupational Health and Safety

4.2   Overview and Proceedings

Department of Mineral Resources

Mr. T Ngwenya from the Department of Mineral Resources made  a  presentation
on the Department’s perspective on the possible causes of the  incident.  He
mentioned that there was a reduction in mine fatalities, from 66 in 2007  to
48 in 2008. The Department suspects, though, that some  of  the  big  mining
companies are resorting to cost-cutting measures on mine health  and  safety
standards to try and contain the current economic situation.  Meetings  were
held with mining houses on this. Seismicity used to be  a  problem  confined
mostly to the gold producing industry, but it now includes  platinum  mining
as well. Silicosis and noise induced hearing loss  are  some  of  the  major
illnesses experienced by mineworkers. Most of the fatalities, in the  mines,
are  caused  by  Fall  Of  Ground  (FOG),  transportation  and  mining   and
machinery. It is  believed  that  up  to  95%  of  all  mine  incidents  are
preventable, including the recent one at Impala  where  9  mineworkers  lost
their lives.

Investigations conducted on the incident by DMR pointed to  gravity  induced
Fall Of  Ground  (FOG)  accident  and  seismicity  was  not  suspected.  The
incident originated from a weak side of a  joint,  where  some  hydra  bolts
apparently snapped. The FOG was thicker than the length of the hydra bolts.

The Department immediately conducted an in  loco  inspection  and  issued  a
notification in terms of section 54 of the Mine Health Safety Act (MHSA)  on
the same day. The section empowers an inspector  to  halt  or  suspend  mine
operations.
Impala was further instructed to:

   a) engage an external independent rock engineering expert;
   b) audit rock-related hazards in all working places; and
   c) review the Prevention Code of Practice and Procedure on FOG before any
      production work.

The  Department,  together  with  organised  labour,  mine  management   and
experts, met almost daily  before  a  withdrawal  of  the  instruction,  was
issued. Some of the challenges that the Department  still  experiences  with
the mining sector, include:

    • minimal prosecutions in mine accidents,
    • non-adherence to mine standards and procedures,
    • repeat accidents,
    • drilling (by mine companies) into highly pressurized gas pockets,
    • reluctance to investigate occupational diseases,
    • exposure to blasting fumes, and
    • unsafe working places declared safe.

The Department has instituted an investigation and the  report  is  expected
in two months time followed by a full enquiry on the incident.

4.3   Impala Platinum Mine

Mr. Frikkie Holl from Impala Platinum Mine shared the views of  the  company
on the accident with the Delegation. Impala immediately  dispatched  a  high
powered team, which included senior management to the site of the  accident.
This was the worst accident experienced at Impala. The deceased miners  were
all rock drill operators. It was reported  to  Impala  Management  that  the
nine workers started their shift, after being given the  go-ahead  by  their
supervisor. The supervisor, when noticing the possible hazard  at  the  work
area, felt that re-enforcing the pillages of the mine shaft ceiling  (mining
roof bolt) would help. The assessment of the shift-boss (senior  supervisor)
3 hours later, after inspecting  the  work  area,  was  that  the  area  was
dangerous and instructed evacuation to another more secure  work  area.  The
FOG accident happened during  the  evacuation  period.  Impala  Mine,  as  a
result of the accident, has introduced new preventative measures,  including
changing production methods and strengthening routine inspection to  prevent
a future re-occurrence of the  accident.  The  Delegation  interrogated  the
presentation extensively and assured the company  that  the  Committee  will
follow the investigation and enquiry closely. South Africa  fared  badly  in
comparative studies (Canada, England and Australia)  on  health  and  safety
standards in mines. The  Committee  will  make  sure  that  the  legislative
measures that the Mine Health and Safety Act, as amended, allow  be  applied
strictly in cases  where  violations  occurred.  The  Chairperson  commended
Impala for the forward-looking steps they took since the accident. A  moment
of silence was observed by the meeting for the miners that died.

   5. Barberton Gold Mine, Barberton, Mpumalanga


   5.1            Officials present


   Department of Mineral Resources was represented by:


      • Mr. Louis Bezuidenhout: Principal Inspector, and
      • Mr. Mthokozisi Zondi: Regional Operations Manager
      • Mr. Zakhele Hlongwane: Parliamentary Officer


   Solidarity represented by:


      • Mr. Paul Mardon: Head: Occupational Health and Safety

SAPS represented by:

      • Mr. Rudi Neethling: Head: Detectives,
      • CJ Ndubane: Communications Officer

NUM represented by:

    • Mr. Derrick Magagula: Chairperson, Barberton branch

Community represented by:

    • Pastor Humphrey Gininda: Community Police Forum

Barberton Mine represented by:

    • Mr. Martine Jooste: Chief Security Officer,
    • Mr. Roy Deysel: Security Manager,
    • Mr. Mario Gericke: Technical Director,
    • Mr. Jan Nelson: Director,
    • Ms Thandeka Ncube: Director: Group Transformation,
    • Mr. Musa Nkambule: Community Liaison Officer,
    • Mr. G van Aswegen: Shaduka shaft representative and
      Health and Safety representatives

5.2   Barberton Gold Mine

The Delegation traveled to Barberton Gold Mine in Mpumalanga where  Mr.  Roy
Deysel, Barberton  Mines  Security  manager,  made  a  presentation  on  the
experiences of the company with illegal miners. Criminal  miners  have  been
operating at Barberton mine since 2000/2001. The mine has observed  a  large
increase in the number  of  these  criminals  and  their  activities.  These
activities have not only become more brazen, organised and  aggressive,  but
also more violent. The criminals are well armed with AK-47s,  shotguns,  9mm
pistols, R1 and R5 assault rifles. Employees, security guards and  SAPS  are
now regularly threatened  and  assaulted.  The  activities  of  the  illegal
miners threaten the safety of employees underground.  These  criminals  have
been linked with illicit trafficking in firearms and proceeds  derived  from
activities identified as sources of financing for terrorist activities.  The
United Nations Office on Drugs and  Crime  increasingly  recognizes  illicit
trafficking in precious metals as one of  the  profit-generating  activities
of organised criminal groups. Gold  and  gold-bearing  ore  are  now  stolen
everyday. Syndicates are equipping,  arming  and  financing  these  criminal
miners. Legitimate gold merchants in Johannesburg  are  ultimately  involved
by assisting with “gold laundering”. Barberton Mine loses in  excess  of  R3
million worth of gold per month, while increased security cost  the  company
R1 million per month. The loss of tax revenue for  government  exceeds  R1.1
million per month. The influx of illegal immigrants  and  criminals  to  the
area led to an increase in violent activities - seven  illegal  miners  were
shot and killed recently by other gangs for  their  gold.  The  police  were
shot at and some injured during an underground raid and as a result  are  no
longer  providing  assistance  with  underground  operations.   Nearly   700
criminal miners were  arrested  in  the  past  12  months,  with  340  being
successfully prosecuted while 355 cases are still pending.

The criminals also make use of company locomotives to force  their  way  out
of the shafts.

In one particular case, during a security raid where a number of illegal
miners were arrested, it was discovered that among those arrested were
Harmony mine employees that were on leave. The company has increased its
number of security guards and has 115 CCTV cameras at working areas.
Disused entrances have also been sealed. It has instituted
biometric/fingerprint access control and embarked on other security
measures to try and prevent the criminals from gaining entrance to the
mine. In one other case reported recently a criminal miner was killed and
two injured underground when they fell down a steep ore pass when the
ladders broke. According to the injured they were a group of nine but the
front six managed to get out safely. They were from Matsulu town which is
about 70km from the mine. This shows the extent of the influx from outside
communities. The injured criminals also reported that there was another
group still underground in that same area.

Further escalation of the  illegal  mining  activities  may  result  in  the
possible closure of mining activities. The impact of such steps  could  have
a crippling affect on the community in  general.  Barberton  Mine  estimates
that the number of criminal  miners  underground  at  certain  times  is  in
excess of 500, and they remain underground for five days and longer.

Reports from the police are that some of the most influential “bosses”  earn
in excess of one million rand per year. The organised groups  consist  of  4
to 30 members. Illegal gold  buyers/illegal  miners  established  their  own
protection groups which resulted in a number of deaths underground.

The SAPS representative also spoke of the small number of members  operating
in the province. The Delegation noted that this was  a  possible  factor  in
the difficulty of arresting the situation.

The current legislation is not sufficient to curb the illegal activities  of
these criminals and should be reviewed. Most are charged under the  Trespass
Act which carries a fine not exceeding R2000. What are required are  a  more
coordinated approach and the involvement of the National  Intervention  Unit
and Task Force as well as the  newly  established  Directorate  of  Priority
Crime Investigations (The Hawks). The mine  also  showed  the  Delegation  a
video cassette in which mine security and a large number of  illegal  miners
armed with AK 47s were involved in an underground shoot-out.
Shoot – outs between  different  gangs  causing  number  of  casualties  has
become daily occurrence. It was reported by a member  of  the  police  forum
that the illegal miners do their gold processing from  underneath  a  bridge
in the area.
The  Delegation,  including  organised  labour  and  civil   representatives
questioned extensively on the presentation. The  company  agreed  that  more
should be done to motivate the community to provide information on  criminal
activities in the area.

The Delegation observed that the situation in Barberton was not only  unique
but also very dangerous. In Barberton the criminals steal  mining  equipment
openly. They also compete directly in the same shaft with  the  company  for
the gold. According to the  Chief  Inspector  Directorate  of  1999,  mining
companies must withdraw and wait for between 3-4 hours  after  blasting  for
re-entry and to resume operations. This is mostly to prevent  possible  rock
fall accidents and the inhaling of toxic fumes. It  is  during  this  period
that the criminals start their  illegal  activities  with  the  stealing  of
mining produce and equipment. The Chairperson assured  Barberton  mine  that
the Committee will review the current legislation including the MHS Act  and
will make amendments to  the  Act  if  necessary.  The  Committee  expressed
concern regarding the  directive  from  police  management  disallowing  the
police from engaging the criminals in underground operations.


   6. Coronation Coal Mine, Vryheid, KwaZulu-Natal


   The Delegation was taken to Coronation Community Center, where members of
   the community raised their concerns on mostly social issues. The  closure
   of the mine a few years ago contributed towards an increase in the number
   of criminal activities in the area, including illegal mining. Former mine
   workers were also not paid for work done during the time  that  the  mine
   was operating. The village was supposed  to  be  serviced  by  the  local
   municipality but this was not happening.  The  desperate  situation  that
   members of the community  find  themselves  in  was  being  exploited  by
   certain individuals from outside who encourage and fund illegal mining.


   6.1            Officials present


   Department of Mineral Resources was represented by:


    • Mr. Mthokozisi Zondi
    • Mr. Jolly Mbatha


   NUM was represented by:


      • Mr. Sifiso Nkosi


   Solidarity was represented by:


       • Mr. Paul Mardon: Head: Occupational Health and Safety


   The Vryheid Community was represented by:


       • Mr. A M Masondo: Councillor: Abaqulusi Municipality
       • Mr D Thabethe, community member




   6.2            Kwanotshelwa village


   The Delegation was taken to Kwanotshelwa village, a few  kilometers  from
   Coronation mine, and shown where the illegal miners were operating in the
   processing of high grade coal. The site is  a  stone’s  throw  away  from
   nearby houses. The fumes, released with the  burning  of  the  anthracite
   coal, have health consequences for  the  nearby  community.  People  have
   complained of suffering from respiratory and other related illnesses. The
   Delegation observed that most of the produce derived from illegal  mining
   is utilized for domestic use and the rest are sold to the  community  for
   domestic use. The DMR will be  encouraged  to  investigate  whether  this
   subsistence mining should be nurtured.


   7. Conclusion


   The country has lost so far more than 200 lives as a  result  of  illegal
   mining. More than R5.6  billion  in  revenue  is  lost  every  year.  The
   prevalence of markets, both local and international, for illicit gold, is
   a determining factor in the fight against these criminal activities.


   The Portfolio Committee  on  Mineral  Resources,  having  considered  the
   written and oral submissions made by  individuals  and  organisations  at
   both the public hearings and the oversight visits, notes the following:


   The presentations centered on a number of key concerns:


       - illegal miners included foreigners;
       - growing use of violence and firearms by illegal miners;
       - involvement of mine employees, management and mine security;
       - involvement of corrupt SAPS members;
       - the frequent arrest of lower rank criminals;
       - the need to pursue syndicate heads;
       - the need to tighten current legislation; and
       - the need to investigate markets for illicit minerals.

   While there is  consensus  regarding  the  challenges  and  some  of  the
   solutions amongst the organisations, there are also  differences  in  the
   approaches to address the respective situations.


      8.    Recommendations


      The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Mineral  Resources  hereby  makes  the
      following recommendations:


      8.1   Legislation


      The Committee, concerned with possible gaps  in  current  mining  and
      related  legislation,  recommends  that  the  Department  of  Mineral
      Resources consider amending:

       • Regulation 3.1.1 of  the  Minerals  Act,  1991,  which  deals  with
         unauthorized entry at a mine, in order to increase  the  punishment
         to 12-30 months imprisonment;


       • Section 143 of the Precious Metals Act, which prohibits the buying,
         selling, deal in, receiving or disposing of any unwrought  precious
         metals in order to increase the sentence from a fine  of  R2000  or
         six months imprisonment, to a minimum fine  of  R50,  000   with  a
         maximum fine of R500,000 or 10 years imprisonment.


       • The Mine Health and Safety Amendment Act to increase the  fine  for
         non-compliance by mine houses in respect  of  the  safe-keeping  of
         explosives from the current R200  000  to  a  maximum  fine  of  R1
         million.

DMR should engage the Department of Justice and  Constitutional  Development
to consider amending the Trespass Act in order to increase the sentence  for
violation to R10, 000 fine or 10 years imprisonment.

     8.2    Foreign illegal miners


     The Committee, concerned with the large number  of  illegal  foreigners
     participating in illegal mining and other related criminal  activities,
     recommends that DMR engage the Department of Home  Affairs  to  tighten
     border controls and halt illegal immigration.


     8.3    SAPS


     Regarding the alleged corrupt  members  of  SAPS  involved  in  illegal
     mining activities, the Committee  recommends  that  the  Department  of
     Mineral Resources engage the Department of Justice  and  Constitutional
     Development and the Department of Police for  advice  on  the  possible
     prosecution and sentencing of the corrupt officials. The Committee also
     recommends improving  the  co-operation  and  exchange  of  information
     between securities at mining houses, SAPS,  SANDF,  NIA.  NPA  and  the
     Justice Department towards the  arrest  and  prosecution  of  syndicate
     kingpins hiding in areas like Northcliff in Johannesburg.
     The Committee recommends that DMR engage the Department  of  Trade  and
     Industry (DTI) to assist  in  investigating  who  are  the  traders  of
     illicit gold in Johannesburg and that their licenses are revoked.


     8.4    Mine employees


     The Committee, concerned with the participation of  mine  employees  in
     illegal  mining  activities,  recommends  improving  the   co-operation
     between mine houses and organised labour on the dangers associated with
     this criminal activity. Trade Unions should  discourage  their  members
     from participating or supporting illegal mining.


        5. Mine Companies


     The Committee believed that the responsibility of access to mines  rest
     with mine owners. Mothballed shafts at mines  in  the  Free  State  and
     elsewhere are sealed off, thereby  making  it  difficult  for  criminal
     mining. The Committee recommends that DMR hold mine owners  accountable
     for the maintenance of security at all access points to the mines.  The
     Committee further recommends to DMR and mine companies that small scale
     mining be encouraged before a mine  is  abandoned  to  prevent  illegal
     mining activities.


        6. G- hostel


    The Committee, concerned with the appalling  living  conditions  in  G-
    hostel, the huge backlog in the provision of housing and mindful of the
    separations  of  power,  recommends  that   DMR   engage   the   Welkom
    Municipality to consider converting the hostel into single family units
    and that the conversion be completed by the end of 2011.
        7. Coronation Mine


    The Committee further recommends that the DMR advocate the fencing  off
    of the open cast coal shafts.


     9.     Acknowledgement


     The Committee wishes to thank all the stakeholders who participated  in
     both the public hearings and the oversight visits. Their  insights  and
     contributions assisted the Committee in  grasping  the  extent  of  the
     illegal mining activities carried out by criminals. The  Committee,  in
     particular, wishes to commend the Department of Mineral Resources (DMR)
     and Organised Labour  (NUM  and  Solidarity)  for  the  commitment  and
     support provided during  the  public  hearings  and  oversight  visits.
     Special thanks also to Sister Linda and staff of  the  Catholic  Church
     School in Vryheid, KwaZulu-Natal  for  the  hospitality  they  extended
     towards the Committee.


     Report to be considered.

2.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING  ON
ITS OVERSIGHT VISIT TO GIYANI, LIMPOPO PROVINCE, DATED 18 NOVEMBER 2009

The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training, having  undertaken
an oversight visit to Giyani from 06 - 09 October 2009, reports as follows:

1. Introduction
The Portfolio Committee  on  Higher  Education  and  Training  undertook  an
oversight visit to Giyani on 06 – 09 October 2009.  The  committee  in  line
with the statement made by the President during  the  State  of  the  Nation
Address (SONA) that identified the Greater Giyani Municipality  as  a  focus
area for rural development, agreed to conduct an oversight visit  to  Giyani
to contribute to  the  Further  Education  and  Training  (FET)   and  adult
education sectors of the area.  The main objectives of the  visit  were  two
fold: firstly, to assess the status of Further Education  and  Training,  to
identify gaps and areas  of  improvement  in  order  to  contribute  to  the
development of intervention strategies, and  secondly,  to  assess  progress
made in the implementation of the Kha Ri Gude Mass  Literacy  Campaign  that
was launched nationally in 2008 with the  intention  of  improving  literacy
and numeracy.

The Committee met with the Provincial Department of  Education,  Letaba  FET
College, Mopani District and Greater  Giyani  Municipalities  where  it  was
briefed on various aspects pertaining to  Further  Education  and  Training,
Skills Development, Adult Basic Education  and  Training  (ABET)  and  Khari
Gude in the Giyani area. This was followed  by  site  visits  to  identified
ABET and Kha Ri Gude centres and the former Giyani College of Education.

This report provides a summary of the presentations made to  the  Committee,
the responses of the delegation, its key findings and  recommendations  with
respect to the objectives of the visit.

2. Delegation
2.1 Parliament
   The  multi-party  delegation  from  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Higher
   Education and Training comprised of Mr M Fransman MP  (ANC)  Chairperson,
   Ms N Gina MP (ANC), Mr G Lekgetho MP (ANC), Mr S Makhubele MP (ANC), Ms F
   Mushwana MP (ANC), Ms W Nelson MP (ANC), Mr  S  Radebe  MP  (ANC),  Mr  G
   Boinamo MP (DA), Dr W James MP (DA) and Ms N Vukuza MP (COPE).
   Support Staff: Mr D Bandi, Content Advisor;  Mr  A  Kabingesi,  Committee
   Secretary and Ms Z Ngoma, Committee Assistant.
2.2 Limpopo Provincial Department of Education

The Limpopo Provincial Department of  Education  was  represented  by  Mr  D
Masemola, MEC for Education; Rev Z Nevhutalu, Head of Department  (HOD);  Dr
L Mafenya, Senior District Manager; Mr M Maphwanya,  General  Manager  (GM),
Governance; Ms P Msimeki, Manager, Corporate Services;  Mr  S  Sono,  Deputy
Manager, Planning; Dr M Matlou, Director, ABET;  Mr  E  Sekgobela,  National
Coordinator, Kha Ri Gude; Mr S  Lephale,  Liaison  Officer;  Mr  R  Moshope,
Manager, Operational Support and Ms S Malima, Senior Manager,  Training  and
Development.

2.3 Letaba Further Education and Training College

Ms M Botha, Chief Executive Officer (CEO); Mrs M Rasekgala,  Chairperson  of
College Council; Mr J Rikhotso, Campus Manager; Mr  J  Venter,  Coordinator;
Ms A Van Der Walt, Acting Chief Financial Officer; Mr  M  Matome,  Marketing
Official and Mr R Fritz, Student Liaison Officer.

2.4 Provincial Legislature
Mr G Mashamba MPL (ANC) Chairperson, Provincial PC on Education; Ms P  Mahlo
MPL (ANC); Mr A Mangena MPL (ANC); Mr L Masoga MPL (ANC); Mr  M  Lehlogonolo
MPL (ANC) and Ms L Luvhengo MPL (ANC).

2.5 District Municipality
Mr R Mabunda, Speaker, Greater Giyani Local Municipality;  Ms  M  Mathebula,
Mayor, Greater Giyani Local  Municipality;  Mr  P  Mangena,  Member  of  the
Committee, Mopani District Municipality; Mr  M  Matlou,  Councillor,  Mopani
District Municipality; Mr  M  Chaamano,  Acting  Director,  Mopani  District
Municipality  and  Mr   L   Matlou,   Executive   Mayor,   Mopani   District
Municipality.
   1. Opening Remarks
The MEC for Education, Mr D Masemola, officially welcomed the delegation  of
the Committee and other guests to the meeting. He  expressed  his  gratitude
for the visit of the Committee to the province. He informed  the  delegation
that the province had major challenges in the Higher Education and  Training
sector and hoped that the visit  would  contribute  positively  towards  the
improvement of the Further Education and Training sector in the province.

The Chairperson of the Committee remarked that education was  identified  as
one of the high priorities of the new  government.  He  explained  that  the
quality of education in general was a major concern and that  skills  demand
surpassed skills supply. He noted that the  committee  aimed  to  leave  the
area with specific recommendations to be tabled  in  the  National  Assembly
for consideration by the Department of  Higher  Education  and  Training  in
particular and other relevant departments.

4. Summary of Presentations
4.1 Overview of Further Education and Training (FET) Colleges
The FET college sector was transformed in 2001 with an objective to  develop
vibrant and responsive multi site colleges that address the skills  shortage
in the country and broaden access  to  post-school  education  and  training
opportunities. At national level, 152  technical  colleges  were  merged  to
form 50 multi-campus FET colleges. Limpopo had 17  Technical  and  Community
Colleges which  were  merged  into  seven  FET  Colleges  and  17  Satellite
Campuses. In 2006, government launched a R1.9 billion 3  year  programme  to
recapitalise the FET colleges, tackle vital curriculum reform and invest  in
staff training, development, infrastructure and equipment. Limpopo  Province
was  allocated  R221  million  (11,  8%)  from  the  R1.9  billion  national
recapitalisation allocation and spent 100% of  the  allocated  funding.  The
major challenges of the FET  college  sector  in  the  province  are  a  low
throughput rate,  unqualified  lecturers,  and  a  poor  perception  of  the
college sector.
4.2 Skills Development Strategy for Higher Education and FET
The National Skills Development Programme targets  the  development  of  all
employees and future employees. In analysing the higher  education  and  FET
landscape it is clear that the demand does not meet the intended  output  as
the quality of skills offered fall short of the demands of the economy.  The
department plays an important role in the programme  by  assisting  learners
to choose the most suitable programmes for their needs.  The  current  major
challenges of the skills development programme are the  lack  of  employment
opportunities  and  lack  of  information  available  to  the  public.   The
department concluded that there is a need for  a  coordinated  and  coherent
approach to improve skills development.

4.3 Presentation on Letaba FET College
The Letaba FET College comprises of four satellite campuses  namely  Giyani,
Modjadji,  Maake  and  Tzaneen.  The  College  offers  quality  training  in
Engineering, Management, Administration, and Construction studies  to  young
people from the local and nearby areas.

Challenges
    ▪  Poor infrastructure for student support services;
    ▪ A high vacancy rate and unqualified lecturers;
    ▪  Lack of proper water and sanitation services;
    ▪ Sector Education and Training Authorities (SETAs) involvement  in  the
      college is very limited;
    ▪ Demand for the NSFAS bursary exceeds the supply;
    ▪ 24%  throughput rate in 2008 and 0% pass rate in Graphic Design; and
    ▪ No database for drop-outs and graduates of the college.

4.4 Presentation of the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign
The Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign was launched in  February  2008  with
the intention of enabling  4,  7  million  adults  to  become  literate  and
numerate in one of the eleven official languages including Braille and  Sign
language, by 2012. In Giyani there  are  3600  learners  currently  learning
from 200 sites. All Wards in Giyani have learning sites that are located  in
schools, churches, crèches and tribal offices. Women comprise  the  majority
of learners in  all  the  sites.  The  minimum  qualification  required  for
volunteer educators is Matric and they are paid a stipend income of R1200  a
month, thus contributing to  poverty  alleviation.  Kha  Ri  Gude  has  been
reputed for the development of original highly-rated materials  in  all  the
languages, including Braille  and  Sign  language  in  line  with  the  Unit
Standards for ABET level 1.

Challenges of the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign
    ▪ Volunteer educators are not paid for recruiting learners;
    ▪ Constant delays in payment of stipends;
    ▪ Lack of coordination between Kha Ri Gude  and  Adult  Basic  Education
      and Training  (ABET);
    ▪ No formal learning  sites available for Kha Ri Gude learners;
    ▪ Budgetary constraints to expand the programme and constant  delays  in
      the delivery of learning materials; and
    ▪ No database to trace drop-outs and graduates of the programme.


   4.5 Presentation by the Mopani District Municipality
   The role of the municipality to  support  educational  challenges  is  to
   compliment the departmental efforts in terms of resource  provision  such
   as water, sanitation and infrastructure at schools and FET  Colleges.  In
   the Mopani District 37.8 % of the population never went to school, 12.7 %
   have Matric, 6.5 % have  Higher  Education  and  24.3  %  have  completed
   secondary education.
   Challenges
      ▪ The absence of  departmental  officials  at  meetings  is  a  major
        concern for the municipality;
      ▪ The inability  to  place  unemployed  learners  and  a  lack  of  a
        database of students who completed the learnerships;
      ▪ No budget to train  communities  and  non  provision  of  bursaries
        from the municipality; and
      ▪ The lack of involvement of the SETAs and  constant  delays  by  the
        Local Government Sector Education and Training  Authority  (LGSETA)
        to disburse funds.

 The municipality requested that  the  Committee  assist  in  strengthening
 Intergovernmental Relations (IGR) for integrated planning within the three
 spheres of government, by demanding compliance and accountability by all.

5. Site Visits
5.1 Visit to the Former Giyani College of Education
The former Giyani College of  Education  has  been  converted  into  Circuit
Offices of the Provincial Department of Education as  well  as  a  residence
for nursing students. The College was disestablished in 2002 as part of  the
process of incorporation of colleges of education from the  jurisdiction  of
the provincial departments of education into the  higher  education  sector,
as required by the Constitution (Schedule  4  of  the  Constitution  of  the
Republic of South Africa, Act 108 of  1996)  and  regulated  by  the  Higher
Education Act  (Act  101  of  1997).   Initially,  following  a  situational
analysis of all colleges in Limpopo, Giyani College was  designated  as  one
of four colleges in the province that were earmarked for incorporation  into
universities, largely on the strength of their infrastructure. However,  the
incorporation  of  the  designated  colleges  into  universities   did   not
materialise, though the function of teacher education was  transferred  into
the higher education sector. As a result, all colleges of education  in  the
province ceased to operate.

Since the closure of the college, maintenance  of  the  buildings  has  been
poor. The college is also used by the University of North West  for  contact
sessions and examinations..
Challenges
    ▪ The lack of water and proper sanitation;
    ▪ Unutilised laboratories and resource centres; and
    ▪ The lack of maintenance of the college buildings.

   2. Visits to Adult Basic Education and Training (ABET) and  Kha  Ri  Gude
      Centres
   1. Giyani Comprehensive Adult Basic Education and Training (ABET) and Kha
      Ri Gude Centre
The centre  was  established  in  2000  and  has  five  volunteer  educators
facilitating teaching and learning. It operates  on  Mondays,  Tuesdays  and
Thursdays and there are 91 learners currently registered. The centre  boasts
of having students that have passed with excellence and some graduates  have
become ABET Practitioners, Care givers, Nurses, and Police Officers.

Challenges
    ▪ The constant delay in the delivery of study material;
    ▪  The  number  of  days  and  hours  of  teaching  and   learning   are
      insufficient;
    ▪ The delays in the payment of stipends to volunteer educators;
    ▪ Kha Ri Gude learners that completed the programme last year  have  not
      yet  received  their  certificates  from  the  Department  of   Higher
      Education and Training; and
    ▪ No database for  those  who  have  completed  or  dropped-out  of  the
      programme.

5.2.2 Muyexe ABET and Kha Ri Gude Centres
The visit to  Muyexe  centres  was  significant  since  Muyexe  village  was
identified during the state of the nation address  as  one  of  the  poorest
villages in the country where it is  imperative  that  government  roll  out
projects to improve the lives of the people.
5.2.2.1 Muyexe ABET Centre
The centre was started in 2000 and  has  four  educators  with  57  learners
currently registered for  ABET  levels  2  –  4.  Besides  the  formal  ABET
programme, the  centre  also  offers  the  much  needed  skills  development
programme on agriculture. The centre operates on Mondays to Wednesdays  from
8h00 to 12h00. The Provincial  Department  supplies  Learning  and  Teaching
Support Materials (LTSM) for all learning areas.

Challenges
    • The absence of accommodation is a  major  challenge  for  the  centre.
      Classes are currently held in one of the learners’ house. Negotiations
      were underway with the School Governing  Body  of  the  local  primary
      school for alternative accommodation at the school;
    •  Learner  attendance  is  irregular  as  learners  sometimes  take  up
      temporary employment in the growing number of projects that are  being
      set up at the village;
    • The salaries are low with no additional benefits such as  pension  and
      medical aid in comparison with those of educators in state schools;
    • The number of days and hours of teaching and learning are insufficient
      to complete the syllabus;
    • There is no database for those who have completed  or  dropped-out  of
      the programme; and
    • No certificates  issued yet for learners that completed the programme.

5.2.2.2 Muyexe Kha Ri Gude Centre
The centre has four volunteer educators, each with a class of  18  learners,
mainly women. Classes are held in the local primary school after school  and
in a church building.

Challenges
    • Most graduates of the programme do not proceed to  enrol  in  Level  2
      programmes offered at the ABET centres due to lack of information;
    • There are delays in the payment of stipends  to  volunteer  educators;
      and
    • Minimal attendance of male candidates in the programme.

5.2.2.3 Thomo ABET and Kha Ri Gude Centre
The delegation made the following  observations  during  the  visit  to  the
Thomo ABET and Kha Ri Gude Centre:
    ▪ Participation of male candidates in the programmes was very minimal;
    ▪ Learners complained about the late arrival of study material  for  the
      programmes;
    ▪ The centre did not have  sufficient  water  and  sanitation  services;
      and
    ▪ Delays in the payments of stipends to volunteer educators.

6. Deliberations
6.1 Discussion with the Provincial Department & Letaba FET College
    ▪ The Committee was concerned that the department  employed  unqualified
      lecturers in FET  Colleges.  It  was  questioned  as  to  whether  the
      department expected students to succeed if they were being  taught  by
      unqualified lecturers.
    ▪ It was stated that some FET Colleges in the province did  not  receive
      an adequate amount of funds for infrastructure development during  the
      recapitalisation  process.  It  was  questioned  as  to  whether   the
      provincial department was allocated an adequate amount  of  funds  for
      the recapitalisation of FET Colleges.
    ▪ It was questioned as to whether the merger  process  of  FET  Colleges
      in the province did not pose challenges for the department.
    ▪ A view was expressed that students were not properly guided  in  terms
      of choosing programmes that were  suitable  for  the  economy  of  the
      province. This created a gap in terms of  what  is  available  in  the
      labour market and what the FET Colleges produce.
    ▪ The committee was  concerned  that  the  department  did  not  have  a
      database of unemployed graduates including those who  dropped  out  of
      the FET Colleges.
    ▪ A concern was expressed that the Campus in Modjadji  had  been  closed
      without proper consultation with the public and young people from  the
      area have been badly affected by the closure of the Campus since  they
      have to travel long distances to other areas to study.  It  was  asked
      whether there were plans to reopen the campus.
    ▪ It was argued  that  the  department  should  formulate  an  effective
      human resource strategy to attract skilled lecturers who will  address
      the  high  vacancy  rate  currently  affecting  FET  Colleges  in  the
      province.
    ▪ It emerged that the Letaba FET College  struggled  to  deal  with  the
      violent protests that were constantly disrupting academic  activities.
      Students protested against the NSFAS bursary which did not  cover  all
      their needs. The committee requested a copy of the memorandum that was
      submitted to the FET College during the protests.
    ▪ The committee was concerned that there were  vacant  posts  especially
      at senior management level of the Letaba FET  College  and  urged  the
      department to intervene in this matter urgently.
    ▪ A view was expressed regarding the high failure rate of  the  National
      Certificate (Vocational) NC(V) programme in the  Letaba  FET  College.
      The committee requested the reason  for  the  low  pass  rate  in  the
      programme.

Responses
The Department and representatives of the FET  College  made  the  following
responses to the issues expressed above:
    ▪  The  issue  of  employing  unqualified  lecturers  was   a   national
      challenge which affects all provinces. It was said that most qualified
      lecturers were attracted to lucrative packages that  were  offered  by
      the private sector and  the  department  could  not  meet  the  salary
      demands of these lecturers.
    ▪ The provincial department of education was not allocated  an  adequate
      amount of funds for the recapitalisation of all FET  Colleges  in  the
      province. The FET Colleges that  received  the  least  allocation  for
      recapitalisation submitted poor business plans to the department.
    ▪ The  Committee  was  informed  that  the  merger  process  contributed
      positively to the development of some  FET  Colleges  that  previously
      lacked sufficient resources. The challenges of mergers are experienced
      at human resources level where staff members have  different  opinions
      on issues.
    ▪ The department acknowledged that it had not created a  database  where
      details of all graduates and drop-outs are stored  and  this  posed  a
      challenge in terms of tracing their further progress.
    ▪ The  Committee  was  informed  that  students  in  FET  Colleges  were
      encouraged to choose programmes that were suitable to their needs. The
      main challenge with this is  that  many  students  struggled  to  find
      employment in their field after completing their studies  since  their
      choices were not in line with the demands of the labour market in  the
      province.
    ▪ The reason for the closure of Modjadji FET College  was  due  to  poor
      enrolment and throughput rate in the College and it  was  stated  that
      the public was informed of the decision.
    ▪ It was stated that the criteria used by NSFAS to  award  bursaries  to
      students of low income was not effective. The majority of students  in
      Letaba FET College are very poor and they require a full  bursary  for
      their studies.  Most of the bursaries awarded  to  students  were  top
      sliced.
    ▪ It was said that the content of the NC(V) programme  is  academic  and
      the majority of students, especially those completing  Grade  9  could
      not cope with the standard of the programme.


6.2 Discussion on Khari Gude and Mopani District Municipality
      ▪ It emerged that most adults who completed the  programme  were  not
        assisted  in  terms  of  continuing  with  their  studies.  It  was
        questioned as to whether the department had programmes in place  to
        assist both  volunteer  educators  and  learners  to  pursue  their
        careers further.
      ▪ The committee was  concerned  that  there  was  no  monitoring  and
        evaluation instrument for the Kha Ri Gude programme.
      ▪ The committee was concerned that the Kha Ri Gude programme  was  ad
        hoc and that there were no permanent centres of learning.
      ▪ The Mopani District was  commended  for  having  the  highest  pass
        rate nationally in the Kha Ri Gude programme.
      ▪ The  District  municipality  was  commended  for  supporting  local
        schools and the FET Colleges with water and sanitation services.
      ▪ It was  argued  that  the  absence  of  departmental  officials  in
        municipal meetings affected service delivery. The  committee  urged
        the District municipality to arrange its meetings in line with  the
        availability of departmental officials.

Responses
      ▪ It was  stated  that  Kha  Ri  Gude  coordinators  conducted  class
        visits every month in all learning sites to  monitor  and  evaluate
        the progress of the programme.
      ▪ The department indicated that Kha Ri Gude  was  not  as  formalised
        as ABET. The programme operates on an ad hoc  basis,  resulting  in
        the lack of permanent learning sites.
      ▪ It was argued that most learners who completed the  programmes  did
        not have sufficient funds to continue with  their  studies  because
        there is as yet no bursary available to them to study further.
      ▪ The department requested the  committee  to  motivate  to  Treasury
        for a higher allocation of funds in order to expand the programme.

7. Findings
The following formed part of the critical findings of the Committee:
    ▪ The information management system of both  the  provincial  department
      and the District municipality was inadequate.
    ▪ It  was  clear  that  the  provincial  department  did  not  have  the
      required human resources development  strategy  to  attract  qualified
      lecturers to FET Colleges;
    ▪ The department invested huge amounts of money  to  purchase  expensive
      machinery and equipment  for  FET  Colleges  without  considering  the
      availability of technical capacity to operate them.
    ▪ The District municipality did not have  a  proper  skills  development
      strategy to assist unemployed young people in the local area.
    ▪ There was no coordination between  ABET  and  Kha  Ri  Gude  and  this
      resulted in the inefficiency of the programmes.
    ▪ The involvement of the SETAs in skills development  was  very  limited
      and caused huge backlogs for both the provincial  department  and  the
      District municipality in terms of learner placement.
    ▪ Students in the Letaba FET College were awarded top  sliced  bursaries
      that did not cover all their expenses.
    ▪ The problem of water shortage in the area  was  a  great  concern  for
      both the  District  municipality  and  the  Provincial  Department  of
      Education.
    ▪ There was a lack of synergy between the  local  FET  College  and  the
      District municipality in terms of skills development.
    ▪ The Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) did not have  a  unit  in  the
      Letaba FET College and it was under resourced.
    ▪ The budget for the Kha Ri Gude programme was reduced  three  times  by
      the Treasury and this crippled its development.
    ▪ The performance of students in  the  NC(V)  programme  was  below  the
      required standard.
8. Summary
The committee was generally concerned by the lack of database  of  graduates
and drop-outs in the FET Colleges and ABET programme. Progress  in  the  Kha
Ri Gude programme was  commended  including  the  support  of  the  District
municipality to schools  and  FET  Colleges  in  the  area.  The  provincial
department was requested to  forward  all  outstanding  information  to  the
Committee. The Committee undertook to write  to  the  Department  of  Higher
Education and Training in particular to highlight some of the more  critical
issues  that  affected  the  local  FET  Colleges,  especially  the  limited
involvement  of  SETAs  in  skills  development.  The  oversight  visit  was
prolific in terms of understanding  a  number  of  fundamental  issues  that
impacted on the progress of FET Colleges  in  the  province.  The  Committee
undertook to forward the report of the oversight  visit  to  the  provincial
department, upon adoption at a committee meeting.


9. Recommendations
Based on its deliberations and  findings,  the  Committee  recommends  inter
alia the following:
    • The department should create a  database  where  all  the  details  of
      graduates and drop-outs will be kept.
    ▪ The provincial  department  should  strengthen  co-ordination  between
      ABET and the Kha Ri Gude at all levels in  order  to  ensure,  amongst
      others, a smooth movement of learners from one programme to the other.
    ▪ There is a need to engage with  the  National  Student  Financial  Aid
      Scheme (NSFAS) concerning a greater allocation of funds to learners in
      FET colleges as  the  current  allocation  is  insufficient  to  cover
      essential learner needs  such  as  transport  at  some  colleges.  The
      Committee will engage with the NSFAS in this regard.
    ▪  The  former  Giyani  College  of  Education   buildings   should   be
      maintained  regularly.  In  the  long  term,  the  Limpopo  Provincial
      Department of Education should  consider  re-opening  the  college  to
      offer teacher education within the parameters set by the Department of
      Higher Education and Training.  It was noted that the unused buildings
      of the college, including the language laboratory and Resource  centre
      are a waste of resources.
    ▪ The Letaba FET College should engage with the local  Municipality  and
      local industry in order to ensure that  they  are  supplied  with  the
      requisite human resources.
    ▪ It was noted that there is a need for a  skills  development  workshop
      in the Giyani region.
    ▪ The Department of Higher Education and  Training  should  monitor  the
      process of payment of stipends by ensuring that stipends are  paid  on
      time to volunteer educators.
    ▪ The involvement of the Education, Training and  Development  Practices
      (ETDP) SETA in further  training  of  volunteer  educators  should  be
      strengthened to enable volunteer educators to  further  their  studies
      without using their stipends.
    ▪  The  inefficiency  of  water  and  sanitation  services   should   be
      addressed by the Department of  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs  as
      matter of urgency.
    ▪ The provincial department should prioritise the  issue  of  attracting
      suitable qualified lecturers to improve the  throughput  rate  of  FET
      Colleges.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Standing Committee on Auditor General on  the  Strategic
Plan and Budget of the Auditor General, dated 12 November 2009:

The Standing Committee on Auditor General (SCoAG), having considered the
Strategic Plan and Budget of the Auditor General in accordance with section
38 (3) (a) of the Public Audit Act 2004 (No. 25 of 2004), recommends that
the House approves the Strategic Plan and Budget of the Auditor General.

The Committee would like to draw attention to matters that it considers
especially important if the AGSA is to succeed in its objectives of
achieving clean audit opinions:

      ▪ the AGSA must incorporate context to the measures as reflected in
        the presentation and word document (entitled “AGSA Balanced
        Scorecard 2010-2013) submitted on 30 October and 5 November 2009
        into the final Strategic Plan and Budget which will be updated by
        30 November 2009.  The final Strategic Plan and Budget will be
        available in print form to all AGSA stakeholders in January 2010.
        An electronic copy of the Strategic Plan and Budget will however be
        available as from 30 November 2009.  These measures are at an
        output or outcome level and they replace the operational measures
        that were submitted on the 16 October 2009.


      ▪ SCoAG encourages other government structures to strive towards
        the goal of achieving clean audits.

      ▪ AGSA consulted with SCoAG on the Audit Directives as required in
        terms of the Public Audit Act as part of the Budget and Strategic
        Plan.


Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Standing Committee on Auditor-General on the Annual
Report of the Auditor General 2008/09, dated 12 November 2009:

The Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA) tabled its Annual Report before
Parliament for consideration by the Standing Committee on Auditor-General
(SCOAG) within the prescribed deadlines in terms of Section 41(5) of the
Public Audit Act (PAA). The Committee held hearings with the AGSA on 21
August 2009.

The committee noted all the concerns raised in the AG’s annual report and
has no doubt that the proposed interventions will remedy the situation
within short, medium and long term. In our analysis of the report, nothing
was noted to have threatened the independence and objectivity of the
Auditor-General in conducting its duties.

The audit work was conducted without fear of undue influence by the
external factors in compliance with the International Standards of Auditing
(ISA).

Report to be considered.

                          MONDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)          Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] – Act No 21
         of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 26 November 2009).



      2) Repeal of the Black Administration Act  and  Amendment  of  Certain
         Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] – Act No 20 of 2009 (assented  to
         and signed by President on 26 November 2009).


                         THURSDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    1) Social Assistance Amendment Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister of
       Social Development.


       Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Social Development and the
       Select Committee on Social Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Government  Employees
        Pension Fund for 2008-09, including the Report of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
        for 2008-09 [RP 241-2009].

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Amatola Water Board  for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sedibeng Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the  Rand  Water  Board  for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Overberg Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift  Water  Board
        for 2008-09, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bloem  Water  Board  for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Umgeni Water  Board  for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


3.    The Minister of Human Settlements

    (a)     Memorandum of understanding (“MOU’) between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Angola on Cooperation in the Field of Human Settlements, tabled in
        terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.
    (b)     Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
        Republic of South Africa, the Government of the Republic  of  India
        and  the  Government  of  the  Federative  Republic  of  Brazil  on
        Cooperation in the Field of Human Settlements  Development,  tabled
        in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (c)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
        (“MOU”) between the Government of the Republic of South Africa, the
        Government of the Republic of  India  and  the  Government  of  the
        Federative Republic of Brazil on Cooperation in the Field of  Human
        Settlements Development, tabled in terms of section 231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction for April 2008 to March 2009.

5.    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs


    (a)     Government Notice No 1568, published in Government Gazette No
        32746,  dated 27 November 2009: Draft regulations on Local
        Government Disciplinary Code and Procedures for Senior Managers
        published for public comment in terms of section 72 and section 120
        of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
        2000).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
     1) Reply from the Minister of Finance to recommendations in the Joint
        Report of Standing Committee on Finance and Portfolio Committee on
        Economic Development on joint meeting on Budget Vote No 7: National
        Treasury, and the 2009-12 Strategic Plan (Update) of National
        Treasury and the 2009-10 – 2011-12 Strategic Plan of the South
        African Revenue Service, as adopted by the House on 25 August 2009.


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance and the Portfolio
        Committee on Economic Development.

     2) Request from the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs for
        the exclusion of a portion of state land from the Lowveld National
        Botanical Garden, Nelspruit, in terms of section 34(2) of the
        National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (No 10 of
        2004).


     3) The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated
        20 November 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
        Members of the Assembly of the termination of the employment of the
        SA National Defence Force for service in fulfilment of the
        International Obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the United Nations as part of the United Nations Political Mission
        in Nepal:


        TERMINATION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE  INTERNATIONAL  OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS AS  PART
        OF THE UNITED NATIONS POLITICAL MISSION IN NEPAL
        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  terminated
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force  (SANDF)
        personnel  to  Nepal,  for  a  service   in   fulfilment   of   the
        international obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the United Nations as part of the United Nations Political  Mission
        in Nepal.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        The United Nations Political Mission was closed  down  on  23  July
        2009. The said termination thus takes effect from 23 July 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof  to
        the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards

                                   signed
                                  J G ZUMA

     4) The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated
        20 November 2009 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
        Members of the Assembly of the termination of the employment of the
        SA National Defence Force for service in fulfilment of the
        International Obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
        the African Union as part of the African Union Observer Mission in
        Northern Uganda/Southern Sudan:


        TERMINATION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE  INTERNATIONAL  OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION  AS  PART
        OF THE AFRICAN UNION OBSERVER MISSION IN  NORTHERN  UGANDA/SOUTHERN
        SUDAN


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  terminated
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force  (SANDF)
        personnel to Northern  Uganda/Southern  Sudan,  for  a  service  in
        fulfilment of the international  obligations  of  the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the African Union Observer Mission in Northern
        Uganda/Southern Sudan.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        The African Union Observer Mission was closed down on 15 July 2009.
        The said termination thus takes effect from 15 July 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof  to
        the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards

                                   signed
                                  J G ZUMA


                          TUESDAY, 26 JANUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Standing  Committee  on
        Finance:

        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of  South
           Africa and the Government of Canada regarding Mutual  Assistance
           between  their  Customs  Administrations,  tabled  in  terms  of
           section 231(3) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
           Africa, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory memorandum to the  customs  agreement  between
           the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  and   the
           Government of Canada.

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        International  Relations  and  Cooperation  for  consideration  and
        report and to the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Defence  and  Military
        Veterans:

        (a)       Amendments  to  the   Convention   on   Prohibitions   or
           Restrictions on the Use of Certain  Conventional  Weapons  Which
           May  be  Deemed  to  be  Excessively  Injurious   or   to   Have
           Indiscriminate Effects, also known as the  Certain  Conventional
           Weapons Convention (CCW), tabled in terms of section  231(2)  of
           the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendments to the Convention
           on  Prohibitions  or  Restrictions  on  the   Use   of   Certain
           Conventional Weapons Which  May  be  Deemed  to  be  Excessively
           Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, also known  as  the
           Certain Conventional Weapons Convention (CCW).


    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  for  consideration   and
        report.  The  Reports  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
        Statements for 2008-09 are referred  to  the  Committee  on  Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the   Represented
           Political Parties’ Fund for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2008-09.


        (b)      Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund  for
           2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  Monies
           in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2008-09.

    (4)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Public Service and Administration:

        (a)      Report of the  Public  Service  Commission  (PSC)  on  the
           Evaluation of Supply-Chain Management Practices within the  R200
           000 Threshold.

    (5)     The following paper is referred  to  the  Committee  on  Public
        Accounts for  consideration  and  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Mining:

        (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on a  performance  audit  of
           the rehabilitation of  abandoned  mines  at  the  Department  of
           Minerals and Energy.

    (6)     The following paper is referred  to  the  Committee  on  Public
        Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Social
        Development:

        (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on a  performance  audit  of
           projects that are funded by the National Development Agency.

    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Labour:

        (a)       Report  of  the  Public   Protector   on   a   Systematic
           Investigation into Allegations of Poor Service Delivery  by  the
           Compensation Fund [Report No 28 of 2009-10].

    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for consideration and report:

        (a)      Government Notice  No  R.  466,  published  in  Government
           Gazette No 32185, dated 29 April 2009: Draft Regulations made in
           terms of section 53 of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84
           of 1998).

    (9)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Energy for consideration and report:

        (a)      Membership of South Africa of the International  Renewable
           Energy Agency (Irena), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of  the
           Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Membership of  South  Africa
           of the International Renewable Energy Agency (Irena).

    (10)    The following paper is referred  to  the  Committee  on  Public
        Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Higher
        Education and Training:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Higher Education and Training,
           dated 26 November 2009, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
           explaining the delay in the submission of the Annual  Report  of
           the National Student Financial Aid Scheme for 2008-09.
    (11)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee  on
        Finance for consideration and report. The Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
        for 2008-09 is referred to the Committee  on  Public  Accounts  for
        consideration:

        (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of   the   Government
           Employees’ Pension Fund for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.

    (12)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and  report.  The
        Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-09 are referred to  the  Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Amatola Water Board
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2008-
           09.


        (b)      Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  Sedibeng  Water
           Board for 2008-09,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the  Rand  Water  Board
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2008-
           09.
        (d)      Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  Overberg  Water
           Board for 2008-09,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of  the  Pelladrift  Water
           Board for 2008-09,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Bloem  Water  Board
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2008-
           09.


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Umgeni Water  Board
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2008-
           09.

    (13)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Human Settlements for consideration and report:

        (a)      Memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) between the Government
           of the Republic of  South  Africa  and  the  Government  of  the
           Republic  of  Angola  on  Cooperation  in  the  Field  of  Human
           Settlements,  tabled  in  terms  of  section   231(2)   of   the
           Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of  the
           Republic of South Africa, the  Government  of  the  Republic  of
           India and the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil on
           Cooperation in  the  Field  of  Human  Settlements  Development,
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (c)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding
           (“MOU”) between the Government of the Republic of South  Africa,
           the Government of the Republic of India and  the  Government  of
           the Federative Republic of Brazil on Cooperation in the Field of
           Human Settlements Development, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
           of the Constitution, 1996.

    (14)    The following the paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee
        on Trade and  Industry  for  consideration  and  to  the  Portfolio
        Committee on Defence and Military Veterans:

        (a)       Report  of  the  South  African  Council  for  the   Non-
           Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for April  2008  to
           March 2009.

    (15)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs:

        (a)      Government Notice No 1568, published in Government Gazette
           No 32746,  dated 27 November 2009: Draft  regulations  on  Local
           Government Disciplinary Code and Procedures for Senior Managers,
           published for public comment in terms of section 72 and  section
           120 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No
           32 of 2000).

    (16)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Request from  the  Minister  of  Water  and  Environmental
           Affairs for the exclusion of a portion of state  land  from  the
           Lowveld  National  Botanical  Garden,  Nelspruit,  in  terms  of
           section  34(2)  of  the   National   Environmental   Management:
           Biodiversity Act, 2004 (No 10 of 2004).

    (17)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and Military Veterans:

        (a)      Letter from  the  President  of  the  Republic,  dated  20
           November  2009,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National   Assembly,
           informing members of the Assembly  of  the  termination  of  the
           employment of the SA  National  Defence  Force  for  service  in
           fulfilment of the international obligations of the  Republic  of
           South Africa towards the United Nations as part  of  the  United
           Nations Political Mission in Nepal.


        (b)      Letter from  the  President  of  the  Republic,  dated  20
           November  2009,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National   Assembly,
           informing members of the Assembly  of  the  termination  of  the
           employment of the SA  National  Defence  Force  for  service  in
           fulfilment of the international obligations of the  Republic  of
           South Africa towards the African Union as part  of  the  African
           Union Observer Mission in Northern Uganda/Southern Sudan.

2.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

    (1)    The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 13 January 2010 in accordance with Rule
         234:

         (a)      Legislative proposal on presidential pardons (Mr J Selfe)

        Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
        and Special Petitions for consideration and report.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
        Forensic Chemistry Laboratories at the national Department of
        Health – November 2009 [RP 268-2009].

    (b)    The Strategic Plan and Budget of the  Auditor-General  of  South
         Africa for 2010-2013 [RP 266-2009].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)      Municipal  Budgets  for  the  2009  Medium-Term  Revenue   and
        Expenditure Framework (MTREF).

3.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Namakwa Water Board  for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (b)     Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  Bushbuckridge  Water
        Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2008-
        09.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Albany Coast Water Board
        for 2008-09, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle  Northern  Water
        for 2008-09, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


4.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No R. 81 published in Government Gazette No 32750
        dated 27 November 2009: Partial commencement of section 26 of the
        Judicial Matters Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 66 of 2008).

     b) Government Notice No R. 1120 published in Government Gazette No
        32750 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations relating to
        Debt Collectors, 2003:  Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of
        1998).


     c) Government Notice No R. 1121 published in Government Gazette No
        32759 dated 27 November 2009: Determination in terms of section 62A
        of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
        of Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002).




     d) Government Notice No R.1055 published in Government Gazette No
        32690 dated 05 November 2009: Amendment of  the Third Schedule, in
        terms of the Insolvency  Act, 1936 (Act No 24 of 1936).


     e) Government Notice No R.1056 published in Government Gazette No
        32690 dated 05 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations in terms of
        the Trust Property Control Act, 1988 (Act No 57 of 1988).


     f) Government Notice No R.1057 published in Government Gazette No
        32690 dated 05 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations in terms of
        the Administration of Estates Act, 1965 (Act No 66 of 1965).


     g) Government Notice No R.1070 published in Government Gazette No
        32700 dated 09 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations in terms of
        the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).

     h) Government Notice No R.72 published in Government Gazette No 32703
        dated 10 November 2009: Referral of matter to existing special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act , 1974 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


     (i)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2008-2009
        [RP 256-2009].


     (j)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on the
        Consolidated Legislation pertaining to International Judicial co-
        operation in Civil Matters for 2006.


5.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pebble Bed Modular
         Reactor (Proprietary) Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
         Performance Information for 2008-09.

6.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
        Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) for 2008-09, including the Report
        of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-09.


7.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Cooperative Agreement between the United States of America
        (USA) and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) to Foster
        Trade, Investment and Development, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996

    (b)     Explanatory Note  of  the  Cooperative  Agreement  between  the
        United States of America (USA) and  the  Southern  African  Customs
        Union (SACU) to Foster Trade, Investment and Development.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Letter from the Minister of  Correctional  Services  requesting
        consideration of a shortlist  of  candidates  to  be  appointed  as
        representatives  of  the  public  on  the  National   Council   for
        Correctional  Services  in  terms  of  section  83(2)(h)   of   the
        Correctional Services Act, 1998 (No 111 of 1998).


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services for
        consideration.


                          THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B 56D – 2008] – Act No
         22 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 26 January
         2010).

      2) Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill [B
         57D – 2008] – Act No 23 of 2009 (assented to and signed by
         President on 20 January 2010).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by
         the Minister of Trade and Industry.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
         Select Committee on Trade and International Relations.

3.    Calling of Joint Sitting

    CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
    COUNCIL OF PROVINCES.


    In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
    South Africa, 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the Joint Rules of
    Parliament, the President of the Republic of South Africa has called a
    joint sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
    Provinces on Thursday, 11 February 2010 at 19:00, in order to deliver
    his State of the Nation Address to Parliament.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Letters from President

     1) A letter dated 24 November 2009 has been received from the
        President of the Republic, informing members of the National
        Assembly that in terms of section 17 of chapter 3 of the Handbook
        for the Appointment of Persons to the Boards of State and State-
        Controlled Institutions, Mr D K Golding will be appointed as a
        member of the board of the SABC while continuing to serve as
        special adviser to the Minister of Public Works.


     2) A letter dated 4 December 2009 has been received from the President
        of the Republic, informing members of the National Assembly that in
        terms of section 13(1) of the Broadcasting Act, 1999 (Act 4 of
        1999), the following persons have been appointed to serve as non-
        executive members of the board of the South African Broadcasting
        Authority (SABC) with effect from 10 January 2010: Mr C S Gina, Mr
        D K Golding, Ms P M Green, Mr P J Harris, Ms B J Masekela, Mr M A
        Mello, Dr B S Ngubane (Chairperson), Mr D C Niddrie, Ms C F O’Neil,
        Ms F L Sekha (Deputy Chairperson) and Ms S C Vos.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Sport  and  Recreation  on  the
   Safety  at  Sports  and  Recreational  Events  Bill  [B7-2009]  (National
   Assembly- sec 75), dated 19 November 2009:

      The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered the
      Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill [B  7–  2009]  (National
      Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the JTM as a sec
      75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B7A-2009].


                          TUESDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    South African Post Office Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister
         of Communications.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and the
         Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.
    (2)    Protection from Harassment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister
         of Justice and Constitutional Development.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Development.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health:


        (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on a Performance Audit of
           the Forensic Chemistry Laboratories at the National Department
           of Health – November 2009.

    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Committee on the Auditor-
        General for consideration:

        (a)      The Strategic Plan and Budget of the Auditor-General of
           South Africa for 2010-13.

    (3)     The following paper is referred to the  Standing  Committee  on
        Appropriations  and  the   Portfolio   Committee   on   Cooperative
        Governance and Traditional Affairs:
        (a)      Municipal Budgets for the 2009 Medium-Term Revenue and
           Expenditure Framework (MTREF).

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-09 are referred to the Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Namakwa Water Board
           for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
           09.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Bushbuckridge Water
           Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Albany Coast Water
           Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle Northern
           Water Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2008-09.


    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:

        (a)      Proclamation No R.81, published in Government Gazette No
           32750, dated 27 November 2009: Determination under section 40(2)
           of date of partial commencement of section 26 of the Judicial
           Matters Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 66 of 2008).

        (b)      Government Notice No R.1120, published in Government
           Gazette No 32750, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of
           regulations relating to debt collectors, 2003, in terms of
           section 23 of the Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of
           1998).


        (c)      Government Notice No R. 1121, published in Government
           Gazette No 32759, dated 27 November 2009: Determination of a
           uniform tariff of compensation for compliance with section
           62(6)(a) in terms of section 62A of the Regulation of
           Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-
           Related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.1055, published in Government
           Gazette No 32690, dated 5 November 2009: Amendment to the Third
           Schedule of the Insolvency Act, 1936 (Act No 24 of 1936), in
           terms of section 153(1) of the said Act.


        (e)      Government Notice No R.1056, published in Government
           Gazette No 32690, dated 5 November 2009: Amendment of
           regulations in terms of section 24 of the Trust Property Control
           Act, 1988 (Act No 57 of 1988).


        (f)      Government Notice No R.1057, published in Government
           Gazette No 32690, dated 5 November 2009: Amendment of
           regulations in terms of section 103 of the Administration of
           Estates Act, 1965 (Act No 66 of 1965).


        (g)      Government Notice No R.1070, published in Government
           Gazette No 32700, dated 9 November 2009: Amendment of
           regulations in terms of section 15 of the Companies Act, 1973
           (Act No 61 of 1973).

        (h)      Government Notice No R.72, published in Government Gazette
           No 32703, dated 10 November 2009: Referral of matter to existing
           special investigating unit and special tribunal in terms of
           section 2(1) of the Special Investigating Units and Special
           Tribunals Act , 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


        (i)      Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on
           Consolidated Legislation pertaining to International Judicial Co-
           operation in Civil Matters for 2006.


    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:


        (a)      Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2008-
           09.


    (7)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pebble-Bed Modular
           Reactor (Pty) Ltd for 2008-09, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2008-09.


    (8)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)            Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) for 2008-09, including the
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2008-09.

    (9)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry:

        (a)      Cooperative Agreement between the United States of America
           (USA) and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) to Foster
           Trade, Investment and Development, tabled in terms of section
           231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
           1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Note on the Cooperative Agreement between the
           United States of America (USA) and the Southern African Customs
           Union (SACU) to Foster Trade, Investment and Development.

2.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
    (1)    The following private member’s legislative proposal was
        submitted to the Speaker on 1 February 2010 in accordance with Rule
        234:

        (a)      Legislative proposal on the President’s power to grant
           pardons (Mrs P de Lille).

        Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
        and Special Petitions for consideration and report.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Agreement between the European Community and its Member States,
        of the one part, and the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa, of the other part, Amending the Agreement on Trade,
        Development and Cooperation (TDCA), in terms of section 231(2) of
        the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the  Agreement  between  the  European
         Community  and  its  Member  States,  of  the  one  part,  and  the
         Government of the Republic of South  Africa,  of  the  other  part,
         Amending  the  Agreement  on  Trade,  Development  and  Cooperation
         (TDCA).

                           FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2010
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Protection from Harassment Bill [B 1 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 32922 of 1 February 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
             and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
        Safety Authority (including the Maritime Fund) for 2008-2009,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 216-2009].




National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

       a) Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture dated 18 January
          2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay
          in the submission of the Annual Report of the National Heritage
          Council’s Annual Report for 2008-2009.

          EXPLANATION FOR THE LATE TABLING OF THE NATIONAL HERITAGE COUNCIL
          ANNUAL REPORT IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 65(2)(a) OF THE PUBLIC
          FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, NO 1 OF 1999:


          The following are reasons for late tabling of the Annual Report of
          the National Heritage Council.


         1.      Due to the system crash of the Accounting System their
              Audit was late and that resulted in the late completion and
              subsequent submission of their Annual Report namely 30
              September 2009. The Annual Report was tabled immediately on 1
              October 2009.


          Yours sincerely


          signed
          MS LULU XINGWANA
          MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE

                          TUESDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Communications


          a) South African Post Office Bill [B 2 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             32887 of 22 January 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.
National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        International Relations and Cooperation for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Agreement between the European Community and its Member
             States, of the one part, and the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa, of the other part, amending the Agreement on
             Trade, Development and Cooperation (TDCA), in terms of section
             231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)       Explanatory  Memorandum  on  the  Agreement  between  the
             European Community and its Member States, of the one part,  and
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa,  of  the  other
             part,  amending  the  Agreement  on  Trade,   Development   and
             Cooperation (TDCA).

2.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes have been instituted to the membership of
        Committees by the DA:

        Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


        Appointed:     Du Toit, Mr N D
        Discharged:  Pretorius, Mr P J C


        Portfolio Committee on Basic Education


        Appointed: Lorimer, Mr J R B
        Discharged:    Smiles, Mr D C


        Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans


        Appointed: Smiles, Mr D C
        Discharged: Lorimer, Mr J R B


        Portfolio Committee on Energy


        Appointed: Ross, Mr D C


        Committee on Public Accounts


        Appointed: Pretorius, Mr P J C
        Discharged: Du Toit, Mr N D


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No 905 published in Government Gazette No 32567
        dated 18 September 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).

    (b)     Government Notice No 936 published in Government Gazette No
        32600   dated 18 September 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).

    (c)     Government Notice No R.1058 published in Government Gazette No
        32692 dated 06 November 2009:  Proclamation of the effective date
        for the National Gambling Exclusions Database, in terms of the
        National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of 2004).


    (d)     Government Notice No 1039 published in Government Gazette No
        32673 dated 06 November 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


    (e)     Government Notice No 1065 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for plugs, socket-outlets and socket-outlet adaptors
        (VC 8008), in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
        Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

    (f)     Government Notice No 1066 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for glow starters for fluorescent lamps (VC 8039), in
        terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act,
        2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).
    (g)     Government Notice No 1067 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for appliance couplers for household and similar
        purposes (VC 8012), in terms of the National Regulator for
        Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (h)     Government Notice No 1068 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for manually operated switches for appliances (VC
        8052), in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
        Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (i)     Government Notice No 1069 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for flexible cords for electrical appliances (VC
        8006), in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
        Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (j)     Government Notice No R. 1153 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations:  Payment of levy and
        fees with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms
        of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
        (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (k)     Government Notice No R. 1154 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations:  Payment of levy and
        fees with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms
        of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
        (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (l)     Government Notice No R. 1155 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations:  Payment of levy and
        fees with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms
        of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
        (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (m)     Government Notice No R. 1156 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations: Payment of levy and fees
        with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).

                         WEDNESDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Withdrawal of tabling and referral

      Please note: The tabling in terms of section 231(2) of the
      Constitution, 1996, and referral of the Memorandum of Understanding
      (MOU) between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
      Government of the Republic of Angola on Cooperation in the Field of
      Human Settlements to the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements for
      consideration and report, published in the Announcements, Tablings and
      Committee Reports of 10 December 2009 and 26 January 2010
      respectively, are withdrawn.

2.    Referral to committee of paper tabled

      (1)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Human Settlements:

        (a)      Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
           Republic of Angola on Cooperation in the Field of Human
           Settlements, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Government Notice No 936 published in Government Gazette No
        32600 dated 2 October 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


        Correction: The above entry replaces item 1(b) published under  the
                  name of  the  Minister  of  Trade  and  Industry  in  the
                  Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports (ATC) of  9
                  February 2010 page 25.

2.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate:  Mr  M  T
        Masinga, an additional magistrate at Emlazi, KwaZulu Natal in terms
        of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act  No  90  of
        1993).


    (b)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr W J  M
        Prinsloo, an additional magistrate  at  Ermelo,  KwaZulu  Natal  in
        terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act  No  90
        of 1993).


    (c)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate:  Mr  L  B
        Maruwa, an additional magistrate at Daveyton, Gauteng in  terms  of
        section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (d)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate:  Mr  M  K
        Chauke, an additional magistrate at Pretoria, Gauteng in  terms  of
        section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).
    (e)     Draft Regulations made in terms of section 97(1) of  the  Child
        Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of 2008).

   3. The Minister of Human Settlements

     a) Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Angola on Cooperation in the Field of Human Settlements, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

   4. The Minister of Police

     a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on Domestic
        Violence for the period January – June 2009, tabled in terms of
        section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of
        1998).

                          FRIDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

         a) Protection from Harassment Bill [B 1 – 2010] (National Assembly
            – sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ON THE
   APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO SERVE ON THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR CORRECTIONAL
   SERVICES IN TERMS OF SECTION 83(2)(h) OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ACT,
   1998 (NO. 111 of 1998), DATED 9 FEBRUARY 2010


    The Letter from the Minister of Correctional Services requesting
    consideration of a shortlist of candidates to be appointed as
    representatives of the public on the National Council for Correctional
    Services was referred to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
    Services on 26 January 2010 [ATC, No1-2010]. The Committee, having
    deliberated, unanimously agreed that the following persons be appointed
    in terms of the above-mentioned provision:


    1.      Dr Kgamadi Joseph Kometsi
    2.      Ms Lusanda Rataemane
    3.      Dr Maletse Mako
    4.      Ms Busi Ngobeni
    5.      Ms Lynn Smit
    6.      Dr Mohamed Randera
    7.      Dr Hema Hargovan
    8.      Adv Silas Nkanunu

                          MONDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2010

CREDA INSERT - T100215E-INSERT1 – PAGES 53-75


