---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 February 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-02-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                  INVITATION TO SADC HEALTHY LIFESTYLES DAY

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, before we proceed with today’s
business, I have been requested by the Minister of Health, Dr Motsoaledi,
to extend an invitation to all members of the Council to attend the launch
of the SADC Healthy Lifestyles Day, which will be held from 26-27 February
2010. Transport to the event will be departing at 20:00.

I am told the event is somewhere in Guguletu. We will ask our office to
send the invitations if you have not got them. I do have an invitation in
my office.

                    PRECEDENCE TO SUBJECT FOR DISCUSSION

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The second request is that the House should
allow that we give priority to the subject for discussion, education,
today, and then we will deal with motions at the end. This is because of
the other business the Ministers have to do, so we thought that we should
prioritise the subject for discussion today. Are we agreed on that? Thank
you.

                         MOTION ADDED TO ORDER PAPER

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I have directed, in terms of
section 78(2) of the Council Rules, that a motion be added to the Order
Paper as the second motion, a copy of which will be made available. I shall
just ask the Chief Whip to read that message to the House, so that we can
agree on that.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Chair. The Chairperson has, in
terms of Rule 78(2), directed that a motion that will be moved later in the
proceedings be placed on the Order Paper. All delegation heads have been
consulted and have concurred in terms of Rule 78(3). Thank you,
Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, are we agreed on that? Agreed.
Thank you very much.

I shall now call the hon Tau to come and chair, because I am participating
in the debate.


   EDUCATION DEBATE: ENHANCING THE CULTURE OF LEARNING AND TEACHING IN OUR
     SCHOOLS FOR BETTER EDUCATION OUTCOMES AND ADDRESSING CHALLENGES IN
    ACCESSING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR POOR LEARNERS IN HIGHER EDUCATION

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I start by thanking the hon
Minister of Higher Education and Training, hon Blade Nzimande. I don’t know
if I should say “Sharp Blade” Nzimande! Welcome, Minister.

I also want to welcome the hon Minister of Basic Education, hon Motshekga.
Thank you for agreeing to come and participate in this debate in the NCOP.
Your co-operation is highly regarded by the NCOP. Thank you also to all the
MECs who have been able to come here today to participate in this important
debate.

We thought it would be important to start our debates on policy issues in
the NCOP this year by looking at education because of its importance, and
we will continue and consider other areas that we have identified as our
priority areas of oversight.

When the President of this country addressed this House last year, he
stated that our education was not delivering the results that South
Africans needed to overcome the ravages of apartheid. He said that a large
slice of the population lacked the skills they needed to find employment,
leaving them jobless for years and years. He further stated:

   Though it absorbs a significant amount of our budget, our education
   system does not produce the outcomes we require.

A couple of months ago the President addressed the matric results that were
released, and they were unsatisfactory by far. An in-depth analysis of
these results shows a deep-rooted challenge in our education system as a
whole.

Let me just go quickly to the statistics. In 1998 more than 1,5 million
children across the country started Grade 1. Since then, about 1 million of
those children fell by the wayside. In 2009 only 551 940 of them registered
for the matric class. That is a dropout rate of about 65%.

We have to ask ourselves the question: Where are those learners today? What
are they doing where they are currently? That is a question that I want to
put directly to all of us as Members of Parliament as well: What are we
doing to be involved in that?

Also, hon members, in terms of the SA Schools Act of 1996, it is also the
responsibility of the parents to make sure that those children go to school
and are taught. I do not want to read the Act; I am sure everybody knows
that the Act says we have a responsibility as parents to make sure that our
children pass Grade 9 at least. It is our responsibility to do so. This is
also in the Bill of Rights, which is entrenched in the Constitution.

There is absolutely no reason today for parents or anybody to allow their
children to not go to school and hide behind the argument of poverty. The
Minister and the Department of Basic Education have made it very clear that
no school should refuse to admit a child to school if he or she does not
have the money to pay for school fees.

That is the reason for the department actually taking steps to make quite a
number of schools no-fee schools today. The quintile system itself has
played a major role in addressing that and, Minister, we want to thank you
that the number of these schools where our children are not paying school
fees has now increased and that they can go to school and receive an
education. Thank you for that, because it was a very big problem in the
past. Although there are challenges regarding the classification of some
schools into different quintiles, the quintile system is still one of the
best ways of actually helping poor children attain a basic education.

Let us quickly look at the matric results. The 2009 matric results were
announced earlier this year. Only 334 609 of the 551 940 who wrote passed
matric. That is 60,6%. Of these, just over 100 000 qualified for university
entrance. In Mpumalanga, for example, the pass rate was 50%, and in the
Eastern Cape 51%. Simply put, this means that one in every two matriculants
in these provinces is facing an uncertain future.

Figures released by the Department of Basic Education show that 18 schools
got a 0% matric pass rate. Half of them – i.e. nine - are found in Limpopo,
four in KwaZulu-Natal, three in the Eastern Cape, one in the North West and
one in Gauteng. Do you want to tell me that those children are all stupid
in those schools and that not even one child can pass? There must be
something wrong. I don’t believe that all those children cannot pass and
that there was a pass rate of zero in those particular schools. There is
something wrong and all of us need to pay attention to that.

I want to suggest right now that all Members of Parliament who are deployed
in constituencies where those schools are should adopt a school like that.
Don’t wait for tomorrow; let it be your school until you upgrade it and
until you get the results corrected. I have done it in the past and I know
it works. I monitor such a school until the results of the school shape up
and then I know I have done my work. Then I can leave that school and go
and do another school.

Hon members, in 2007 the pass rate was 65,2% and in 2008 it was 62,5%.
These decreases started after 2004, when the pass rate was 70,7%, and it
has been going down every year. If the trend is anything to go by, it means
we are heading for trouble.

What are some of the challenges that exist and that all of us can address,
instead of waiting for the department? One of the challenges is absenteeism
at school, either of the teachers or the children themselves. We can go
there and check. I did that just two weeks in my constituency, and I
discovered that these problems still exist. Other challenges are bad
management of schools and a lack of infrastructure at schools.

In interacting with my constituency, I further found that there was a lack
of discipline among some of the teachers – not all of them. Remember that
we have some teachers who are very good, but some of them still lack
discipline at school, and some learners also have a lack of discipline,
either leaving early or arriving late, whatever the case may be.

There is also poor management of school transport. They have complained to
those of us who have visited schools that in some areas they don’t have
school transport, or the school transport brings them to school late and
fetches them early, whatever the case may be. Those are simply questions of
logistics can be addressed by management at that particular school.

Then there is the issue of a lack of qualified teachers, especially for
subjects such as mathematics and science. Minister, when I visited two high
schools in the Modimolle area in Limpopo, where I am deployed, I asked both
of the principals of those schools one simple question: What made your
results drop in 2009? Let us leave other years, just tell me what made your
results drop in 2009.

Both of them said to me that the children had failed in large numbers in
mathematics, physical science and accounting. I asked them why they had
failed. The answer I got from both these principals was that the papers
were too hard. The standards set in the papers were too high. That is what
I got from their mouths. Now, I didn’t see the papers, and I don’t know
what they looked like, but what I want to raise is that it is common
knowledge – you get some information - that some of the teachers, when they
teach accounting, deliberately avoid bookkeeping and management accounting.
When they teach mathematics, they avoid, for example, looking at the
question of trigonometry, which is very important in teaching mathematics.

Hon Chairperson, other speakers will expand on what I have said, because I
don’t have much time. But let me also say that we should also ask ourselves
the following questions as we discuss this subject: How many children of
disadvantaged parents can read, count and write properly when they go to
school, as opposed to the children from advantaged families? How many
township and rural schools are crippled by the lack of resources that are
needed to ensure that teaching continues uninterrupted? How many schools in
poor areas are functioning and have libraries and laboratories? These are
some of the questions that we should ask.

Once more, the government has committed itself to ensuring access to
quality education as one of the strategic priorities of this term of
Parliament, with a focus on the delivery of quality outcomes. As the
President stated, among other things, during the state of the nation
address in 2009, particular attention would be paid to learner outcomes,
early childhood development, improving school management and supporting and
developing a higher quality of teaching as a profession. Achieving this,
however, depends upon dealing with basics first.

These are what the President calls the non-negotiables, that is, teachers
should be in school, in class, on time and teaching for seven hours every
day. There should be no neglect of duty, there should be no abuse of
learners and learners must be in class learning. These are non-negotiables
and very, very important.

Coming to higher education, I want to thank hon Minister Blade Nzimande. I
have had a discussion with him - I don’t want to repeat a lot in the debate
– particularly in terms of the students who need to be registered at or
admitted to tertiary institutions. I am referring to the question of
students who are perhaps doing their third or final year and hardly have
the money to complete their degrees. They have to break off their studies,
go and work and come back and finish their degrees. There are still these
problems at tertiary institutions.

There is a point system for admitting students to university. I am not too
sure whether it is standard, or whether each university has its own point
system. The University of Cape Town, for example, might have its own
system, and UWC might have its own system, so too Free State, Wits, and the
University of Pretoria. Which criteria are being used, actually, in dealing
with these point systems?

The most important thing is that we must make sure that the children who
pass well in matric gain access to these tertiary institutions. Those point
systems must not be used to prevent our children from entering institutions
of higher learning and to favour other people getting into the institutions
of higher learning.
I would want to request the Minister today to look into that. I have
actually seen that the Minister has begun that type of discussion. I think
this morning you came out very well. I do not know if you pre-empted the
debate this afternoon, Minister, but I was watching you on television and
this question came up again, and you responded to it very well. I want to
thank you very much.

Thank you, hon members. Those are my inputs for the debate. [Applause.]

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, it is always a pleasure
and an honour to follow on after you in a debate.

Chairperson of the NCOP, Ministers present and members of the House, this
topic of today is very important. It is the crux of the matter and the
solution to guaranteeing a better future for all our people and our
country. Education is the main pillar of building a stable and prosperous
country. Therefore a quality education and training system is cardinal to
enhancing good values and morals in our communities.
Voorsitter, kan ons met gerustheid sê dat ons in hierdie rigting beweeg?
Die antwoord is nee, omdat die gehalte van syfervaardigheid en
geletterdheid in grade 3, 6 en 9 hopeloos te laag is. Ons het ’n krisis in
die onderwys en ons moet dit vinnig en dringend uitsorteer. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, can we confidently say that we are heading in this direction?
The answer is no, because the levels of numeracy and literacy in Grades 3,
6 and 9 are far too low. We are experiencing a crisis in our education
system and we need to address this swiftly and urgently.]

We must quickly come up with accurate diagnostic models to address the
problems and the causes of failure in our basic education system.

We need effective models and programmes to address our sociocultural
environment within and outside our schools, as well as a change of mind-set
among our children and youth regarding the values and goals that are
important for a stable life and community.

The capabilities of our teachers and their commitment to quality education
and training outcomes must be improved and set as the most important
priority.

Die doelwit, soos gestel deur vandag se onderwerp vir bespreking, wys soos
’n teregwysende vinger na elkeen van ons in Suid-Afrika. Die departement
het wel in 2008 ’n projek geloods om ’n fondasie te lê vir leer en om
geletterdheid en syfervaardigheid te verbeter.

Dink net: As die nasionale regering onder die ANC en sy alliansie-vennote
die model wat in 2001 deur die destydse DA-administrasie in die Wes-Kaap
geïmplementeer is, geïmplementeer het, het ons nie hierdie krisis op hande
gehad nie.

Die uitfasering van onderwyskolleges deur die destydse regering onder
voormalige President Mbeki se beheer was verkeerd en ’n fout.
Onderwyskolleges is die teelaarde vir leerkragte in basiese opvoeding en
onderrig. Dit is hier waar die fondasie vir enige goeie leerkrag gelê en
vasgepen word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The goal, as put by today’s subject for discussion, points like an
admonitory finger to each one of us in South Africa. In 2008, the
department did indeed launch a project to lay the foundation for teaching
and to improve literacy and numeracy.

Just consider the following: If the national government under the ANC and
its alliance partners had implemented the model that was implemented in
2001 by the former DA administration in the Western Cape, we would not have
this crisis at hand.
The phasing out of teacher training colleges by the government at the time,
under the leadership of former President Mbeki, was wrong and a mistake.
Teacher training colleges are the breeding grounds for teaching staff in
basic education and teaching. This is where the foundation for any good
teacher is laid and established.]

To enhance the culture of learning and training, we must show our
commitment to advocating our aims and goals extensively all over the place-
on billboards, television and radio, in local government institutions,
national government institutions and social development institutions, on
our roads, in our shops, etc.

We must have a psychological, physical and structural campaign to achieve
our goal of learning and training our youth and communities. This must not
be a once-off occasion, but an ongoing and constant campaign in every
sphere of human existence.

Die stelsel van basiese onderwys moet verander word, want die bestaande
stelsel toon ernstige probleme. [The basic education system needs to be
transformed as the existing system shows signs of serious problems.]

The simple factor by which the teacher-learner ratio is calculated is wrong
and inadequate. We must find a different model to determine this ratio,
especially in our basic education phases, Grades 1 to 3, Grades 4 to 7 and
further up.

We must implement a model for monitoring and evaluation in schools and
classes to see if pupils perform and progress in numeracy and literacy.
This must be done on a regular and constant basis by the school’s senior
staff. Then, when the inspector comes to the school, as mentioned by the
President in the state of the nation address, nobody will fear that faults
will be identified. To achieve this, more time must be set aside for the
appropriate staff to perform this duty in the time available to them.

Leer en opleiding begin by die gewoonte om te lees en ’n liefde vir lees te
ontwikkel. Daarom stel ek dit as ’n feit dat hierdie gewoonte deur middel
van verskillende programme, modelle en inisiatiewe aangemoedig moet word.
Mense met ’n liefde vir lees verstaan beter, ontwikkel beter en presteer
beter.

Ons kan nie verwag dat leerkragte wat in ’n situasie opgelei is om ’n
bepaalde model van onderrig toe te pas en uit te voer, ’n nuwe model, wat
ander doelwitte het, suksesvol sal implementeer nie. Hulle moet ook
konstruktief en effektief opleiding en onderrig ontvang om hulle te
kapasiteer vir hul nuwe taak. Geen “mikrogolf”-opleidingsmodel sal
effektief werk nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Education and training start with the habit of reading and by developing a
love of reading. For this reason, I am stating it as a fact that this habit
should be promoted by means of different programmes, models and
initiatives. People who love to read have a clearer understanding of
things, their development is more advanced and they perform better.

We cannot expect teachers who are trained to apply and implement a certain
model of teaching in a specific situation, to successfully implement
another model that has other goals. They must also receive constructive and
effective training and teaching to capacitate them for their new task. No
“microwave” training model will work effectively.]

Chairperson, you cannot expect learners to excel in any form of mathematics
if they did not receive maths training from the primary phase and
throughout the phases up to Grade 12. Umalusi identified that historically
30% to 40% of all secondary schools did not have some form of education
with regard to maths before Grade 9. Therefore the maths pass rate in 2008
was only 46%. In 2008 54% did not pass and in 2009 53% did not pass.

This is a typical example of a misjudgement in educational accountability
and implementation. The misfortune of this situation is that those learners
were dealt a psychological blow by our system of education to their whole
lives and future. This we must never again allow to happen.

Too many learners with the potential to study further, maybe at a college
or university, cannot go to such an institution, due to the financial
inaffordability. We must come up with a financial model of assisting them
to further their studies.

Even parents with a decent job, such as teachers, people in correctional
services, health services or other government sectors, cannot afford to
send their children to these educational institutions. We must look into
the matter. Maybe the benefit of a study loan or bursary at their workplace
could address this problem.

Hierdie voordele sal ook ons leerders aanmoedig om hulself te kwalifiseer
in daardie rigtings waar die voordele vir hul toekomstige kinders se
verdere studies rooskleurig is. Dit sal die finansiële sake van ons
hoëronderwysinstellings ook baie verbeter, en hulle sal ook beter dienste
aan ons studente kan lewer wanneer hulle by hierdie instellings opdaag.

Kom, laat ons die onderwys, onderrig en opleiding van ons jeug en
gemeenskap die belangrikste saak maak om ’n beter toekoms vir ons land en
al sy mense te verseker. Ons moet ook daarop konsentreer om kriteria en
modelle te vind vir dié leerders wat uitval tussen graad 1 en graad 12,
sodat ons hulle langer in die skool kan hou. Dit sal verseker dat ons baie
meer matrikulante sal hê, en ’n baie beter toekoms vir ons jeug en ons
samelewing kan voorsien, met al die voordele wat dit inhou. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[These benefits would also urge our learners to obtain qualifications in
those areas that would be beneficial to their children’s future studies.
This would greatly improve the financial affairs of our higher education
institutions as well, and they would also be able to offer better services
to our students when they arrive at these institutions.

Come, let us prioritise the education, teaching and training of our youth
and communities to ensure a better future for our country and all its
people. We must also focus on finding criteria and models for those
learners who leave the education system between Grade 1 and Grade 12, so
that we can keep them in school for a longer period. This would ensure a
greater number of matriculants and provide a much better future for our
youth and society, with all the benefits that are associated with it. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much, hon De Villiers.
As I call on the hon Makgate, may I take the opportunity to welcome the
president of the SRC of the University of Cape Town Mr Sizwe Mpofu-Walsh,
who is seated in the gallery. You are welcome, sir. You may proceed, hon
Makgate.

Ms M W MAKGATE: Modulasetilo, Matona a Lefapha a a leng teng fa, pele ke
simolola ka puo ka re thuto e botlhokwa mo baneng ba rona. [Chairperson,
senior officials of the department present here today, before I start with
my speech, I would like to say education is important to our children.]

Nelson Mandela’s long walk and commitment to quality education for all
South Africans manifests itself not only in his personal struggle to
qualify himself as an attorney, but also in the broader struggle for the
liberation of black people in general and black Africans in South Africa in
particular.

His vision of quality and free education in a nonracial, democratic,
nonsexist society has evolved over many decades through not only personal
sacrifice, but also the collective political counsel of the then leadership
of Kotane, Max Sisulu and others.

The ANC’s vision for a quality, compulsory and equal education was
subsequently concretised in the Freedom Charter at the Congress of the
People in Kliptown on 26 June 1955. These objectives were completely
articulated and amplified in the Rivonia Trial of 1964, during which Nelson
Mandela said:

   The present government has always sought to hamper Africans in their
   search for education.


   There is compulsory education for all white children at virtually no cost
   to their parents, be they rich or poor. Similar facilities are not
   provided for the African children ...

Against this background, it must be noted that the vision of the Freedom
Charter became the bedrock of struggle for the liberation and its policy
compass. It culminated in the adoption of the South African Constitution of
1996. Moreover, the Bill of Rights, although conceptually raised during the
Rivonia Trial, encapsulated all the ideals that we envisaged during Nelson
Mandela’s testimony.

In relation to education, the Constitution is ambiguous. Section 29, clause
1 says:

   Everyone has the right -


     a) to a basic education, including adult education; and


     b) to further education, which the state, through reasonable measures,
        must make progressively available and accessible.



   (2)      Everyone has the right to receive education in the official
        language or languages of their choice in public educational
        institutions where that education is reasonably practicable. In
        order to ensure the effective access to, and the implementation of,
        this right, the state must consider all reasonable educational
        alternatives, including single medium institutions, taking into
        account -


          a) equity;


          b) practicability; and


          c) the need to redress the results of past racially
             discriminatory laws and practices.

Since Nelson Mandela was inaugurated as President in 1994, our ANC-led
government has made significant strides in relation to policies pertaining
to education. In our primary and secondary schooling, we are just a few
years away from achieving 100% participation by all our children. About 600
000 children attend crèches and preschools. The matriculation pass rate has
risen from 58% in 1994 to 60,7% in 2009.

Overcrowding in classes has been greatly reduced. The teacher-learner ratio
in 2006 was 1:32 as opposed to 1:43 in 1996. Currently, more than the
poorest 60% of schools in the country are no-fee schools.

The mass literacy campaign is now reaching more than 500 000 people who
could not read and write. In higher education, 140 000 students have been
supported through our national financial aid scheme, which is helping to
improve participation of the poor in higher education.

Furthermore, during his tenure as the President of the ANC, the first
democratically elected President of the Republic and his public-speaking
career after retiring from presidential duties and office, Nelson Mandela
has been consistent in his quest to amplify the historic evolution of ANC
policies, emphasising the critical importance of education and
constructively criticising the subsequent ANC administration for failing to
implement policies.

However, it is critical that we contextualise recent trends in basic
education, particularly against the enormous sacrifice of Nelson Mandela
and his peers. In this regard, the consistent decline in the matric pass
rate between 2006 and 2009, with 2009 presenting us with an all-time-low
matric pass rate, is indeed alarming. Many commentators have, since the
publication of the 2009 results and over the last while, lamented the
direction of the systematic deficiencies of basic education in our country.

As we all know, our ANC-led government’s policy which entails shifting
resources to the poor, achieving almost universal access, and implementing
initiatives to enhance outcomes and the culture of learning in schools has
been amazingly effective. Furthermore, our education budgetary allocation
demonstrates this government’s commitment to developing the strategic
capacity and instruments to build the developmental state; and we would
like to engage with any contrary view.

At the same time, new challenges have emerged which demand of the ANC-led
government to be more resilient. However, we need to acknowledge that these
successes have not translated into an improved outcome. Our country
continues to be confronted by low pass rates mathematics, science and
technical subjects which in turn continue to cast doubts on whether we are
able to meet the immediate, medium- and long-term skills capacity demands
of the developmental state.

What is it that we need to do? I have already alluded to funding, which has
given access to millions of South Africans to the various bands of
education. However, we believe that indicators of access should not be
restricted to a narrow definition of registration at a centre of learning,
since the evidence of inequalities is still reflected in our learning and
teaching landscape and it remains stuck.

For example, the critical deliverable of infrastructure provision often
gets overlooked in the broader picture. Currently, and although we have
made significant gains in the sphere of infrastructure provision, the
scenario remains heavily skewed, particularly in relation to rural areas
and poor and wealthy urban schools.

Moreover, infrastructure delivery in rural and peri-urban schools continues
to be bedevilled by the absence of synchronisation between the three
spheres of government. We are therefore calling on the Department of Basic
Education to address this matter.

As the ANC, we have adopted certain non-negotiables in education as
contained in our 2009 January 28 Statement. Amongst other things, the ANC
is calling on teachers to be in class on time and to teach for seven hours
daily. These non-negotiables were reaffirmed by our President, Jacob Zuma,
during the state of the nation address two weeks ago.

As we know, our education system, aside from real constraints, is also
seriously constrained by management capacity. This has led in many
instances to unintended consequences. For example, they manifest in poor
delivery, dysfunctional schools and ill discipline among some educators and
learners. We are therefore endorsing the injunction of our leadership to
engage with all its stakeholders, learners and teachers to adhere to the
non-negotiables.

Furthermore, we are calling on the department and its provincial
counterparts for improved evaluation and monitoring. Also, we wish to
propose to the Department of Education, as a matter of policy, a revised
and faster evaluation and assessment of schools where management requires
attention.

In addition, we would like to be privy to an updated database that reflects
those schools where management deficiencies are acute, in order to remedy
the situation. It is our view that through working together we can
destigmatise the image of township and rural schools, since it appears as
if a stigma has taken root in many of these schools.

As we all know and have seen, either as spectators or active participants,
the functioning and transformation of our school governing bodies remain
contentious. In most areas, SGBs are indeed executing their mandate and
statutory obligations in an exemplary fashion, and we salute them.

In other areas they have been used as catalysts to advise on the sinister
objectives of careerists with regard to counter-transformation and further
undemocratic and racialist agendas.

The SGB system has been given life through an Act of this democratic
Parliament and as public representatives it is our duty to ensure that the
statutory mandate is upheld at all times. It is our view that the latter is
also a non-negotiable since the responsibilities and duties of the SGBs and
the school management in general are regarded as being mutually exclusive.
Quite the contrary, they are indeed both central to the framework within
which management of schools is located. Furthermore, as the ANC we are
calling for the forging of a social compact for each sector to contribute
to the common objective in which particular communities and progressive
formations can together strengthen the schooling system and build an
enduring people’s contract.

In conclusion, despite the achievements articulated here, as the ANC we are
conscious that both higher and basic education have not evolved to the
desired level, hence education is our government’s number one priority,
consistent with the definition adopted at our 52nd conference in Polokwane.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr D GRANT (Western Cape): Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Mahlangu, hon
Minister Nzimande, the hon Motshekga, the Northern Cape MEC Cjiekella hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, we welcome today’s debate on enhancing the
culture of learning and teaching in our schools for better education
outcomes.

Our national pass rate has dropped by 13% since 2003 and our literacy and
numeracy levels are way below the international standards. This is an
indication that the current education system as well as the culture of
learning and teaching are not properly entrenched and that education in
South Africa is in crisis.

One of the primary reasons for this is that the rights of learners have all
too often come a distant third in order to protect ideological
considerations and other educator rights. However, in the Western Cape, we
are determined to put the rights of learners above any consideration. Every
action, policy or strategy we adopt is guided by this principle.

If South Africa is to succeed, we simply cannot afford to fail the millions
of young learners in this country who are desperate to obtain a quality
basic education or enhance their future opportunities. It is within this
context that the DA administration in the Western Cape has adopted a range
of measures which will enhance the culture of teaching and learning in our
schools. This puts the rights of approximately one million learners first
and ensures that they receive a quality education.

Despite the fact that the Western Cape has the best education system in the
country, we have made a bold commitment to improve our educational
outcomes, setting specific targets for 2010, which include an improvement
to 80% in the Grade 12 pass rate; an increase in the number of learners who
are writing their examinations; and a reduction in the number of
underperforming schools from 85 to 55. We are planning to have reduced this
number to zero by the year 2014.

These are bold but necessary targets. Until yesterday, we were the only
province in the country that had set such specific targets in education.
I’ve just learned that the department of education in KwaZulu-Natal has
released its own targets. We welcome their commitment to improving
education in their province. I’m looking forward to reading their plan and
discussing their strategies, as I shared with MEC Cjiekella in Kimberley a
few days ago.

While we realise that there is no quick fix in education, we believe that
these targets are achievable with dedicated and targeted planning and
support. A number of practical management interventions have already been
put in place in the Western Cape to help in achieving these targets.

These interventions include the implementation of a detailed turnaround
strategy to improve the Grade 12 results; improving literacy and numeracy
outcomes by directing maximum human and capital resources to the first
three years of schooling; and a management plan to conduct diagnostic tests
to measure the literacy and numeracy competency of all three grades, namely
Grades 3, 6 and 9 learners. The tests will take place on one school day
between 8 November and 19 November 2010. This will allow us to identify
problem areas and to take effective and timeous remedial action.

Increased levels of accountability and performance of officials and
principals have also been introduced. This is in the performance contracts
for head office staff and district officials who are directly linked to
learner outcomes - a first for any administration. It will ensure time-on-
task by limiting the amount of training and the number of seminars and
other functions that take place during school hours. The Western Cape
department of education has ensured that at least a month’s notice of
training opportunities is given and has built in safeguards to ensure that
such training will take place outside school hours or on weekends.
The department has also reacted swiftly and firmly to any attempt to
disrupt schooling, such as at Ludwe Ngamlana Primary School in Khayelitsha.
We will not under any circumstances allow education to be abused in the
pursuit of a political or any other agenda. I would like to thank the
national Minister for her support in this regard.

Yesterday, the provincial cabinet approved the Western Cape education
department’s request to publish the draft Western Cape Provincial School
Education Amendment Bill for public comment. This Bill provides greater
powers for school inspections; regulates and renews the functions and
powers of the provincial education council; makes provision for the
inspection of schools to monitor performance and compliance; and further
restricts the presence of alcohol, drugs and firearms at our schools.

An innovative plan to address infrastructure backlogs was also
presented earlier today at a press conference. This plan provides for a
number of short- and long-term interventions and includes the building of
12 new additional schools and 200 classrooms, as well as allocating 126
mobile classrooms, which will be rolled out among 75 schools before the end
of the second term on 11 June 2010.

This plan will help alleviate school overcrowding and improve the overall
state of our school infrastructure. These are but a few of our
interventions that we have achieved thus far and it is safe to say that at
the forefront of most of these interventions is the learner.

However, it is only through a sustained, focused and systematic approach
that we will achieve the stated targets of improved learner outcomes. There
is no doubt that a new wind is blowing through education in the Western
Cape as well as the country. There is a great promise of a better tomorrow
for all learners, giving a real life to our vision for an open opportunity
society for all.

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, hon Minister of Higher Education and Training,
Minister of Basic Education and all protocol observed, this year the
Gauteng department of education will focus on improving learner performance
in schools. Both President Zuma and Premier Mokonyane have stressed that
improving the outcomes of our education system is central to providing
decent work and developing our economy.

The President and our premier have made it clear that by the year 2014 we
need to ensure that learners leave primary schools being able to read,
write and achieve in basic mathematics, and that our matric pass rate needs
to improve, with a higher percentage of young people achieving a university
entrance.

The Gauteng department of education has, for the past few years, sought to
improve learners’ levels of achievement in numeracy and literacy. While
some progress has been recorded, particularly as regards the number of
learners in schools in disadvantaged communities who study maths and
science, the goals of quality teaching, learning and achievement in these
critical subjects have not been achieved.

In line with the national priority to improve maths and science education,
the Gauteng department of education has developed a revised comprehensive
maths, science and technology education improvement strategy. This maths,
science and technology strategy is the result of wide consultations with
school principals and teachers, departmental officials, universities and
local experts in maths and science education. Their collective experience
of what to do and, importantly, what not to do has resulted in a realistic
and feasible approach to the task.

The intervention is multifaceted and includes formulating strategies for
teacher preservice and in-service education and training. Secondly, we will
focus on the role of resources in improving the quality of learning. This
includes the improvement of infrastructure, appropriate fixtures and
fittings and equipment and quality learning support materials. Thirdly, we
will implement a sustainable strategy for improving learner achievement
through holiday camps and weekend classes. Fourthly, we must build the
capacity of the system - schools, district and head offices - to ensure
that quality learning is effectively managed and takes place optimally.

With regard to literacy, government research has shown that the majority of
learners in the Gauteng province are not able to read or write at the
levels required by the national curriculum. Targets have been set by the
Presidency and the department of education specifically, that by the year
2014 60% of Grade 6 learners in Gauteng will be at or above the national
literacy achievement standard.

To accomplish this, the Gauteng primary literacy strategy is built on four
pillars: annual external assessment of all Grade 3 and Grade 6 learners;
the provision of high-quality literacy textbooks and workbooks, readers and
teacher guides for all learners in 790 underperforming primary schools; the
provision of learner support and the improvement of district and school
management of primary literacy practice.

In terms of support to learners, the strategy includes a social marketing
campaign to encourage parents to read to their children in the home and
support their children’s reading and writing homework; the co-ordination
and alignment of the work of the literacy NGOs in the province; and the
development of primary school libraries in 790 underperforming primary
schools in the province.

Various tests, locally and internationally, show that our learners are
failing numeracy and literacy. About 28% of Grade 3 learners pass literacy
and about 44% have numeracy skills. This improves slightly in Grade 6, with
an average of just below 40% of learners with language skills and just over
50% able to do maths.

If we hope to develop the skilled workforce needed to grow the economy of
the country, we need to improve learner performance throughout the
education system, especially in the foundation phase.

There are a number of factors, both learner-related and institutional, that
result in poor learner performance. Learner-related factors include
inadequate curriculum management and coverage during the year; ineffective
school-based systems for monitoring curriculum delivery; a lack of
standardised lesson plans, practical assignments and tasks; and a quality
of teaching and assessment that is not optimal.

Institutional factors include learner and educator discipline, school
safety, poor hygiene, cleanliness of infrastructure, poverty and social
deprivation.

Last year we developed a five-year strategic plan from 2009 to 2014 to
achieve better education outcomes. This plan is based on the following four
pillars: ensure that Gauteng has effective schools and learning
institutions; Gauteng department of education head office and districts to
provide relevant, co-ordinated and effective support to schools; enable
young people to make the transition from school to further education and/or
work that provides further training opportunities; and strengthen
partnerships with all stakeholders, resulting in education becoming a
societal priority.

The new approach to science, maths and literacy aims to give concrete
expression to ensuring that our schools are effective learning institutions
and that our head office and districts provides relevant and appropriate
support to schools.

Obviously, none of these will be possible unless we build effective
community partnerships to make sure that President Zuma’s non-negotiable,
of teachers and learners in class, learning and teaching for seven hours a
day, is achieved.

A province-wide Back to School campaign has helped to get education off to
an early start in our province and to deal with the inevitable challenges
of late registration of learners and overcrowding. Our department would
like to thank the many public representatives, community members and the
private sector for visiting schools throughout the province and
contributing so generously to cleaning and repairing our schools. Your
efforts have inspired us and given us hope.

Next month our department will host a meeting of faith-based organisations
to discuss ways in which this important community can assist in entrenching
the culture of learning and teaching in our province and deepen the
involvement of parents and community members in their children’s education.
We also see this as an important way in which the faith-based sector will
be able to offer pastoral support to schools affected by violence. Such
partnerships have already been running on a pilot basis in Merafong,
Eersterus and Boipatong.

To help learners access opportunities to further higher education, we have
already issued over 350 of the 700 bursaries we have committed to
matriculants from quintiles 1, 2 and 3 schools. This brings to almost 4 000
the number of learners on Gauteng provincial government bursaries in higher
education institutions.

We will continue to link 2 000 other learners to educational opportunities
and provide them with financial support. We are getting eight learnerships
in Gauteng co-ordinated through the Gauteng City Region Academy in areas
including artisan training, ICT training, co-operatives, heritage
learnerships, creative industries and the auto industry.

Training in specific areas includes traffic officers, office
administration, human resource management, construction, motor mechanics,
information technology, boilermaking, electrical, welding, plumbing,
fitting and turning, social auxiliary work and child and youth care.

This year we will begin a series of roadshows throughout the province,
targeting learners in Grades 8 and 9 to ensure they have timely information
about matric subject choices before they go to Grade 10. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MECs, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, allow me to quote what the former President Nelson Mandela said:

   Education is the great engine of personal development. It is through
   education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that the
   son of a mineworker can become the head of the mine, that the child of
   farmworkers can become the president of a great nation.

I want to quote something else that former President Mandela said:

   There can be no keener revelation of a society’s soul than the way in
   which it treats its children.

Opvoeding en dissipline moet nooit agterweë gelaat word nie. Dit moet nooit
vergeet word dat opvoeding en dissipline ná aan die hart van elkeen van ons
mense is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Education and discipline should never be neglected. It should never be
forgotten that education and discipline are dear to each one of us.]

We need to invest in our youth to ensure a skilled and capable workforce to
support growth and job creation.

The ID slams the Department of Higher Education and Training for failing to
spend nearly R200 million of its National Student Financial Aid Scheme,
NSFAS, budget over the past years. It is outrageous that in a country where
tens of thousands of young people lack the financial resources to pursue
further education, thousands of them are unable to access government
funding. This is a massive contributing factor to the serious lack of
skills among our youth, and therefore to the 70% youth unemployment rate,
which continues to render them powerless in our economy.

The NSFAS has largely blamed universities and colleges for the unspent
R89,3 million in 2007 and R95,5 million in 2008, saying that they only
reported back on the use of funds late in the year, making it difficult to
spend the remaining money. The NSFAS also blamed the shortage of suitable
candidates for loans.

The ID remains unconvinced that there is a shortage of suitable candidates
for the loans and we call on the Minister of Higher Education and Training,
Blade Nzimande, to improve information about access to the NSFAS.

We also call on the Minister to lengthen the NSFAS application period from
two weeks to three months to give students ample time to apply. Those
responsible for distributing NSFAS funds must be held accountable for
unspent money because the youth are suffering the consequences of their
actions.

The ID supports Minister Nzimande’s ordering of a national review into the
way money is allocated for bursaries. We support all efforts to prioritise
enrolment of more previously disadvantaged students in universities and
colleges. However, NFSAS funds should also be prioritised towards those
students wishing to enter the areas of studies most urgently needed in our
economy.

Minister of Finance Pravin Gordhan’s first national Budget sees the release
of the first budget for the new Department of Higher Education and
Training. From April this year the Department of Higher Education and
Training will have its own budget and South Africans will be looking at the
department to start delivering. The upcoming financial year will see
R32 billion allocated to this sector of education, with R19,5 billion to
universities, R3,9 billion to FET colleges and R168 million for skills
development.

Allow me to say the following:

Dit is goed en wel om teoreties te beplan. Die uitvoer van werk en om toe
te sien dat die werk uitgevoer word, is egter van kardinale belang. Die
department moet kan monitor en evalueer wat regtig gebeur. Hoe kan ’n
onderwyser aan 38 tot 40 kinders in ’n klas persoonlike aandag gee? By ’n
primêre skool, Vela-Langa in Paballelo, is daar 73 kinders in graad 1.
Wanneer gaan daardie onderwyser by almal kan uitkom?

Die betrokkenheid van ons ouers by die voorheenbenadeelde skole is glad nie
na wense nie. Ons ouers moet meer belangstelling toon in die opvoeding en
ontwikkeling van hul kinders. Die department moet toesien dat daar reg
begroot word vir ons skole, sodat daar ook regte fasiliteite by ons skole
kan wees. [Tyd verstreke.] Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[It is all very well to plan according to theory. However, carrying out
work and ensuring that the work is carried out are of the utmost
importance. The department must be able to monitor and evaluate what really
happens. How can a teacher give individual attention to 38 to 40 children
in a class? At Vela-Langa Primary School in Paballelo there are 73 pupils
in Grade 1. When will that teacher get to everyone?

The involvement of our parents at previously disadvantaged schools leaves
much to desired. Our parents have to show more interest in the education
and development of their children. The department must see to it that
proper budgeting for our schools takes place in order to have proper
facilities at our schools. [Time expired.] I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms D Z RANTHO: Chairperson, hon Ministers, MECs and members, all protocol
observed, South Africa’s education system has made a lot of progress in
prioritising programmes and policies in accordance with the transformation
agenda of the ANC.

Since the 1994 democratic breakthrough, significant legislation and
policies have been implemented to promote access to education in line with
the Freedom Charter. These achievements follow the Freedom Charter’s
guiding clause, which states that the doors of learning and culture shall
be opened. This clause has been an inspiration during student-life
struggles, classroom politics and the yearning for a better education
system.

The adoption of the democratic Constitution had a major impact on the area
of education and training, quite likely entrenching the human rights
doctrine. Subsection 1 of section 29 of the Constitution states that
everyone has the right to basic education, including adult education. This
section also states that everyone has the right “to further education,
which the state, through reasonable measures, must make progressively
available and accessible”.

Furthermore, a provision of this section states that in order to ensure the
implementation of these rights, the state should take equity into account
and redress the legacy of apartheid. This provision recognises that the
right to access quality education might not be enjoyed by children from
disadvantaged backgrounds, particularly if certain sections of society seek
to treat education as a commodity whereas this section places education as
one of the basic needs. However, socioeconomic inequalities seem to place
constraints on this right, which is enshrined in the Constitution.

The education policy debate should be located within the social structure
and practice in various institutions such as schools, the family, the
community, the Department of Basic Education, the business sector and
organisations or bodies. It is at the community level that the position of
schools can be understood and advanced in society. This relates to an
education alliance that includes community involvement in transporting the
learners, the role of women’s co-operatives in producing school uniforms,
the empowerment of the community, and the strengthening of local education
and training units, which include teachers and learners.
There is a need to strengthen management capacity to ensure working
districts and schools. This entails bringing in management capacity from
the private sector, civil society and elsewhere in the public sector.

There is a need to develop a social compact for quality education. This
will include a national consultative forum dedicated to clarifying the non-
negotiables and performance targets to key stakeholders, and the monitoring
thereof.

The mobilisation of communities at all levels should be encouraged to raise
awareness of and participation in education issues. Examples include
graduates assisting their former schools; corporate social investment; ANC
branch campaigns to clean up schools and support food gardens; and
encouragement of young graduates to enter teaching. As was said, “Teach
South Africa”.

Schools can be useful resources for the surrounding communities. This
relates to the possible sharing of resources, sports facilities and joint
events. This partnership between schools and local community structures
will build trust and a sense of ownership. Furthermore, it will eventually
prevent school vandalism, violence and crime.

The following issues also need to be looked into in the context of
community activism. One of the issues relates to the issue of no-fee
schools, which has been a bone of contention. The way in which it is
applied is not satisfactory in certain areas. Other concerns relate to
other issues like the issue of teacher training; the renewal of powers of
school governing bodies, which is crucial; discrimination against children
on language grounds; and the issue of the education of the girl-child.

We also need to seriously look into the issue of combining the idea of
nutrition with a basic health service in schools. Part of the problem is
too much focus on the nutrition side without looking at the effects of ill
health. Certain diseases can be taken care of quite easily with the right
medical attention.

The issue of HIV and Aids in schools is one of the major challenges to all
South African schools. In this regard the Constitution guarantees the right
not to be unfairly discriminated against, the right to life and bodily
integrity, the right to privacy, and the right to a safe environment in the
best interests of the child.

There is a need to strengthen awareness, skills, values and attitudes in
order for educators and learners to uphold the behaviour that will protect
them from infection and to support the infected and affected.

Parts of the awareness programmes to be strengthened include HIV and Aids
testing, admission and/or appointment of educators, the right to attend any
school and the prevention of HIV and Aids transmission during play and
sport.

The ANC election manifesto seeks to reduce the rate of new HIV infections
by 50% through vigorous prevention campaigns. There is a commitment to
accelerate health care for millions in schools. In order for this goal to
be met and sustained, resources are required.

Azikho ke izixhobo ezikolweni zethu, Mphathiswa obekekileyo. Izikolo
ezininzi zabantu abamnyama azinazo izixhobo ezaneleyo zokulwa ezi zifo.
Mhlawumbi singatsho ukuba sibethwe lixesha esisuka kulo, ixesha localu-
calulo. Kodwa ke, loo nto ayithethi ukuba asinakho ukwenza nto. Sasiqhele
iziko elivuthayo localu-calulo, saloyisa. Asinakho ukoyiswa leli iziko.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[There are no resources in our schools, hon Minister. Many African schools
do not have enough resources to fight these diseases. We might put the
blame on our past, the apartheid regime. But that does not mean something
cannot be done. We were used to the hostile environment of the apartheid
regime, which we defeated. We cannot be defeated by this environment.]

With regard to the rural farm schools and transport infrastructure ...

... luthutho lwabantwana olungenzeki ngendlela eyiyo nolusidla kakhulu
phaya ezilalini olu sithetha ngalo. Kodwa loo nto ayithethi ukuba asinakuba
nabo abantwana abapasayo esikolweni. Sinawo umzekelo obonakala kakuhle
eFreyistata. IFreyistata ineefama kodwa ikwazile ukwenza u-100% wezinga
lokupasa kulo nyaka uphelileyo, u-2009 lo sisuka kuye. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... we are talking about the transportation of schoolchildren in the
villages, which is not functioning well. However, that does not mean we
cannot have learners who are doing well at school. We have a good example
in the Free State. The Free State is a farming province but it managed to
achieve a 100% pass rate last year.]

The ANC election manifesto argues that by 2014 all schools should have
basic infrastructure such as water and electricity because this can have an
impact on education outcomes. It is possible to meet this challenge through
the comprehensive rural development strategy to ensure that rural
development is linked to the education system to promote an integrated
system. Xa singasebenzisana singenza lukhulu. [Working together we can do
more.]

Government should strengthen the transport system to ensure an effective
and developed infrastructure. Farm schools and village schools could
benefit from a comprehensive rural development strategy that attracts and
retains skilful teachers, as revealed by the joint media statement of the
teachers’ unions. Discipline, professionalism and efficiency need to be
encouraged in schools.

With regard to the state of the school governing bodies, SGBs, the SA
Schools Act, Sasa, prescribes different but interlocking roles for school
governing bodies and school management teams, SMTs, in the interests of the
school. However, there have been tensions between school governing bodies
and school management teams, due to perceived role overlaps in
implementation of Sasa provisions.

Enhancing the culture of learning and teaching requires several
interventions ranging from the provision of infrastructure to learner and
teacher programmes to create safety at schools. Section 8 of the SA Schools
Act of 1996 compels the governing body of a school to adopt a code of
conduct for learners. In support of teachers, the department released
examples of codes of conduct to schools and provided training and further
guidance on alternative forms of discipline.

There is a need to strengthen the regulations for safety measures that
focus on the safety of learners within school premises, particularly at
public schools. Such measures also accommodate school tours and sporting
activities.

The regulations will, among other things, ensure the following. Firstly,
public schools must take reasonable measures to ensure that the safety of
learners during tours and sporting activities includes insurance against
accidents. Secondly, learners and educators who lead a school tour are not
allowed to carry drugs, alcohol or weapons.

The ANC’s national executive committee, NEC, January 8 Statement addresses
the various state of the province addresses and demonstrates continued
commitment to addressing some systematic challenges and the need to
strengthen partnerships between schools and local communities. The 2009
matric results have confirmed these systematic challenges. In the area of
the community, education partnership ... [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): There is that watch there. I’m just
urging the members to use it; it is very effective in managing your own
time. Hon Mashamba, you may proceed with the debate.

Mr G MASHAMBA (Limpopo): Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, I come
from Limpopo with the mandate to participate in this national debate and
discussion on enhancing the culture of learning and teaching. I was
mandated not to engage in politicking on education. I think that we have
long since passed the stage where we talk about provincial issues as if we
were a federal republic. We are a unitary republic, so we can’t have more
than one vision for our education system.

We took the approach that a healthy mind in a health body is equal to a
healthy school and a healthy community. So, while it is important to look
into the issues relating to the internal processes of our education system,
it is also important to take into account the communities in which we find
our schools.

As a result, we have noted that we do not – in our province at least, I do
not know about the other provinces – as yet have adequate facilities for
our schools.

We have noted one anomaly, which the MEC has probably pointed out, namely
that whilst we are busy building state-of-the-art schools, there are, at
the same time, kids who are still studying under conditions that are not
desirable.

We find that because of the approach which we adopted, some of the schools
we have built, even the ordinary schools, are collapsing. So we need to
determine what needs to be done there.

I come from a rural province. We have found that there is a factor unique
to our rural schools. It is that our children are not able to do their
homework properly because Eskom has the tendency to provide electricity
with a low voltage. This means that the poorest of the poor must actually
upgrade their electrical hardware in order to make it possible for their
children to do their homework.

Our roads infrastructure also needs to be taken into account because
sometimes, if it rains in certain areas, kids are not able to go to school.
That has an impact on their educational progress.
We have also come to realise that the call for free and compulsory
education is important, precisely because that will relay the question of
patriotism. A child who was brought up and sent to school by his country,
by the state, is likely to be grateful to the state and the people of the
country, as compared to the child who was sent by a struggling mother or
uncle. So the whole question of free education will actually have an
important impact on the wellbeing of our country.

We also looked at the question of educators. We realised that while it is
important for teachers to be au fait with their subject matter, the good
teacher is one who does not only know the subject matter but also knows the
community from which the students and the children come. This enables that
teacher to understand the difficulties the learners encounter in the
educational system.

We also noted that it is important for us to make sure that the department
that deals with supplying water co-operates with the education department.
For instance, at the school we built in Phalaborwa, there was no co-
ordination with local government. The school cannot operate because local
government says that it did not know that a school would be established
there. So our intention in the future is to have better co-ordination with
our local government.

On the language issue, we have come to realise that while it is important
for students in the lower grades to learn in their mother tongue, we think
that that is not sufficient. We must point out to our education department
– I hope that this is their terrain – that there is nothing wrong with
copying from the past. For instance, when the National Party came to power,
it made sure that it did not reinvent chemistry, physical science,
mathematics and so on. What it did was to translate all those textbooks
into Afrikaans.

We do not see why these subjects cannot also be translated into our own
languages. We should have a structure that deals with this so that we are
able to go forward with our own languages. Our own languages should not be
used as the language of learning only at the primary level.

We are also saying that we have too much policing in schools. It is not the
way to go. We are not saying that it should not be there, but rather that
it is necessary to heighten the social consciousness of communities
instead, so that they are able to appreciate the importance of community.

We think that this can only be done if communities – not only students and
teachers and so on – are organised. In this way we can make sure that our
communities understand the importance of education.

We would also like to see adult education intensified in our province.
These days, schoolchildren are given very difficult tasks to complete. It
is difficult for children from a village because they lack not only
material infrastructure but also human resources. Their parents – in many
cases just the mother because the father is working either on the farms or
the mines – are illiterate, as are so many of the people in the
countryside. Some of the tasks that these learners are asked to perform
require somebody who is actually au fait with the subject. So it is also
important to understand the need for adult education in that light.

We think that it is important for us to guarantee better access to finances
for our students in higher education. Not every rural village parent in my
province will understand the dynamics of higher education. If the various
provincial departments of education can take an interest in and take
responsibility for following up on students who pass at the end of a year
and make sure that they link them up with state resources that are
available, they will contribute a great deal in making sure that our
children access the funds that are available.

We have also seen that it will be important for us to redefine what we mean
by the term “parent”. When talking about the role of parents, we should say
that a parent is not necessarily the blood parent of a child; it can even
be somebody who is standing in loco parentis. In our communities we find
that there are many retired people who are knowledgeable about education,
but because they do not have children at school it is difficult for them to
participate directly in schools. Yet those people who have children at
school are not au fait with educational matters.

On the issue of feeding schemes, we feel that it is important to monitor
what happens at our schools, especially our primary schools. At one of the
schools we visited, we were told that according to the norms and standards
guidelines of the education department, learners do not get meat. When we
asked the feeding scheme people why this is so, they said it is specified
in the menu from the department. Well, we approached the department and we
were told that that was not the case.

We are happy that our province intends making sure that kids who go beyond
primary school on to high school should also be provided with meals. A
child does not suddenly become rich when he finishes primary school. Even
learners at high schools in our communities do need food to be provided.

There is also the question of the ideological environment within which
education takes place. Our TV, radio and print media promote the idea that
they are very helpful in making sure that our children not only become
skilled but also get moulded into useful citizens. However, when you watch
TV, listen to the radio or read our newspapers, you find that the ideas are
not helpful in building our young people into critical citizens of
tomorrow. We hope that our education system is not there just to produce
people who will go and sell their labour in the market; we hope that our
education system will produce useful citizens.

We think that our education system should also produce politicians like us
here, who, tomorrow, should provide the necessary environment within which
our society can operate. Because if we don’t have credible politicians, we
will have a country that is run by those who make everything unstable.

I mention this now because in Limpopo, where I come from, it is
disheartening to find that where student formations no longer function
according to political ideas – maybe ideas from different political parties
– the ethnic element is coming back. There are Zulu, Venda and Tsonga
students’ associations and so on. That, I think, is a recipe for disaster.
Tomorrow we might end up having warlords all over the place, defending
ethnic entities.

That is coupled to the tendering processes. We said that our schools are
collapsing because, firstly, people who are awarded tenders do not do
proper work. Secondly, because of the element of ethnicity, what will
happen is that everybody will make sure that they do their level best to
push their own narrow interests. That, in turn, may also strengthen
ethnicity.

In order to address this situation, I think it is important for politicians
to make sure that they make the population aware of the seriousness of
education.

Insofar as internal processes are concerned, I think we agree with other
provinces about what should be done at schools. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson Baba Mahlangu,
Minister Motshekga, MECs, hon members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, it
is indeed an honour to participate in this debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Excuse me, hon Minister. Yes, hon Sinclair?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: I’m sorry to disrupt the hon Minister, but in terms of the
speaker’s list we have, the hon Plaatjie, is supposed to be speaking now.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Sinclair. There was an
agreement that the speakers’ list would be changed, and a new speaker’s
list has been submitted to members. We will call Mr Plaatjie. Thank you
very much. Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you, Chair. It wasn’t
my intention to come and steal anyone’s time today. [Laughter.] I was
merely summoned and told when I would speak, so my apologies for the
inconvenience to the hon member. We’ll sort it out over tea one of these
days.

Chairperson, thanks for your leadership in calling for this debate and
discussion, because we know you for your passion to serve our people and,
in particular, your passion for education. Let me take this opportunity to
start by giving a short report to the House.

A few weeks ago the 2010 registration process that started the academic
year at our universities, universities of technology and colleges was
completed. For our fledgling department there were many lessons to be
learnt from this period, particularly relating to the challenges facing
students and institutions.

It is clear to us that there are no quick fixes and that many of these
challenges cannot be addressed in the short term. We want to be upfront
about that. We need to take into account that the higher education sector
has grown significantly over the past 15 years, as there has been a
significant increase in the intake of black and particularly female
students, mostly from disadvantaged backgrounds.

As a matter of fact, over the past 10 years female students have come to
constitute the majority of students at all universities in the entire
system. [Applause.] While this is a welcome development, we have become
victims of our own success, because the infrastructure has not actually
been able to keep up with the growth and increase in access.

I am pleased to share with you that we are, nevertheless, undertaking a
number of measures to ensure that some of the fundamental problems
besetting the higher education system are addressed and overcome.

When we conceptualised this department it was with the vision of a truly
comprehensive and differentiated postschool system conjoining the education
and training sectors. Allow me to emphasise this. We’re trying to build a
differentiated and flexible postschool system - not necessarily postmatric
- to actually cater also for those youths who may not want to go back to
school, but require opportunities. That is where we are trying to anchor
the paradigm of this new Department of Higher Education and Training.

This is not only about access to postschool opportunities for the youth,
but for adults as well. For this evolving system to meaningfully contribute
to the lives of individuals, to the economy and to broader society, we are
striving to ensure that all the work of our department is understood by
addressing key interrelated issues which we want to mainstream into our
postschool system. This includes addressing HIV and Aids, making sure that
we respond to the needs of the disabled; and addressing the class, race and
gender contradictions in South African society.

The primary goal of this administration is to improve access and success
for particularly poor and rural students by moving from a racially elite
system to a more inclusive system. Elements of this racial and class-
defined system include low participation rates; distortions in the shape,
size and distribution of access to education and training; and quality and
inefficiency challenges in the system and its subsystems in the
institutions.

It’s important to emphasise this, especially the issue of access and
success, because as things stand now statistics on hand show that 48% of
the students who are supported by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
actually drop out of university - they don’t finish, they don’t complete
their studies. So it is important that we do not just emphasise access, but
also emphasise success in the system.

While government has made great strides towards redressing the apartheid
legacy, many thousands of young people still bear the brunt of entrenched
policies and practices designed to preserve privilege. This obviously has
to change. While we worked to achieve a smoother registration period this
year, a range of problems were encountered, from financial and academic
exclusion to financial aid and accommodation shortages.
As a department we set up a task team to monitor the 2010 registration
process, and it was mandated to intervene in the event of upheavals on
campuses. Allow me also to say that for the beginning of the 2011 academic
year, I would really like to see hon members of the NCOP going out with us
and visiting universities and FET colleges during the registration period,
so that we can, for ourselves, have first-hand experience, especially of
what happens during this period.

Ahead of and during the registration period, we met with various student
formations and with Higher Education SA, which represents the vice-
chancellors, and agreed to work together to address immediate challenges,
as well as to seek long-term systemic interventions to ensure greater
access, particularly for financially needy students.

One of the things we agreed on was that no academically deserving but
financially needy student should be excluded from accessing a place in a
college or university, in particular. [Applause.] In order to facilitate
this as a department, we asked the NSFAS to advance registration fees for
those students who qualified for NSFAS assistance. This is because the
problem before was that a student qualified for NSFAS aid but had to pay
R3 000 to R5 000 upfront; and poor students cannot afford that. I wish to
say to members that any university that excludes a student who qualifies
for NSFAS assistance on the grounds that that student has not paid
registration fees will now actually be breaking the law in many respects.

Unfortunately, 23 universities had committed themselves to taking advantage
of this upfront payment, but only 12 institutions took up the offer for the
2010 academic year, to the value of R180 million, to cover registration
fees. Briefly, reports from the task team reveal some of the things that we
know.

In some instances there was a lack of communication, for example between
the stakeholders, students and university management. Sometimes there was
no co-ordination between the various units of a university, like the
finance section not co-ordinating with the faculties or financial aid
offices.

A case we dealt with at one stage was of a student who got five
distinctions in matric and was actually admitted to a university by the
faculty, but when he went to the financial aid office they said they were
no longer dealing with the first-years; that they had finished dealing with
them the day before, and that he was no longer going to get anything. This
student is an orphan, by the way. So the faculty office admits the student,
but the financial aid office excludes the student.

These are some of the problems, and there are a lot of them. I do not have
time to go through all of them, but the reason we are raising these things
and reporting to you is to call upon our institutions, colleges and
universities in particular to please treat applicants with care and
humanity.

I want to raise this very sharply with the chairpersons of the university
councils, particularly during the stressful opening registration period. I
want to say, “You must treat students with care”. Some of these
universities got irritated - we had a lot of calls, because we had a
dedicated phone line - when we approached them. It was as if we were
harassing them. We want to say to them that this Zuma administration is a
caring administration; no problem is small. [Applause.] If the President
has a hotline, why can’t each university create an office where complaints
can be lodged for the institution to deal with?

We are saying this because we personally went to many institutions. We also
wish to say that whilst we understand some of the frustrations faced by the
students, we strongly condemn the violence and destruction of property that
occurred during some of the protests, especially at the Tshwane University
of Technology, the Mangosuthu University of Technology and the University
of Zululand – and that’s two institutions in KwaZulu-Natal. We don’t want
to give that province a bad name.

We encourage engagement rather than violence, which serves no purpose. We
are determined to use this experience in order to address the larger
systemic issues. For example, the NSFAS review committee report is now with
us as a department, and we are studying it. It’s a very interesting report.
We will be releasing it for public comment next month, and we invite the
House to also provide a platform to respond to those recommendations which,
by the way, also deal with some of the matters that were being raised by
the hon Gunda. I’m very happy that you focused on higher education.

We are equally concerned about NSFAS unspent monies. But some of the
reasons for this are ironic, because they are owing to a lack of capacity
at some of our former black universities. Ironically, where the money is
needed most, there isn’t enough capacity to be able to administer it.
Another reason is the dropout factor: students who drop out midway and
whose allocations therefore have to be returned. So we are looking at all
those things and we are quite confident that we will be able to deal with
them.

Let me use this opportunity to address the issue of transformation. This
also affects the question of how NSFAS operates. For instance, most
universities give only about half of the amount that the students want. As
a result, we are sitting with just under R3 billion in student debt owing
to universities. This NSFAS report will assist in telling us what we can do
in order to address this in order to make sure that poor students do not
have these kinds of stresses and are able to concentrate on the one thing
that they go to university to do, which is to study and pass.
We are convening a higher education summit next month, which will be opened
by the President, bringing all the stakeholders together. We have never
done this before. This summit will bring together trade unions, management
and university councils in order for us to agree on what we mean by
transformation and what the challenges are and, it is hoped, emerge with a
charter. We want to feed all these matters into that process.

Related to this, by the way, is another challenge for our department.
``Postschool’’ must not only mean university. That is the problem we have
at the moment - that some children who don’t get matric exemption, which we
do want them to get, even commit suicide because they see no other way out.
That is why we are going to grow the FET college sector from the current
420 000 students to at least one million students, if not more, by 2014.
[Applause.] We will elaborate on these things when we table our strategic
plan for 2010 to 2015 and when we have our Budget Vote debate in this
Parliament.

Let me end by saying that one of the most important things, which was not
announced this week, is that we are forming the Quality Council for Trades
and Occupations to actually recognise and accredit workplace training,
which is normally not properly recognised.

I would also like to end my speech by saying that this House is very
important to me and to us, because you are actually closer to where these
colleges and universities are. There’s no place that is national, because
institutions are located in particular areas. So please be partners with
us. Thank you very much for inviting us. Siyabonga. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. Now, hon Plaatjie,
you are the most important person to come to respond to the debate of the
Minister. [Laughter.]

Mr S H PLAATJIE:  Chairperson, allow me to start this debate by borrowing
words from a famous actor, Michael J Fox, who said, and I quote:
   I am careful not to confuse excellence with perfection. Excellence I can
   reach for, perfection is God’s business.

At times we import models and ready-made curriculum solutions without much
considering our own situation. In pursuit of the solution to the problem of
the culture of learning and teaching in our schools, we need to start from
the basics. Beyond the technical support, which most of the speakers have
alluded to, for example school fees, bursaries, learner transport, etc, the
prerequisite for a culture of learning is the mastery of vocabulary. This
is the long and short of the matter.

Where there is a severe vocabulary deficit, the culture of learning is
seriously undermined. If the department wishes to enhance the culture of
learning and teaching in our schools, they must pay particular attention to
vocabulary. It is the foundation on which the educational superstructure
rests. Where there is no foundation, the building collapses. In business it
is a lack of capital that restrains the entrepreneurs. However, in
education it is lack of vocabulary that impedes and frustrates learners.

In most cases, the South African curriculum dictates that children need to
acquire a mother tongue and, thereafter, English for educational and
commercial reasons. Many children are defeated here. Learning one language
is hard enough. To master two languages poses a very steep challenge.
The culture of learning in South Africa generally flourishes in the little
pockets where families are better resourced and where children have access
to literature. It also flourishes where they are exposed to good spoken
language.

Cope is advocating an activist state. In an activist state, the state
actively supports the development of community leaders and cascades
bureaucracy so that all efforts to tackle the problems can be joined at the
local level.

The present government is relying only on the top-down mechanism and is,
therefore, failing. Cope would have removed VAT on books for children and
encouraged nonprofit companies to produce easily accessible literature for
children. If the problem of vocabulary is solved, the problem of enhancing
the culture of learning and teaching will be resolved.

Let me come to the problem of funding poor learners in higher education.
Every week this government is embarrassed because whatever is meant for the
poor is grabbed by those who are already wealthy within that circle that is
close to government.

Cope agrees that we should create support for the poor, but we insist that
total transparency should prevail. According to the Sowetan a few weeks
ago, in Mpumalanga an MEC, Pinky Phosa, pressured her head of department to
award her future son-in-law a bursary. Has the government acted on this?
Why are wealthy learners always prioritised?

In the activist state that Cope envisages, ordinary people will have a
great deal more power than at present. We are committed to a state where
people shall really govern and where people will be active in their own
cause.

In conclusion, I will address the question of teaching. Cope insists that
colleges of education be reopened; teachers’ certificates be upgraded at
least after two years; and every classroom must have immediate access to
the Internet so that they are able to facilitate teaching and learning.

We have lost 16 years. We owe it to Madiba to create a golden republic and
not to slide towards a banana republic. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms G CJIEKELLA (Northern Cape): Chairperson, hon Ministers, MEC Grant and
hon members, Hannah Arendt said that education is the point at which we
decide whether we love the world enough to assume responsibility for and by
the same token save it from ruin. Furthermore, through the education we
provide we can decide whether we love our children enough to prepare them
in advance for the task of renewing a common world, or whether through our
failure to provide them with educational opportunities we expel the
children from our world and leave them to their own devices by striking
from their hands their chances of making something new, something
unforeseen by us.

These words were said by a famous educationist, one Hannah Arendt; and they
could well have been said to all of us seated here today about the
situation with regard to higher education in the Northern Cape.

Education is an investment for the future. It is a delivery system that
transfers wisdom, culture, norms, values, expectations and the vision of
one generation to the next. It is through education that the development of
our human resource capital, which is so critical in our country and in our
province at this point, can be enhanced, thus making it possible for us to
fight and defeat poverty and adequately redress past inequalities and
discrimination.

It is against this background that we have embarked on a path to advocate
for the establishment of a university in the province. Amongst the main
aims of this drive is a desire to develop innovative and critical thinkers,
producers and users of knowledge with the capacity to shape the future of
our province, our country, the whole of Africa and the world at large.

The recent global recession made it blatantly clear to many of us that the
success of our country depends on the innovativeness of our people rather
than on the abundance of labour or its natural resources, as was evident
with our major banks in the country.

We need to continue to develop a critical mass of human resources
possessing skills that are required to compete favourably in the global
economy. That is the surest way of building a strong economy that is
growing and sustainable, and capable of creating the jobs we need to
drastically alter the socioeconomic conditions under which many of our
people continue to live.

To this end we have just identified as our starting point the establishment
of a university in the province. It is of particular significance that the
call for the establishment of such an institution should be in resonance
the 20th anniversary of the release of Nelson Mandela. It is in line with
the collective honour that we, together with the whole world, continue to
bestow on this iconic symbol of freedom and democracy that we shall
accordingly, together with the members of this House, intensify our efforts
to establish an institution of higher learning.

We are fully aware of the enormity of the challenge that still lies ahead
of us. But working together with our communities, the private sector
stakeholders and other formations, we remain convinced that the initiative
for which we plead for your support today will go a long way in ensuring
that higher education, in the form of a university education, becomes
accessible to more and more of our young people.

Hon members, we are of the firm belief that, upon completion, this
university must and will become a centre for educational excellence and
diligence. Out of this university must come engineers, geologists, artisans
and mine managers who will take full advantage of the emerging mining
potential in our province, the Northern Cape.

We shall overcome the obstacles relating to the provision of quality
education especially for the poor and the vulnerable. Again, out of this
university there should come agricultural economists and animal health
inspectors who will take full advantage of our province’s strong
agricultural sector.

This institution of higher learning must also help us in addressing the
scarce skills currently experienced in our province as well as the rest of
the country by producing doctors, nurses, pharmacists and other health
practitioners so that we are able to provide quality health care to all our
people.

It must also help us to produce educators, school managers, subject
specialists, and so forth, so that we do not suffer from a shortage of
teachers to teach our children. We also need social workers and other
community-based workers to help us address many of the social ills within
our communities; and accordingly this university must also produce these
critical skills.

The message we are communicating today in this House is that, upon
completion, this institution of higher learning must not and will not
become a white elephant. It must in a real sense seek to instil values and
skills that can only take our province and our country forward. If we
educate our nation, and in particular our young people, we would have won a
greater cause for our social and economic transformation agenda, and such a
university will offer us the best opportunity of doing so.

The pass rate that we achieved in our province in the 2009 Grade 12
examination is well documented, as have been the reasons for the decline.
It is certainly not my intention to proffer any excuses for the steep
decline in the results. However, the most compelling factor that influenced
learner performance was the inevitable cost-containment measures required
to offset projected and real over-expenditure as articulated in our earlier
statement.

It is certainly my intention to lead a turnaround strategy, central to
which is our refocus on taking educational decisions on basic school
functionality. We are determined to improve the management of our schools
as well as ensuring that the non-negotiables, as articulated by our
President, are strictly adhered to: Managers must manage, teachers must
teach, learners must learn, and parents must take a keener and deeper
interest in their children’s education.

Accordingly, our officials at district and provincial offices will ensure
that learner and teacher support materials are delivered to schools on
time. Furthermore, we will introduce and roll out our matriculation
intervention programme, as well as intensify our programme for learner
achievement, focusing on literacy and numeracy outcomes in Grades 3 and 6,
and strengthening the Foundations for Learning Campaign.

We will further ensure that our district offices are appropriately
capacitated to roll out support to schools. In line with our premier’s
directives in the state of the province address, we will continue on our
path to stabilise the administration of the department to ensure that
sufficient and effective support and administrative systems are in place to
guarantee learner performance. Learner performance, as was emphasised, must
and will be by design and not by default.

As one of the major medium- to long-term strategies of ensuring that the
province never again records such a poor statistic, we reviewed the
establishment of a university as one area that will further assist us to
ensure that every classroom has a competent and qualified teacher in all
the critical subject areas.

Such a university, through its development programmes, will enable our
educators to continue to sharpen and deepen their subject knowledge and
enable them to deliver a quality education to our learners. We remain
optimistic about the success of such a university because of the various
programmes that our National Institute for Higher Education has already put
in place. They will assist us to make a smooth transition to the
establishment of a university.

Hon members, your valued support for this cause will ensure that thousands
of young people are given hope for a brighter and a better tomorrow, born
out of investment in a good education. Your tangible support in this regard
will ensure that we avert the sad and gloomy picture of reality that is
currently being experienced by many of our young people, as portrayed in a
poem written by a young boy when he says:

   Reality is the long walk home
   And tired feet that hurt.
   It’s back to the grime
   And the dust and the dirt.
   It’s back to the home
   Where nobody cares.
   It’s back to where
   Hardship is common
   And knowledge is rare.

It is our collective belief that your efforts, voices and support will in
the not too distant future enable this boy to proclaim and say: “Thank you,
hon member, for always making me strive to be my best. It was you, hon
member, who made me always smile. I am now educated to think critically. I
am equal to my peers and can walk with dignity. I have learnt to be a
reasonable and active citizen for what I see and understand, and that has
changed me and made me a better citizen.” I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thanks for your speech, hon member. When I
ring these bells I do it with great respect for the MECs to indicate that
their time has expired!

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Mphathisihlalo, mhlonishwa Mabhoko, mhlonishwa
uNgqongqoshe okhona lapha weMfundo yamaBanga aPhansi, abahlonishwa
abangoNgqongqoshe beziFundazwe abaqhamuka eziFundazweni zezwe lethu
ezahlukene. Mhlonishwa Sihlalo kufuneka ngiyibongele le Ndlu ngoba  wakwazi
ukuba usihole kahle ukuze kukwazi ukuthi nathi kuleli lizwe lakithi sixoxe
ngezinto ezibalulekile ezisezintsha futhi kithina, ngenxa yalokho nje
ngithi kuwe, Mabhoko!

UMthethosisekelo wethu wezwe ukubala njengelungelo lokuqala ukuba wonke
umuntu abe nokukwazi ukuthi afunde ezikoleni zezwe lethu. Yize-ke noma
umuntu ehlezi ebhentshini labaphikisayo, kodwa kunezinto eziyiqiniso ongeke
waziphikisa njengokuthi nje kukhulu okuzanywayo ukuba kwenziwe kuleli lizwe
kodwa kufuneka sibambisane sonke njengabantu abakhethiwe kuleli lizwe ukuba
sime ndawonye sisebenze sifuqe lonke lolu donga olwakhiwa wubandlululo
kuleli lizwe lakithi,ukuze siqede isifo sokungazi. Njengomuntu omele elinye
lamaqembu akuleli lizwe, abantu abamnyama, ngazi kahle kamhlophe ukuthi
imfundo yabantu abamnyama yayisibulala kangakanani ukuze singabi nalo
ulwazi.Umuntu ofundile lapha eNyuvesi yakwaZulu Ongoye -kade esho
umhlonishwa ukuthi badume ngokuba uma benza udlame babulale yonke into -
wayephuma neZiqu engazi nokuthi angenzani ethembele ukuthi kufuneka ahambe
ayofuna umsebenzi, kanti kufuneka ukuthi uma uphuma esikhungweni semfundo
ephakeme, ukwazi ukuzisiza wena uqobo, ungathembele ekutheni uyosizwa
uhulumeni kuphela.

Kufanele sibonge ukuthi uhulumeni wethu uzamile ngoba bheka nje,
uNgqongqoshe wethu kuleli sonto eledlule, ngoLwesithathu wabele lo Mnyango
wethu wezeMfundo izigidigidi ezingama–R165 kulo nyaka wezimali ukuze ukwazi
ukusiza abantu abakithi.
Sengishesha nje ngoba isikhathi asisekho, kunezikole zasemakhaya la
engizalwa khona, emakhaya ‘ezilalini’ ngesiXhosa, angazi–ke ngezinye
izilimi lapho abantu bakhona besahlupheke kakhulu ngoba asinayo ngisho
imitapoyolwazi ezikoleni zethu. Yize noma sekukhona izikole lapho
sekufundiswa izinto ezinjengokushisela nokunye kodwa asikwazi ukuthi sibe
semazingeni aphezulu njengezinye izikole ngenxa yokuswela ulwazi.

Okunye yizinkalo ezihanjwa yizingane zethu bakithi; izingane zethu zize
zihambe zilala yonke imigwaqo le ngoba zihamba amakhilomitha angaphezu
kwayishumi nantathu ngezinyawo ziya ezikoleni. Kuyobangcono ukuba
Ngqongqoshe izifundazwe lezi ukwazi uzelusalusa ngoba azizimele ukuze wazi
ukuthi zenzani ukusiza ukuthi izikole zibe seduze kwabantu bakithi

Kuleli lizwe lethu kufuneka futhi siwabhekisise amanyuvesi ethu lawa,
sibheke nabahlohli bakhona nokuthi yini balahlele laphaya ekudeni izingane
zethu uma zizama ukungena emanyuvesi. Phela uma zifika nezifundo zoLwazi
Lwempilo zithathwa njengento engekho nje, noma ngabe isitifiketi sengane
siyayivumela ukuba ingene enyuvesi kodwa uma kubalwa amaphuzu okungena
enyuvesi lawa Ulwazi Lwempilo akabalwa nhlobo. Yizo zonke Ngqongqoshe
izinto okufanele nizibheke ukuze sikwazi ukuthi sigqugquzele konke lokho
esikumele thina njengabantu abamnyama baleli lizwe ukuze izwe lethu liye
phambili.

Mhlonishwa Mabhoko,ngibonga kakhulu ukuba umuntu acoshe leli thuba ngoba
uma ngizoma lapha ngithi ngizophikisa, ngabe ngenza ihlazo nje ezweni ngoba
ihlazo akufuneki lenziwe ezweni.[Ihlombe.](Translation of isiZulu speech
follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Mabhoko, hon Minister of Basic
Education present here today, hon Ministers from the different provinces of
our country; hon Chair, I must commend you on behalf of this House because
you managed to lead us well, which enabled us to discuss the important
matters of our country, which are still new to us. That is why I salute you
by saying, Mabhoko!

Our country’s Constitution states that access to education is a fundamental
right. There are facts that opposition parties cannot deny with regard to
what has been achieved in this country. But we have to work together as the
elected so that we can stand together and eradicate the ravine that was
caused by apartheid, and we must also eliminate ignorance. As a
representative of one of this country’s parties that represent black
people, I know very well how Bantu education destroyed us and that we lack
knowledge. Graduates from the University of Zululand - Ongoye, as the
Minister mentioned - are well known for inciting violence and once they
start they destroy everything and would graduate without the necessary
skills, and his or her only hope would be to find employment. If you leave
an institution of higher education you are supposed to be self-reliant and
should not rely on the government to assist you.
We must be grateful that our government has tried because our Minister
allocated an amount of R165 billion to the Department of Education in this
year’s Budget Speech last Wednesday.

I’ll be quick now because my time is running out. There are schools where I
was born in the rural areas called ”ezilalini” in isiXhosa - I don’t know
what they are called in other languages - where people are  suffering
immensely because we do not even have libraries in our schools. Even though
there are schools where things like welding and other courses are offered,
we are unable to reach the higher standard like other schools because of
the lack of knowledge.

The distance our children have to walk is another issue. Our children end
up sleeping along the way because they have to walk more than 13 kilometres
to school. It would be better, Minister, if you could monitor these
provinces, because they are not independent, so that you know what they are
doing in order to assist with having schools nearer to our people.

Our country’s universities also need to be scrutinised. Check their
assessors and why they do not consider our children when they apply for
admission to these universities. Subjects like life orientation are not
considered, even if the child’s certificate shows a university entrance.
Life orientation points are not considered at all when they calculate
entrance points. Minister, these are all issues that need to be addressed.
And we should encourage all those whom we are representing as black people
of this country in order for them to advance.

Hon Mabhoko, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. If I could
stand here to oppose, I would be a disgrace to this country because we do
not need that in this country. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr Mahlangu, the
Deputy Chair in her absence, the Chief Whip, Members of Parliament present,
the two MECs who are here – thank you very much, colleagues – our guests,
and ladies and gentlemen, now that the Chairperson has cut down my time
from 20, as initially indicated, to 15 minutes, let me start off by
responding to some of the comments made by colleagues so that if I run out
of time, the speech will be for circulation.

I want to start off by expressing appreciation for the contributions that
have been made by members with regard to basic education, which does
confirm our belief that the success of the sector of education will start
where it begins, which is with basic education.

We are not oblivious to the challenges that are confronting us, but are
grateful that all of us appreciate that basic education remains very basic
to our success. Therefore, the partnership that we can get here with
members, provinces and colleagues will go a long way.

I want to respond to a few things that have been raised by colleagues
without necessarily debating them. I want to emphasise that we should not
mislead ourselves and say that the whole system is in a crisis. That is why
we keep on misleading people. It’s the education of the African child that
is in crisis. We have to note that so that our attention and support are
focused on that.

The education of children in other communities still remains quite good.
That is what is holding the system together. We appreciate that. However,
we should not create an impression that there is a huge crisis, with
everybody crying wolf, when there is no wolf. The wolf is in African
schools, and that is where we are supposed to be focusing our energies.
That is where the crisis is.

I will also be failing in my task if I fail to appreciate premiers. I think
we are privileged as a sector because of all the things that premiers do in
provinces. I can assure you that they chose the best that was there in
their parties.

We have a very good team of MECs, very dedicated and hardworking MECs, and
all of them rise above politics. That makes me very hopeful that,
nationally, whether the DA or the ANC is in power, we will indeed overcome
because we have a team of very strong MECs in all the provinces, who are
doing their best to get the system going. For that, I must really say to
the NCOP, which is in a way focusing on the provinces, that we have a very
strong team nationally. All our MECs have been able to rise above
provincial differences. All MECs are aware of the fact that we are saying
education is every child’s right, and every child has to have access to
quality education.

We can say with pride that most provinces have been submitting their
turnaround strategies. It’s going to be useful at our next camp to look at
what lessons we learnt from one another and how we can strengthen the
sector and move out from there. My appeal, and excitement, when I was
invited to come here, was to interact with the members of the NCOP on how
we can make education a societal issue, mobilise everybody across political
divides on the issue, and also look at the things that we should be doing.

Amongst the things that I want to raise - which are also ``wolves’’ that
people create - is that the reasons for underperforming are quite
different. I want to advise members that when they pay a visit to schools
which are dysfunctional, I can tell you the reasons they are going to give
you. You can even write the report before you go in - I’m responding to
you, Comrade Chair - it is poverty, unemployment, crime, teenage pregnancy,
etc. They are all going to tell you the same story. It’s going to be about
everything else but them. If you go to a highly functional school, they
won’t even tell you about how they have fought criminals, fed children or
stopped pregnancies; they will tell you that it’s teamwork, dedication,
hard work, etc. That is what they will all tell you.
What has happened during the visits that we’ve been undertaking with
colleagues is that we went into the real substance, which told us what the
problems were. Don’t even ask them what the problems are; go and find out
where they are. Go to the time books and see if those very teachers have
been on time and on task all the time. Teachers don’t attend school. That
is what we’ve been saying quite regularly.

We want to mobilise colleagues and say that as you make education a
societal matter, go to the time books and see which teachers have been
coming to work, which ones have been leaving on time and which ones have
been staying. Go to the children’s books. Don’t ask questions; go to the
children’s books and see if they have been writing. Don’t use any anecdotal
stories because they won’t help you. They will tell you stories which are
not useful. Your school visits won’t be useful unless you have a structured
approach on how you are going to get the results.

As I get to the speech, I will also highlight that, as a department, we are
positioning ourselves to make sure that when we say that education must be
a societal issue, with our provincial structures, we are able to interact
with communities in ensuring that as we mobilise people we are able to work
together in making sure that education is a societal issue.

Check books and talk to learners; they are the ones who know what is
happening in the classrooms. There is no way even the principal can know
which teachers speak on their cellphone, which teachers don’t come to the
class, or which teachers talk about their children. It’s only the learners
who can tell you. So don’t even ask them; go to the learners, they will
tell you the story. You will know what the truth is.

I’m also saying to our people that poverty is being used as an excuse. I
keep on saying that we should intercept poverty. It’s been there; it will
be here forever. That is what they are going to say to us. The main focus
of education is teaching and learning. That is what the whole thing is
about. My colleagues from the provinces will tell you that the only thing
the top school in the country, which is in the Western Cape, and an African
school in Limpopo, which is in the top 10 category, share between them is
not good infrastructure, it’s not teachers - Sadtu will tell you that we
have been giving them “microwave” training - what is common between them is
discipline and focus on the task.

With poor infrastructure and poor communities, what is common between the
top schools in the Western Cape and in Limpopo, in the deep rural areas, is
not infrastructure; not poverty. It’s discipline and being on task and on
time all the way. This means that that is what works. As people move into
making education a societal matter, we also want them to assist us in
ensuring that our teachers are on time and on task all the time, as the
President has been calling for.

We will indeed address infrastructure. I will be talking to that quite
shortly. But that is not what schools that succeed tell us has been their
success story. It’s not the amount of infrastructure. Some of the schools
where we have put the top infrastructure- high-level infrastructure, which
hon Mashamba was talking about- don’t necessarily give us results. This
means that it is not where we have to go and look for results. We have to
go and look for results on what works.

Having said that, let me quickly get into what I had prepared for the
debate and possibly also reflect on what members have said so that members
should not say that I have not reflected on what they have said. I have
taken note. Some of it is good counsel. I don’t think I need to respond to
that, but it is just something we need to take into consideration as we
plan. If I don’t respond, it’s not because it’s not important; we have
taken notes and we will factor it into our planning.

The decline in our 2009 matric results from 62% in 2008 to 60% in 2009,
which really got me into hot water, necessitates that we look into new
strategies at all levels in the system to address the old issue of how we
can enhance the culture of learning and teaching in our schools and improve
outcomes. That’s why most of our MECs are engaging in the things they will
do differently to get different outcomes. Again I am proud that most of our
MECs have been engaging with what is to be done differently to get
different outcomes.

The strides we have made by dismantling the apartheid legacy are undermined
by the fact that we are not getting the results that we are looking for. We
are proud that we have turned around the massive repetition problem in the
early 1990s in the early grades. In Grade 1, overall enrolment has dropped
from 165% to 114%.

We have lots of repetition in the system - kids just failing between
grades, and because they are not measured at Grade 12, people are not aware
that we have a lot of wastage in the system. We are improving that quite
drastically. The number of children who continue their schooling into the
last three years of high school has increased remarkably. Again, Chair,
this goes back to your point on what happened to the one million kids who
were missing between Grades R and 12. Some of them go to further education
and training, FET, colleges; they do not necessarily go to matric. It is
how the system works. If you calculate from Grade 1 to Grade 12, it won’t
add up to 1:1 because some of them divert, thereby becoming 1:0,5 in the
middle. We are also quite concerned about the fact that some of them do
indeed drop out.

We are proud that between 1970 and now we have improved the enrolment or
retention rates from 30% to 90%. That is why in the township schools we
find that we have a crisis with high schools. This is because the planning
was for three primary schools to one high school. We knew that only one
third was going to reach high school. It’s only now that we are having lots
of blockages, hence the huge infrastructure backlog, because the retention
and number of kids going up to matric have increased almost threefold.
Whereas only one third went up to matric, two thirds now go up to matric;
but yes, we are worried about the third that does not reach matric.

Even though we score badly - we also get lambasted for things that we tell
the world - it’s we who presented ourselves for the international tests so
we could benchmark ourselves. Indeed, when the results came back, we were
not happy at all. The picture, as Nick Taylor has just recently written, is
nuanced. We have not gone back, but we have not improved either.

Again, people just want to glorify the old apartheid days. What was working
under apartheid is still working. White education was working. Black
education did not work under apartheid. We have not been able to make
drastic moves, and that we admit. But we should not create a sense that we
have reversed. We have not, but we are not making the improvements that we
want.

Again, others will cry wolf with us that there is a crisis when they know
things are going very well in their education system. Education in white
communities is going very well. Fifteen years down the line, life for white
people is still hunky-dory and very good. We are happy about that, but the
crisis is, as I have said, in black education. Therefore, that is what we
need to address. The point I’m trying to make is that we have not reversed,
but we have not improved either.

Quality continues to be our biggest challenge. That has been raised by
different members. I want to quickly run through the things that we are
trying to do, together with our provinces, in addressing the things that we
want to do differently to achieve different results. We admit that the
results we are getting are not the results that we are looking for. We want
more, hence we are prepared to work harder, faster and smarter. We
therefore will run through the things that we are doing in working harder,
faster and smarter.

One of the main things that we are working on with provinces is what we
call the Basic Education Action Plan. With regard to this plan, which we
are working on with provinces, we will have to monitor it with you as
Parliament and support provinces in the implementation of the targets.

The first target involves the Rapid Assessment and Remediation Initiative.
We are looking at schools that performed below 20%. The Western Cape,
Gauteng and some other provinces don’t have that major problem; it is in
some of our bigger rural provinces. In the Western Cape, there was only one
school; in Gauteng, there was also one school below 20%. In other
provinces, for instance in KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo and the Eastern Cape, we
have more than 500 schools which performed below 20%. Through this
programme, we are looking at the Rapid Assessment and Remediation
Initiative through which we can intervene in those schools, see what the
problems are and, this time, decisively act on those problems and correct
the situation.

We are looking at ways of improving our national senior certificate, NSC.
One of the causes, as we have already highlighted, is around the grouping
and subject choices that our children make. Some of the kids, because we
emphasise maths and science, even though they want to do law, also want to
do maths. They are not sure what they are doing physical science for. This
is to help our children make the correct choices and combinations which are
relevant to their future.

We also want to improve the teaching in those subjects, because we still
have lots of problems in the teaching of maths, science, accounting and
English. We are looking at all those interventions which we have to make
with regard to improving our national senior certificate.

We have already spoken a lot about curriculum implementation support. You
will recall that every other person who had an interest in education raised
concerns about the curriculum. We can say with pride that we have
identified what the problems are. We are addressing them and have a clear
programme in addressing all the issues or challenges around the curriculum.


Again, we are looking at teacher development support. Anybody who is in
education will tell you that the system stands and falls on teachers. You
can have everything else, but if your teachers cannot perform, you have a
problem. They are your tools of labour. If you have a taxi, but your driver
doesn’t drive, you are out of business. Teachers remain the core and the
most important factor in our education system. We are working on progress
and need to look at teachers.

There are major infrastructure issues which we have inherited. I have just
highlighted some of the challenges around our infrastructure. As much as we
had a backlog of poor infrastructure that we inherited from apartheid and
homeland governments, we also had to create new infrastructure to cope with
overexpansion. The education system has multiplied threefold since we took
over. That two thirds that used to drop out under apartheid, or those many
kids who were not able to go to school because they had to pay fees, are
now able to go to school. Our infrastructure has not been able to cope with
the expansion that we have. As a result, we have not been able to correct
or remedy the infrastructure that we inherited from apartheid.

We have, again, a massive programme that we are beginning to co-ordinate
nationally to assist provinces to deliver the infrastructure that we have.
We are excited that the Presidency and Treasury have committed to using the
capacity that was used to build the stadia to intervene in schools. As soon
as the stadia programme is cleared, we are going to use the same capacity
to intervene in schools. Through capacity, we are confident that we will
begin to address some of our major infrastructural backlogs that for years
we have been unable to deal with.

We have also spoken about the adult literacy programme, and colleagues have
also raised it. We have a very successful programme, which we call “Kha Ri
Gude”, which is meant to break the back of illiteracy amongst adults. It’s
going very well. We will give you a report next time.

The other matter that I want to raise is around the National Education
Evaluation and Development Unit, Needu. It has also been spoken about quite
a lot vis-à-vis the inspectorate. I thought I should speak to you about
what Needu is and what it is not. We will shortly operationalise Needu,
which will start off immediately with the Rapid Assessment and Remediation
Initiative to assess where the problems are and create and develop measures
to intervene in those schools. There have been lots of discussions about
what Needu will and will not do.

Needu is a mandate that we received as the ruling party in Polokwane to
establish a National Education Evaluation and Development Unit for the
purposes of monitoring, evaluation and support. It will be a professional
facility dedicated to doing precisely that. It will evaluate everybody. So,
inspection will fall under it. Inspection is not the be-all and end-all.
It’s going to evaluate anything in the system from the national department
to the provincial departments, educators and the whole system in its
entirety.

It has an element of development in that where it picks up problems, it
will help us design development initiatives. If our problem, when we do an
inspection, is about the capacity of our teachers, we will know what to do
with it. If it’s about the capacity of our officials, what do we do with
it? That’s what Needu is going to be doing. We are already making it
operational.

Again, we’ll be very happy to come and raise that with you when we have
more time so that we don’t take much of your time now. Needu’s role will be
to assess and develop strategies for the improvement of the quality of
educational outcomes and support schools to achieve these.

We are proud to say that we have built up the national Department of Basic
Education, but systems and structures of that single department do not
speak to the objectives that we want to achieve. To ensure that the
national department is able to fulfil its mandate in line with the mandate
of Basic Education, it has become imperative to strengthen departmental
capacity at national, provincial and district levels. We are working with
our provinces to ensure that they are positioned to support schools, as
much as we are working hard to position ourselves to support provinces.

We have restructured the national department to enable it to meet its core
constitutional mandate of setting national policy and monitoring it, and
evaluating all provinces and the entire basic education system. That is our
mandate; it’s in the Constitution, and we do it nationally. We set up
policies; we monitor everybody; we evaluate everybody.

Again, as I said, we are quite privileged that from where I stand we have
major co-operation with our provinces. So that it should not be a major
issue as to how we co-ordinate the system to make it work well. We are
working with provinces to ensure that they too are properly positioned and
structured to implement national policies aimed at supporting schools.

What we have found out is that our provinces, all of them, have structured
themselves in different ways. Some have got themselves into a corner in the
way they have structured themselves. They are not able to do the task that
they are supposed to be doing. You find that within the same province
different regions have different structures, capacities or resourcing
strategies. We are working with provinces to ensure that we have the best
structure nationally to ensure that we are indeed able to respond.

Chairperson, I do not want to take advantage of the fact that you gave me
more time. Let me move to the last point, which is about the 2010 World Cup
and our ``schools cup’’ adventure.

We are doing the countdown and, again, making 2010 exciting for schools. We
are inviting you to join us in our 2010 Football World Cup School Adventure
where all provinces are involved. Already, each province has symbolically
adopted some of the 2010 Fifa World Cup participating nations. Between now
and May 2010, I hope that learners and teachers in the whole school
community will have learnt about the adopted countries and their people.

My 2010 School Adventure will culminate in an exciting football competition
in May 2010, in which teams of learners from each province will play one
another in the South African Schools Football World Cup. We will precede or
maybe even pre-empt the winning country, because each province is going to
be representing one of the competing countries. Perhaps the winning
province will be giving the lucky country the luck to win!

I want to assure you that the school year has not been shortened in 2010,
which was the concern of most people. We have compensated for the time that
we will lose by increasing the numbers within the terms that are there. We
have not lost much time regarding 2010, which has been the concern for most
communities.

In closing, in line with the President’s call for education to be made a
societal matter, we are appealing to political parties and individual
politicians in the House to go out there and help us to mobilise
constituencies to make education a societal matter.

I am saying to all opposition parties that we can fight about everything
else, but let us not fight about this matter. Let’s just ensure that every
child has the right to education. Education is the human right of every
child. We can make our politics on everything else but not on this issue,
by protecting education as a national asset and at least as one thing that
unites us as South Africans. We are appealing for education to be the one
thing that unites us, all of us.

For our part, we are supporting communities through the social mobilisation
branch of our department. We are strengthening our school governing bodies,
SGBs, and learner representative councils, LRCs, and creating a forum of
nongovernmental organisations, NGOs, academics and business to interact
with us and give the support that they want to give in provinces in a co-
ordinated manner.

We are systematically working to make education a societal matter, and we
trust that you will play your part in this momentous task of turning the
system around and making us a nation proud of our education achievements,
because at the end of the day we are all South Africans.

We can differ on everything else. We are appealing, again, for this to be a
unifying factor. We are committed, as a department, to playing the game.
Again, I am appealing to communities, and especially to activists, comrades
and politicians who are here to say that this is a South African one and
not a political one. Let’s work together on it. I thank you, Chair.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Minister, you will agree with me that it
wasn’t a waste of time that I used my discretion to give the Minister a
little more time because this is the information that we wanted, and that’s
the reason why I called for this debate. We want to thank you, Minister,
for the time you shared with us. That’s exactly what we wanted to hear. Now
we know what to do when we go back to our constituencies.

Ngiyaqolisa baba uMasuku ekubekezeleni kwakho noMashamaite. Seningavala-ke
niphendule uNgqongqotjhe ngombana niqakatheke khulu. [Ihleko.] [Iwahlo.]
[My apologies to Mr Masuku for having to be patient, together with Mr
Mashamaite. You can now close and respond to the Minister because you are
very special. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Mr M MASUKU (Mpumalanga): Chairperson, hon Minister of Basic Education,
Minister of Higher Education and Training in absentia and the members who
are my colleagues, I was worried that ...

... uma ubiza uNdabezitha bese ubiza uNgqongqoshe bonke bangoNgqongqoshe.
[... if you call him Ndabezitha [your majesty], and then you call a
Minister, they are all in charge.]

My work was going to be very difficult, but they assisted me in a number of
areas that I was worrying about. When I grew up, I was taught that,
Ndabezitha, in this land where we are, people were living in it somewhere
in 1652. They were just told that they had been discovered, and their land
had been discovered. I was worrying, this year, when I heard that a
particular province had discovered the culture of learning.

I think the Minister has helped us with this one by saying to us that all
these things are ours. I was worrying because I was wondering and asking
myself: If we say the culture of education has been discovered now, what
happened in 1955 when we said the doors of education and culture would be
opened? I was asking myself if that wasn’t about the culture that we should
be talking about? I was very worried when we were talking about recent
discoveries, but you have covered us, Minister.

One of the things that you have also covered on that discovery is that the
Freedom Charter that spoke about education in 1955 also said that when our
children are educated - we actually have to educate them to respect our
country and our people, and also ensure that they are capacitated to
participate with other people of the world – they must showcase their
talent to the world, and that sporting event, which the Department of
Education has started, is spot-on.

Minister, I am a product of a tree because my first class was under a
marula tree, and the second class that I went through was in a church, and
the third one was under another marula tree, and the fourth one was under
an acacia tree. Therefore, I understand what you mean when you talk about
unsafe structures.

It is important that when we deal with this issue of education, as you have
said, the limitation on our politicking about it becomes very important
because at some point when I was attending, I was staying in a forestry
village. I used to walk to a high school that was on the other side of the
town. I used to find my fellow scholars standing by the road to be taken by
a school bus. The school bus was actually taking them to a school that was
nearer than my school. That school was actually the best when you looked at
it. The issues that you have covered, Minister, clarify that we are dealing
with history and a particular section of our society that has suffered.
That is why, when we deal with this matter, I ask myself if that wasn’t an
ideological focal factor that was putting us there.

Therefore, we don’t need an ideology to reverse that. Is the Constitution
not addressing that matter to allow us not to fight against these
ideologies that are actually competing in that particular situation? Then I
asked myself if I still have to bring in my ideology. Yes, do I still have
to throw in my ideology in terms of my thinking when I was saying the doors
of education must be opened? What happened to Ermelo, when it was said that
in my province other children should not be taught in other languages? Then
I was asking myself if it is an ideology or not. Is it not something that
we have to counter?

I want to say that in Mpumalanga we also draw our mandate from what the
President and the Minister have said about the framework that we have
actually set. What is good about it is that many colleagues were asking me
why my human settlement is here. In Mpumalanga, education is the business
of every one of us. Whatever we do, we actually said to ourselves that we
are going to focus on that, and we are going to place education and skills
and development at the centre of this government, as the President has
said. We have decided that, Minister.

We know that the result for this year rejects us and that all these things
we are talking about here are for us to lead you because we are right at
the lower rank of the outcomes. We have said to ourselves that we are going
to set bold steps in relation to dealing with institutions so that the
improvement at the national level must be better.

We have decided that from that 46% result that we achieved this year, we
are going to set ourselves a bold plan that between now and 2014 we are
going to take steps in the areas that we have identified, with the
President, in Grades 3, 6, 8, 9 and 12, and we are going to have external
examinations and ensure that we get a 60% increase, including in Grade 12,
by 2014.

We have sponsored only 6 552 children in schools. We felt that when we talk
about this 60% increase, we want to increase those entries from 13 000 to
112 000 by the year 2014.

Somebody will ask us what it is that we are going to do, and what it is
that we have identified that we have to do differently between now and
then. Following what the Minister said and indeed reflecting exactly the
challenges on the ground, we said to ourselves that we are going to take
specific areas that we think are critical, such as the issue of the number
of contacts between the learner and the teacher, which we are going to try
to increase.

The MEC for education has been up and down every time interacting with
teachers’ organisations, learners, parents and sometimes with Members of
Parliament till now to assist in that situation so that the culture of
learning and education at school can improve.

In that way, one of the things that actually came out is that they had
identified the collective contract in terms of what it is that must be
done. They have committed indeed to be in class on time and learning. We
have also committed, on the other side, that we are going to ensure that
the learner support materials are present all the time and by December of
every year. We have started with this in this financial year.

The other area of work that we have identified is that of infrastructure
and the rural community. We have discovered that some of the areas that
performed badly actually do not have proper infrastructure. They have
unsafe structures and mud schools. We have a premier who committed himself
last week to ensuring that this year we must clear those off. At the same
time, he has also noted that in farm schools children are spending time
going up and down and sometimes the scholar transport doesn’t assist them
with transportation.

We have decided that we are going to build hostels for those farm schools.
Those hostels must be able to assist the children in different ways. In
farm schools, the issue is not only about travelling, but it is also about
the conditions on farms. There are children that we realised are learning
without lights. They are actually using fire to study. You can imagine what
is going to happen. So, those are the matters we said we had to deal with.

The last issue is that the premier has also made a commitment that we
should have extra classes for all those schools that got less than 20%.
While we have continuous assessment, we must have the winter schools and
extra classes that are supposed to be able to assist us to deal with that.

If I had time, I would have talked about how one could deal with the issue
of scholar transport and early childhood development, ECD, issues as part
of the support of this particular programme. But all these are actually
done to support what we have already started, Minister.

Lastly, I would like to say that all these things we have talked about are
what we do because this is the business of all of us. Actually, we have to
participate in it, and that is exactly what activism is all about, namely
the participation of all those who are supposed to be involved. It is not
any other thing; it is not an ideology to be shouted; it is not a decree
that you give. Activism is something that you do in practice repeatedly
until the results are better. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mna T A MASHAMAITE: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, mohlomphegi Tona, re be re
theeleditše Maloko a Palamente a bolela ka ga ditaba tša thuto go tloga ka
iri ya bobedi - gore na thuto e bohlokwa bjang. Ke nnete thuto e bohlokwa.
Go na le polelo ya Sepedi yeo e rego “setšhaba seo se sa rutegago ke seo se
timetšego”. Ka fao, setšhaba se se tlo timela. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraph follows.)

[Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, we have been listening
from two o’clock to Members of Parliament debating education matters -
about the importance of education. It is a fact that education is
important. Without education, a nation is lost.]

I just want to raise a few points here because I feel that the speakers who
spoke before me did not touch on them. The point I want to raise is in
relation to the dress code of learners at school. The department must
introduce a dress code for learners in the same phase across the country.
This will go a long way towards alleviating the economic burden on parents
and guardians of having to buy new school uniforms every time a child is
transferred to a new school.

Displaying a national symbol in the form of an education emblem of the
nation - national heroes and martyrs such as Chris Hani - would build
national pride and identity among learners and thus promote common values
and inspiration among the diverse learner population.

Education is a means of promoting good citizenship as well as preparing our
people for the needs of a modern economy and a democratic society. By
building on achievements in education, the ANC government is determined to
ensure the progressive realisation of universal schooling, improve the
quality of education and eliminate disparities.

There is a need to intensify the mobilisation of adults who cannot read or
write to join the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign. In the same breath,
the ANC government will pay attention to improving the quality of Grade R
and early childhood development to ensure that young children are
adequately prepared for schooling. In this instance ...

... moswana o boletše a re tloga-tloga e tloga kgale, modiši wa kgomo o
tšwa nayo šakeng, goba thupa e kobja e sa le boleta. [... young children
need to be prepared at an earlier stage for schooling.]

The ANC continues to call for non-negotiables in education - that teachers
should be on time, in class and teach for seven hours a day. Pupils should
be involved in affairs that affect them. In this regard, the building of a
movement for quality education involving learners, teachers and parents
will gather momentum and zest in its strategic aim to ensure universal
access to quality public education.

In his state of the nation address, the President said that government must
work faster, harder and smarter. Let us heed the call as the people of
South Africa and do it. We can do it; it can be done.

This month, as we celebrate 20 years since the release of Mr Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela from prison, we celebrate the revolutionary and selfless
struggle, which gave rise to an open and democratic society free from the
legacy of institutionalised racism and discrimination.

In conclusion, making education one of the five priorities over the next
five years reaffirms the commitment of the ANC to the improvement of the
quality of education and access thereto. The 2009 curriculum review
addresses the content and impact of education on young people in the main
and their progression to higher education and preparation for entry into
the labour market. The productive sector has been mobilised to appreciate
the importance of further education and training colleges in meeting the
skills and employment creation needs of the country.

Ga re a swanela go ba bo popotela ye e sa kwego gomme ya feletša e wetše
leretheng la mohwelere. Ke a leboga, mohlomphegi Modulasetulo. [Legofsi.]
[We do not have to be stubborn because that may lead us into trouble. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much, hon Mashamaite. I
must say that this is quite historic. If you don’t record what happened
here today, you will never be able to do it again. You closed a debate in
which both Ministers present participated in the debate before you. Thank
you very much, hon Mashamaite, for that.

Debate concluded.

         INCREASE IN DROWNINGS IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B P MABE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes the alarming increase in children who die in home and public
         swimming pools across the country and that drowning has reportedly
         moved to fourth on the list of causes of unnatural death amongst
         children;


      2) further notes that it is estimated that last year alone more than
         400 people drowned in South Africa, and many of them were children;


      3) also notes that for every child who drowns five are left with
         permanent brain damage and trauma; and

      4) calls on the various municipalities and the Department of Co-
         operative Governance and Traditional Affairs to urgently consider
         initiating measures that will compel swimming pool owners across
         the country to reregister their swimming pools and ensure that they
         are secured at all times and that those who own swimming pools
         undergo the necessary training to deal with drowning emergencies.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is there any objection to the motion?
Do you object? In the light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

            ESKOM PRICE HIKES LEAD TO FURTHER ECONOMIC DIFFICULTY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R A LEES: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: regarding the above motion,
the intentions are good, but the methods were unacceptable.

Chairperson, I hereby move the following motion without notice:

   That the Council –
      1) notes that –


          a) the South African economy is in the worst recession since the
             1920s;


          b) this economic recession has resulted in nearly a million
             people losing their jobs;


          c) the majority of the people of South Africa are faced with
             severe financial challenges;


          d) the South African government failed in its duty to ensure that
             the electricity needs for the country were adequately provided
             for and prevented Eskom from building new power generators,
             despite warnings since 1998 that such generation capacity
             would be required;

          e) the South African government failed to deal with the
             maladministration within Eskom;

          f) the electricity tariff was increased by a very high 27,5% in
             2008 and 31,3% only 8 months ago;

          g) the excessively high electricity tariff increases of 24,8% for
             2010-11, 25,8% for 2011-12 and 25,9% for 2012-13 that were
             approved by Nersa on 24 February 2010 will severely aggravate
             the current extremely poor economic climate.

[Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon member, your time has expired. Your
motion will now become a notice of motion and will be printed in full in
the next Order Paper. Hon Mokgoro, you may proceed. Oh, there is a point of
order.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, can I just get clarity from the Chair on the time limit
for a motion without notice?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): It is one and a half minutes.

Mr T HARRIS: Thank you.

                20TH ANNIVERSARY OF RELEASE OF NELSON MANDELA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G G MOKGORO: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

      1) notes that 11 February 2010 marked the 20th anniversary of former
         President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela’s release after 27 and a half
         years in prison;


      2) further notes that former President Mandela worked with great
         leaders of the African National Congress such as Chief Albert
         Luthuli, Oliver Reginald Tambo, Walter Sisulu, Ahmed Kathrada,
         Raymond Mhlaba, Chris Sithembisile Hani, Lilian Masediba Ngoyi,
         Winnie Nomzamo Mandela and Florence Matomela in fighting for the
         liberation of the people of South Africa and that his name and
         stature continue to be a living symbol of peace and humility, as he
         fights for the rights of the marginalised, discriminated and poor
         across the globe; and


      3) takes this opportunity to pay tribute to this great stalwart and
         son of Africa for dedicating himself and the great years of his
         life to the struggle and liberation of the people of South Africa.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

            APPRECIATION FOR EVENING STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, I move without notice:
   That the Council –

      1) joins the masses of people of South Africa in thanking President
         Jacob Zuma for calling the Joint Sitting of Parliament in the
         evening on 11 February 2010 to deliver his State of the Nation
         address and his firmness in the government’s commitment to advance
         the lives of the poor;


      2) acknowledges that the timing of the President’s address was an
         important gesture to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the release
         of our people’s icon and Isithwalandwe, former President Nelson
         Rolihlahla Mandela, from prison - a watershed moment that changed
         our country and which was brought about by the resolute struggles
         of the people of South Africa;


      3) further acknowledges that the delivery of this important address in
         the evening, when the majority of the people of South Africa,
         particularly senior citizens, domestic workers, mineworkers and
         students were at home, was an affirmation of the activist character
         of the fourth democratic government and Parliament to remain
         relevant and reaching out to the majority of the people of South
         Africa; and

      4) welcomes President Jacob Zuma’s clear and pragmatic plan to improve
         the quality of life of all South Africans.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is there any objection to the motion?
An HON MEMBER: Yes!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In light of the objection, the motion
may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a
notice of motion.

      PROMOTION OF COUPON SYSTEM FOR FURTHER EDUCATION AT COLLEGES AND
                                UNIVERSITIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad –

     1) die koeponstelsel vir verdere studie aan universiteite en kolleges
        aan leerders na matriek by die nasionale Departement van Onderwys
        sal promoveer; en


     2) toesien dat riglyne, kriteria en regulasies opgestel word om
        hierdie stelsel teen 2011 in werking te stel.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:
   That the Council –


   1) will promote the coupon system for further studies at universities and
      colleges to learners after matric at the national Department of
      Education; and

   2) recommends that guidelines, criteria and regulations be drawn up so as
      to put this system into operation by 2011.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is there any objection to the motion?
In the light of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The
motion without notice will now become a notice of motion.

    IRRESPONSIBLE AND NEGLIGENT BEHAVIOUR OF SURGEON AT PRETORIA HOSPITAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M G BOROTO: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

      1) notes recent reports of a Pretoria police officer who was shot
         twice in the stomach during a house robbery on Friday 19 February
         2010 and turned away by a city hospital because a surgeon on
         standby did not want to come in;


     2) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
        such irresponsible and negligent actions by the surgeon and calls on
        the Department of Health to immediately institute an inquiry into
        the conduct of the surgeon and the staff on duty for failing to
        inform the paramedics until they arrived at the hospital; and


    3) ensures that such behaviour is prevented in our hospitals.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES VISIT TO LIMPOPO

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chairperson of
the National Council of Provinces, I move:

   That, in terms of Rule 21(2) and in the interests of enhancing public
   participation, conducting oversight and providing a platform for
   consideration of issues affecting provinces as provided for in section
   42(4) and 72(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
   –
     1) the Council resolves to, from 23 to 26 March 2010, conduct public
        hearings, hold meetings, conduct oversight visits and sit in
        plenary in the province of Limpopo on 25 and 26 March 2010, at
        17:00 and 09:30 respectively, until the conclusion of business on
        those days; and


   (2)      the Council notes that the estimated cost of effecting the
        change in venue and maintaining it for the specified period will be
        R5 000 000.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much, Chief Whip. Is
there any objection to the motion? Are you objecting, hon member?

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, that’s exactly the point: I don’t know. I need
some clarity. Is this an issue on which each of us is voting, as opposed to
it being a provincial vote?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Which one?

Mr R A LEES: This particular motion. Is this an individual ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): No, it’s a House vote.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, is it being put to the vote? I just need clarity
on the way this works, please.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau) That’s fine. I think maybe what we need
to do is firstly determine whether there are any further motions without
notice, before we come to the notices on the Order Paper. Are there any
other motions without notice?

    THANKS TO WHIPS’ FORUM AND NCOP CHAIRPERSON FOR SUBJECT OF DISCUSSION
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad die Swepeforum en die Voorsitter van die Nasionale Raad van
   Provinsies bedank vir die belangrike en noodsaaklike onderwerp vir
   debattering vandag in die Raad.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council thank the  Whips’  Forum  and  the  Chairperson  of  the
   National Council of Provinces for the important and essential subject for
   discussion in the Council today.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.]

               NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES VISIT TO LIMPOPO

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chairperson of
the Council, I move:

   That, in terms of Rule 21(2) and in the interests of enhancing public
   participation, conducting oversight and providing a platform for
   consideration of issues affecting provinces as provided for in section
   42(4) and 72(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
   -

   (1)      the Council resolves to, from 23 to 26 March 2010, conduct
        public  hearings, hold meetings, conduct oversight visits and sit
        in plenary in the province of Limpopo on 25 and 26 March 2010, at
        17:00 and 09:30 respectively, until the conclusion of business on
        those days; and


   (2)      the Council notes that the estimated cost of effecting the
        change in venue and maintaining it for the specified period will be
        R5 000 000.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): As there is no speaker’s list, I shall
now put the question. The question is that the motion be agreed to. As the
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall
first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber,
which they are.
In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration of vote?

Declaration of vote:

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, I would like to declare that the Western Cape
will be voting in support of this motion, but in future we would like to
see whether we can find ways of spending less than R5 million.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Come again, hon member from the Western
Cape.

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, the Western Cape will be voting in favour of the
motion, but in future we would like to see ways where we could save money.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of   the
Constitution.

   MISCONDUCT OF SECRETARY TO THE NCOP AND ACTING SECRETARY TO THE NCOP TO
                          CONTINUE IN SUCH CAPACITY
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Council –

     1) notes that Adv Lulama Matyolo-Dube was  recently  found  guilty  on
        four charges relating to financial misconduct;


     2) expresses its displeasure at the fact that Adv Lulama  Matyolo-Dube
        betrayed the trust placed in her by this  House,  thereby  bringing
        the Council in particular and Parliament in general into disrepute;

     3) accepts that a vacancy exists in the Office of the Secretary to the
        Council; and

     4) agrees that until such time that a Secretary  to  the  Council  has
        been appointed, Adv Modibedi Eric  Phindela  continues  to  act  as
        Secretary to the Council.

Mr R A LEES: Mr Chairman ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Are you objecting already?

Mr R A LEES: No, I have a point of order, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, I would
just like to know when notice of this motion was given, because I don’t see
it on the Order Paper. Should it not have been dealt with as a motion
without notice?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I wonder whether the hon member
was in the House when I first moved another motion. This was covered before
the debate. Was he in the House? We must use our listening skills properly.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of   the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:07.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          THURSDAY 19 NOVEMBER 2009


ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) South African Postbank Bill [B 14 – 2009] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of International Relations and Co-operation

    (a)     Amendments to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
        the use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be
        excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate effects (CCW),
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution of the
        Republic of South Africa, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on Prohibitions or
        Restrictions on the use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may
        be deemed to be excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate
        effects, also known as the Certain Conventional Weapons Convention
        (CCW).
 2. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Represented Political
        Parties’ Fund for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2008-09 [RP 248-2009].

    (b)     Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2008-
        09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies in Trust
        kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2008-09 [RP 230-2009].

                          FRIDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Amendment Bill [B 12 –
         2009] – Act No 19 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on
         24 November 2009).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2009/10 –
        2011/12.

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations:


          a) Explanatory Memorandum on the Appropriation Bill, 2009:
             Preliminary outline on Inter-Departmental Function Shifts – 10
             June 2009.


          b) Government Notice No R.685 published in Government Gazette No
             32322 dated 19 June 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/644), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (c)      Government Notice No R.686 published in Government Gazette
             No 32322 dated 19 June  2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/317), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (d)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
             concerning Financial Co-operation in 2006, tabled in terms of
             Section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
             Africa, 1996

          e) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financial Co-operation between
             the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic of
             Germany.


        (f)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
             concerning Financial Co-operation in 2008, tabled in terms of
             Section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
             Africa, 1996.


        (g)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Financial Co-operation
             between the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Republic
             of Germany.


        (h)      Government Notice No 697 published in Government Gazette
             No 32344 dated 26 June 2009: Determination of interest rate for
             purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate
             of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Act,
             in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    3.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations for consideration and report:


        (a)      Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department of the
             South African Reserve Bank for 2008.

    4.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Trade and International Relations:


        (a)      Government Notice No 380 published in Government Gazette
             No 32067 dated 3 April 2009: Introduction of a compulsory
             specification for preservative treatment of timber, in terms of
             the National Regulator for Compulsory Specification Act, 2008
             (Act No 5 of 2008).

        (b)      Government Notice No 559 published in Government Gazette
             No 32233 dated 22 May 2009: Standards matters, in terms of the
             Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


        (c)      Government Notice No 560 published in Government Gazette
             No 32233 dated 22 May 2009: Standards matters, in terms of the
             Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


        (d)      Government Notice No 596 published in Government Gazette
             No 32253 dated 29 May 2009: Application for an exemption in
             terms of Part A of Schedule 1: Health Professions Council of
             South Africa, in terms of the Competition Act, 2008 (Act No 89
             of 1998).


        (e)      Government Notice No 743 published in Government Gazette
             No 32396 dated 17 July 2009: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


        (f)      Government Notice No 780 published in Government Gazette
             No 32443 dated 31 July 2009: Standards matters in terms of the
             Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


          g) Government Notice No 782 published in Government Gazette No
             32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed amendment to the compulsory
             specification  for motor vehicles of category N1 in terms of
             the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
             (Act No 5 of 2008).


          h) Government Notice No 783 published in Government Gazette No
             32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed amendment to the compulsory
             specification  for replacement brake lining assemblies for road
             vehicles in terms of  the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


          i) Government Notice No 784 published in Government Gazette No
             32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed introduction of a
             compulsory specification  for single capped fluorescent lamps
             in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


          j) Government Notice No 785 published in Government Gazette No
             32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
             specification  for  motor vehicles of category L in terms of
             the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
             (Act No 5 of 2008).

          k) Government Notice No 786 published in Government Gazette No
             32443 dated 31 July 2009: Proposed amendment to the compulsory
             specification  for  motor vehicles of category M1 in terms of
             the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
             (Act No 5 of 2008).

          l) Government Notice No 787 published in Government Gazette No
             32443 dated 31 July 2009: Correction Notice: Compulsory
             specification  for  lamp controlgear in terms of the National
             Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
             2008).

          m) Government Notice No 788 published in Government Gazette No
             32443 dated 31 July 2009: Correction Notice: Compulsory
             specification  for  electrical and electronic apparatus in
             terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications
             Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

          n) Government Notice No 810 published in Government Gazette No
             32467 dated 31 July 2009: Broad-Based Black Economic
             Empowerment in terms of section 14 of the Broad-Based Black
             Economic Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).

    5.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations for consideration and to the Select
        Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs:


          a) Report of the Auditor-General on audit outcomes of local
             government for the year ended 2007-2008 [RP 110/2009].

    6.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations:
        (a)      Government Notice No R.712 published in Government Gazette
             No 32357 dated 1 July 2009: Regulations in terms of section 86
             of the Cooperative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).

    7.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


        (a)      Proclamation No R.20 published in Government Gazette No
             32130 dated 2 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution
             Sixteenth Amendment Act, 2008.

          b) Proclamation No R.21 published in Government Gazette No 32091
             dated 2 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution Fourteenth
             Amendment Act, 2009.

          c) Proclamation No R.22 published in Government Gazette No 32091
             dated 2 April 2009: Commencement of the Constitution Fifteenth
             Amendment Act, 2009.

          d) Proclamation No R.23 published in Government Gazette No 32091
             dated 2 April 2009: Commencement of the General Laws (Loss of
             Membership of National Assembly, Provincial Legislature or
             Municipal Council) Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 55 of 2008).

          e) Proclamation No R.24 published in Government Gazette No 32091
             dated 2 April 2009: Amendment of Regulations of Public Funding
             of Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No 103 of
             1997).

        (f)      Government Notice No R. 724  published in Government
             Gazette No 32371 dated 10 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1
             (No 1/1/1380), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No R.725 published in Government Gazette
             No 32371 dated 10 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/645), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

        (h)      Government Notice No R. 749 published in Government
             Gazette No 32406 dated 15 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No.
             2 (No.2/318) in terms of the    Customs and Excise Act, 1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (i)      Government Notice No R. 762  published in Government
             Gazette No 32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1
             (No 1/1/1381), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (j)      Government Notice No R. 763 published in Government
             Gazette No 32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3
             (No 3/646), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (k)      Government Notice No R.764 published in Government Gazette
             No 32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/318), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (l)      Government Notice No R. 765 published in Government
             Gazette No 32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 6
             (No 6/15), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


        (m)      Government Notice No R. 766 published in Government
             Gazette No 32416 dated 24 July 2009: Amendment in terms of the
             Value-Added Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of 1991).


        (n)      Government Notice No R. 793 published in Government
             Gazette No 32444 dated 31 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1
             (No 1/1/1382), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (o)      Government Notice No R. 795 published in Government
             Gazette No 32444 dated 31 July 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2
             (No 2/319), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (p)      Government Notice No R.832 published in Government Gazette
             No 32484 dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1383), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).

          q) Government Notice No R.833 published in Government Gazette No
             32484 dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1384), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          r) Government Notice No R.834 published in Government Gazette No
             32484 dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/319), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

          s) Government Notice No R.835 published in Government Gazette No
             32484 dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1385), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).

          t) Government Notice No R.836 published in Government Gazette No
             32484 dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/648), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

          u) Government Notice No R.837 published in Government Gazette No
             32484 dated 14 August 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/320), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriation for consideration and to the Select
        Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs for report:


        (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of
             the handling of confiscated abalone at the Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism [RP 116-2009].

    9.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:
        (a)       Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2009 -
             2012 [RP 30-2009].

    10.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      2008-2009 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section
             26(1) of the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998
             (Act No 107 of 1998).

    11.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations and to the Select Committee on Trade and
        International Relations:

         a) Government Notice No 1103 published in Government Gazette No
            32489, dated 14 August 2009: Draft Preferential Procurement
            Regulations, 2009: For public comment in terms of section 5 of
            the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act, 2000 (Act No
            5 of 2000).
          b) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning the Trade Development
             Cooperation Agreement Facility, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
             1996.

          c) Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             the Trade Development Cooperation Agreement Facility.

          d) Agreement between the African Development Bank and the African
             Development Fund and the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa regarding the Establishment of the Regional Office of
             the African Development Bank and the African Development Fund
             on the Territory of the Republic of South Africa, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

         e) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the African
            Development Bank and the African Development Fund and the
            Government of the Republic of South Africa regarding the
            Establishment of the Regional Office of the African Development
            Bank and the African Development Fund on the Territory of the
            Republic of South Africa.

    12. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations and to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises:

          a) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Employment Creation and
             Sector Policy Support to the Economic Cluster Programme of
             Action, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution
             of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             Employment Creation and Sector Policy Support to the Economic
             Cluster Programme of Action.


    13. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations and the Select Committee on Security and
        Constitutional Development:
        (a)      Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning the Legislative Sector
             Policy Support Programme [SA/006/07], tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
             Africa, 1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between
             the European Community and the Republic of South Africa
             concerning the Legislative Sector Policy Support Programme.

          c) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Access to Justice and
             Promotion of Constitutional Rights, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
             1996.

          d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             Access to Justice and Promotion of Constitutional Rights.

    14.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development:

          a) Proclamation No 45 published in Government Gazette No 32380
             dated 3 July 2009: Commencement of the National Prosecuting
             Authority Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No. 56 of 2008).

        (b)      Proclamation No 46 published in Government Gazette No
             32380 dated 3 July 2009: Determination of fixed date under
             section 43A of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998
             (Act No 32 of 1998).


    15.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report and the
         Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations in accordance with
         its mandate:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2008-
             2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Group
             Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural Development
             Bank of South Africa for 2008-2009 and the Performance
             Information [RP 143-2009].


      16. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
          Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Ltd and the
             Group for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Broadband Infraco (Pty)
             Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.


          (c)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Express
             Airways (Proprietary) Limited for 2008-2009, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

          (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA for
             2008-2009, including the  Report of the Independent Auditors
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2008-2009 [RP 139-2009].


    17.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
          Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
          report:


          a) Proclamation No 16 published in the Government Gazette No
             31017 dated 7 May 2008: Notification by President in respect
             of entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.


          b) Proclamation No 18 published in the Government Gazette No
             31034 dated 9 May 2008: Notification by President in respect
             of entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.


          c) Proclamation No 20 published in the Government Gazette No 31136
             dated 10 June 2008: Notification by President in respect of
             entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.


          d) Proclamation No 21 published in the Government Gazette No
             31179 dated 25 June 2008: Notification by President in respect
             of entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.


          e) Proclamation No 31 published in the Government Gazette No 31309
             dated 8 August 2008: Notification by President in respect of
             entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.

          f) Proclamation No 38 published in the Government Gazette No 31416
             dated 12 September 2008: Notification by President in respect
             of entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.

          g) Proclamation No 58 published in the Government Gazette No
             31748 dated 30 December 2008: Notification by President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities identified by the United Nations Security Council,
             made in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related
             Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
             section 26 of the Act.

          h) Proclamation No 59 published in the Government Gazette No
             31748 dated 30 December 2008: Notification by President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities identified by the United Nations Security Council,
             made in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related
             Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
             section 26 of the Act.

          i) Proclamation No 60 published in the Government Gazette No
             31748 dated 30 December 2008: Notification by President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities identified by the United Nations Security Council,
             made in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related
             Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
             section 26 of the Act.

          j) Proclamation No 61 published in the Government Gazette No
             31748 dated 30 December 2008: Notification by President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities identified by the United Nations Security Council,
             made in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related
             Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
             section 26 of the Act.


          k) Proclamation No 5 published in the Government Gazette No 31835
             dated 3 February 2009: Notification by President in respect of
             entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.


          l) Proclamation No 6 published in the Government Gazette No 31835
             dated 3 February 2009: Notification by President in respect of
             entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.


          m) Proclamation No 7 published in the Government Gazette No 31835
             dated 3 February 2009: Notification by President in respect of
             entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.


          n) Proclamation No 4 published in the Government Gazette No 31834
             dated 4 February 2009: Notification by President in respect of
             entities involved in terrorist and related activities
             identified by the United Nations Security Council, made in
             terms of section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities, 2004 (Act
             No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of section 26 of the Act.

         (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the
             Public Protector for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 159- 2009].


         (p)     Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for
             2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
             [RP 112-2009].


         (q)     Report and Financial Statements of the Special
             Investigating Unit (SIU) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 214-2009].


         (r)     Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Prosecuting Authority (NPA) for 2008-2009, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 116-2009].

         (s)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Debt
             Collectors for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009.


         (t)     Register of Debt Collectors in terms of section 12(1) of
             the Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).

    18.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Development for consideration:
         (a)     Code of Good Administrative Conduct in terms of the
             Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of
             2000).

         (b)     Report on the Review of the Organisation and Post
             Establishment of the Office of the Public Protector during
             2008/2009.


     19. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Development:


          a) The Acting President of the Republic submitted a letter dated
             15 July 2009 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
             Provinces, informing Members of the Council of the employment
             of the SA National Defence Force for service in co-operation
             with the South African Police Service in the prevention and
             combating of crime and maintenance of law and order within the
             Republic of South Africa during the FIFA Confederations Cup
             Event, the FIFA World Cup Draw Event and the FIFA World Cup
             Team Workshop and Medical Conference.

    20.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
          Finance and Appropriations for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-
             General for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 173-2009].

    21.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
          Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2008-2009, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 25 for 2008-2009 [RP 149-
             2009].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living
             Resources Fund (MLRF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 131-2009].


         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism
             for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             2009.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Weather   Service  for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 107-2009].

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the iSimangaliso
             Wetland Park for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.

    22.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan
             Fund (RHLF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009.


         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
             Foundation (SHF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009.


         (c)     Annual Review of the National Urban Reconstruction and
             Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2008-2009.
    23.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
          Finance and Appropriations for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
             Southern Africa (DBSA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 and the Report and
             Financial Statements of the Development Bank of Southern
             Africa Development Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of the Development Fund for 2008-2009.

    24.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
          Trade and International Relations for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator for 2008-2009, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 132-2009].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 36-2009].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Bureau of
             Standards (SABS) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 142-2009].
         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Export Credit Insurance
             Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2008-2009, including
             the  Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit
             Regulator (NCR) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 154-2009].


         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
             Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2008-
             2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             2009.
         (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
             Board for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.


         (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling
             Board (NGB) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 174-2009].

         (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2008-2009, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 168-
             2009].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
             Limited for 2009-2009, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 128-2009].

         (k)     Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Empowerment Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 205-2009].


          l) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal
             for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance information for 2008-
             2009 [RP 196-2009].

          m) Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
             Institute of South Africa for 2008-2009, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 144-2009].

         (n)     Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
             Development Agency for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.

         (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency
             Affairs Board for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009.

         (p)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
             Administration Commission of South Africa for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 213-
             2009].

         (q)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
             finance Apex Fund for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 113-2009].


    25.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Department of Labour – Vote
             15 for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
             Vote 15 for 2008-2009 and the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information of the
             Sheltered Employment Factories for 2008-2009 [RP 77-2009].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
             [RP 81-2009].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 33-
             2009].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2008-2009.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Department of Public
             Enterprises – Vote 30 for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 30 for 2008-2009 [RP 206-
             2009].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment
             Insurance Fund (UIF) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 82-2009].
        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development
             and Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2008-2009, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009.


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited
             for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for
             2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             2009.


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary)
             Limited for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.


    26.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration:


          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
             Administration for 2009-2012.


    27.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration
        and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Public Administration
             Leadership and Management Academy (Palama) Vote 10 for 2008-
             2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 10 for
             2008-2009 [RP 187-2009].


    28.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs:


          a) Notice No 748 published in Government Gazette No 32404 dated 14
             July 2009: National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
             Amendment Act, 2009 (Act No 15 of 2009).


          b) General Notice No 964 published in Government Gazette No 32394
             dated 15 July 2009: Draft Model Air Quality Management By-law
             for adoption and adaptation by municipalities in terms of the
             National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act
             No 39 of 2004).

          c) General Notice No 756 published in Government Gazette No 32426
             dated 20 July 2009: Marking of rhinoceros horn and hunting of
             white rhinoceros for trophy hunting purposes in terms of the
             National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act
             No 10 of 2004).

          d) Government Notice No 777 published in Government Gazette No
             32439 dated 24 July 2009: National Policy in Thermal Treatment
             of General and Hazardous Waste in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Waste Act, 2008 (Act No 59 of  2008).

          e) General Notice No 1001 published in Government Gazette No 32434
             dated 24 July 2009: List of Activities which result in
             Atmospheric emissions which have or may have a significant
             detrimental effect on the environment, including health, social
             conditions, economic conditions, ecological conditions or
             cultural heritage in terms of the National Environmental
             Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).

    29.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Education Vote 13 for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 13 for 2008-2009 [RP 191-2009].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of the Transformation Fund of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2008-2009 [RP 176-2009].

          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
             Assurance in General and Further Education and Training -
             UMALUSI for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009.
        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Qualifications Authority for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 66-2009].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust
             for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2008-2009.

        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
             Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 117-
             2009].


    30.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Trade and International Relations:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Services-Seta) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 11-
             2009].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
             Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
             (CTFL-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2008-2009 [RP 87-2009].
    31.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Public Services:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Education
             and Training Authority (TETA) for 2008-200, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 104-2009].


    32.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
             Sector Education and Training Authority (SASSETA) for 2008-
             2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009.

    33.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Social Services:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
             Sector Education and Training Authority (HWSETA) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 94-
             2009].

    34.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Trade and International Relations:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
             Engineering and related Services Education and Training
             Authority (MER-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 99-2009].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
             Manufacturing Industry Sector Education and Training Authority
             (Foodbev-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 92-2009].


    35.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 85-
             2009].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of The Insurance Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 96-
             2009].
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Finance,
             Accounting, Management Consulting and other Financial Services
             Sector Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 91-
             2009].

    36.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Trade and International Relations:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
             Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 86-
             2009].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail
             Sector Education and Training Authority (W&R-Seta) for 2008-
             2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
             [RP 105-2009].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
             Authority  (MQA) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 110-2009].

    37.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Information
             Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
             Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 95-
             2009].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Education Training
             and Development Practices Sector Education and Training
             Authority (ETDP-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-2009 [RP 89-2009].


    38.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 84-
             2009].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries Sector
              Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2008-2009,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 93-
             2009].

    39.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs and Select
        Committee on Education and Recreation:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism,
             Hospitality and Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta)
             for 2008-2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             2009 [RP 133-2009].


    40.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and    Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
             Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
             Training Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2008-2009, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 98-2009].

    41.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government
             Sector Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2008-
             2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009
             [RP 97-2009].
    42.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Ltd for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.

          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Government
             Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information of Vote 6 for 2008-09
             [RP194-2009].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
             Media Institute of South Africa (Nemisa) for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
             Council (IMC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 134-2009].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 - Department of
             Communications for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 24 for 2008-09 [RP 209-2009].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
             Office (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
             Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2008-09, including
             the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             of Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa
             (USAASA) and the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF) for
             2008-09 [RP222-2009].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
             Company (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.

          i) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Airways
             (Pty) (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.

    43.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
             and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 117-2009].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Academy of Science
             of South Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
             Foundation for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Council for Educators for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Drug-
             Free Sport for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2008-09 [RP 99-2008].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 - Department of
             Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 17 for 2008-2009 [RP 152-
             2009].


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for
             2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.

          h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.

          i) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
             for Natural Scientific Professions for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2008-09.

          j) Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
             Council (HSRC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 184-2009].

        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
             South Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.

        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 - Department of
             Science and Technology for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 31 for 2008-09 [RP236-2009].

          m) Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory
             Council on Innovation for 2008-09.

          n) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education (CHE) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.

    44.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments
             Corporation of South Africa Limited (Armscor) for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Group
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
             [RP 56-2009].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 - Department of
             Correctional Services for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 197-2009].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 - Department of
             Safety and Security for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 22 for 2008-09 [RP 204-2009].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Independent
             Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2008-09, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 20 for 2008-09 [RP234-2009].

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
             Rights Commission for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP65-2009].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 - Department of
             Justice and Constitutional Development for 2008-09, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information of Vote 21 for 2008-09 [RP189-
             2009].

          g) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Defence for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 19 for 2008-09 [RP193-2009].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the Castle Control Board
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09 [RP165-2009].


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Inspectorate
             for Correctional Services for 2008-09 [RP132-2009].

    45.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for
             2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
             [RP 179-2009].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the
             Msunduzi/Voortrekker Museum for 2008-09, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [PR 137-2009].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts
             Council for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 181-2009].
        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09.


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
             Foundation for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 43-2009].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for
             2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
             [RP 160-2009].


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 188-
             2009].


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum and Monument for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 61-2009].


        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of
             Cape Town for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 155-2009].


        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and
             Video Foundation for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 150-2009].


        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
             Institution for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 42-2009].


        (n)      Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys
             Art Gallery for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.

        (o)      Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts
             Centre of the Free State for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 218-2009].


        (p)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


        (q)      Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the
             Boer Republics for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


        (r)      Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela
             Museum for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 129-2009].


        (s)      Report and Financial Statements of the Kwazulu-Natal
             Performing Arts Company (trading as the Playhouse Company) for
             2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (t)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Library for the Blind for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


        (u)      Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP138-2009].


        (v)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum -
             Bloemfontein for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


        (w)      Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island
             Museum for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 180-2009].


        (x)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 57-2009].


        (y)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 215-2009].


          z) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency (Sahra) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 184-2009].


             (aa)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
                  Arts and Culture for 2008-09, including the Report of the
                  Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
                  Performance Information for 2008-09.


             (bb)      Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow
                  Centre for the Arts for 2008-09, including the Report of
                  the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
                  Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP192-2009].


             (cc)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
                  Heritage Council for 2008-09, including the Report of the
                  Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
                  Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP242-2009].


    46.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Trade and International Relations for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
             Foreign Affairs for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 3 for 2008-09.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
             International Co-operation Fund for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.

          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer
             Tribunal for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Regulator
             for Compulsory Specifications (NRCS) for 2008-09, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for the seven-month period ending
             31 March 2009 [RP 153-2009].

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and
             Human Resources for Industry Programme (Thrip) for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.

        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 36-2009].


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity
             Distribution Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP220-
             2009].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
             Group of Companies (CEF) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information of the
             Central Energy Fund Group of Companies for 2008-09 [RP186-
             2009].

        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
             Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP177-2009].

        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Nuclear Energy Corporation Limited (Necsa) for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP141-
             2009].

          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
             Council (MHSC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP8-2009].


          l) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
             and Precious Metals Regulator for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP132-2009].


          m) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
             (CGS) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2008-09 [RP 55-2009].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 - Department of
             Minerals and Energy for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 28 for 2008-2009 [RP 240-2009].


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the Mintek Group for 2008-
             09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
             [RP27-2009].


        (p)      Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond
             Trader for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP178-2009].

          q) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of
             Trade and Industry for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 32 for 2008-09 [RP 18-2009].


          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
             Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2008-09, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          s) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09 [RP53-2009].


          t) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office (Cipro) for 2008-09,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP115-
             2009].

    47.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting
             Standards Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 63-2009].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud
             for Financial Services Providers for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and
             Fiscal Commission (FFC) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 183-2009].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
             Corporation Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 59-2009].

    48.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Women, Youth, and People with Disability:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
             (UYF) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


    49.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
             Public Works for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 5 for 2008-09.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 - Department of
             Housing for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 26 for 2008-09 [RP136-2009].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Servcon Housing
             Solutions (Pty) Ltd for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
             Trust (IDT) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 200-2009].

          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
             Development Board (CIDB) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 233-2009].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa (ASA)
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2008-09.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
             Environment (CBE) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.

          h) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
             Africa (Ltd) (ACSA) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Co Ltd (ATNS) for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2008-09.


          j) Reports and Financial Statements of the Ports Regulator of
             South Africa for 2007-08 and 2008-09, including the Reports of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 and 2008-09.


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety
             Regulator (RSR) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 158-2009].


          l) Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
             South Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company
             for 2008-09.

          m) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Roads Agency Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP145-2009].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
             Corporation for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP170-2009].


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search
             and Rescue Organisation for 2008-09.
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09 [RP217-2009].


          p) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
             Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2008-09, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          q) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
             2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09
             [RP221-2009].


          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Passenger Rail Agency
             of South Africa (Prasa) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP157-2009].


    50.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 - Department of
             Land Affairs for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 27 for 2008-09.

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09 [RP172-2009].
          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
             Authority (TCTA) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
             Commission for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 130-2009].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 - Department of
             Water Affairs and Forestry for 2008-09, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 34 for 2008-09 [RP163-2009].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Biodiversity Institute for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP165-2009].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Parks (SANparks ) for 2008-2009, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP148-2009].

          h) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
             Council (ARC) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP199-2009].


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
             Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2008-09, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          j) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 - Department of
             Agriculture for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 23 for 2008-09 [RP210-2009].


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Onderstepoort
             Biological Products (Ltd) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          l) Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2008-09.


        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2008-09, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP192-2009].

    51.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 - Department of Home
             Affairs for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 4 for 2008-09 [RP239-2009].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09 [RP60-2009].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Film and Publication Board
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09 [RP224-2009].

          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
             Schemes for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 67-2009].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 - Department of
             Health for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 14 for 2008-09 [RP169-2009].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
             Commissioner for Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works for
             2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
             Research Council (MRC) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP174-2009].

          i) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 - Department of
             Social Development for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 16 for 2008-09 [RP225-2009].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
             Agency for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP 58-2009].


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
             Security Agency (Sassa) for 2008-09, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP 29-2009].

   52.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee of
        Security and Constitutional Development:


          a) Proclamation No R.50, published in Government Gazette No
             32494, dated 14 August 2009: Commencement of sections 8 to 10
             of the Judicial Matters Second Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 55
             of 2003).


          b) Government Notice No R.841, published in Government Gazette No
             32494, dated 14 August 2009: Scale of fees payable in respect
             of matters referred to in section 80 of the Attorneys Act,
             1979 (Act No 53 of 1079).

    53.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on an investigation at the South
             African Broadcasting Corporation [RP 237-2009].


    54.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration
        and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 - Department of
             Provincial and Local Government for 2008-2009, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 29 for 2008-09.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
             Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2008-09 [RP207-2009].

          c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 - Department of
             Public Service and Administration for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 8 for 2008-09 [RP190-2009].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
             Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd (Sita) for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP47-2009].


    55.     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
             Deposits for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
             Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2008-09 [RP201-2009].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
             Bank for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2008-09.

          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
             Service (Sars) for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP238-2009].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Collective Investment
             Schemes for 2008-09 [RP202-2009].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the Sasria (Ltd) for 2008-
             09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – National Treasury
             for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 7
             for 2008-09 [RP198-2009].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
             Board for Auditors for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP156-2009].

          i) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Pension
             Funds Adjudicator for 2008-09, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.


          j) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
             Centre for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09 [RP162-2009].


          k) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 - Statistics South
             Africa for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 11 for 2008-09 [RP211-2009].


          l) Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Supervision
             Department of the South African Reserve Bank for 2008.

    56.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration
        and report and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural,
             Religious and Linguistic Communities for 2008-09, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP212-2009].

    57.     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance and Appropriations:

        a) Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank - 17
           September 2009.


          b) Government Notice No.892, published in Government Gazette No
             32546, dated 31 August 2009: Determination of interest rate
             for purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of ‘‘Official
             rate of interest’’ in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule, in
             terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


          c) Government Notice No R.918, published in Government Gazette No
             32582, dated 25 September 2009: Exchange Control Regulations:
             Cancellation of appointment of an authorised dealer in foreign
             exchange - Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft in terms of the
             exchange control regulations.

    58.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Trade and International Relations for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan for the Companies and Intellectual Property
             Registration Office (Cipro) for 2009-10 – 2011-12.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
        rehabilitation of abandoned mines at the Department of Minerals and
        Energy [RP 257-2009].


    (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of
        projects that are funded by the National Development Agency [RP
        258/2009].


     c) Report of the Public Protector on Systematic Investigation into
        allegations of poor service delivery by the Compensation Fund
        [Report No 28 of 2009-2010].


   2. The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


    (a)     Government Notice No R. 466 published in Government Gazette No
        32185 dated 29 April 2009: Draft Regulations on the National Forest
        Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998)


   3. The Minister of Energy


    (a)     Membership of South Africa to the International Renewable
        Energy Agency (IRENA), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Membership of South Africa to the
        International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

      (a)   Consolidated Annual Report on the Performance of KwaZulu-Natal
           Municipalities, 2007-2008
      (b)   Statement on allegations of fraud, corruption or any other
           serious malpractices within Lekwa Local Municipality
           (Mpumalanga) in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
           Government: Municipal System Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


           Reffed to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
           Traditional Affairs for consideration.


                          MONDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 13 – 2009] – Act No 21 of 2009
         (assented to and signed by President on 26 November 2009).

      2) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
         Laws Amendment Bill [B 15 – 2009] – Act No 20 of 2009 (assented to
         and signed by President on 26 November 2009).

                         THURSDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2009

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Social Assistance Amendment Bill, 2009, submitted by the Minister
         of Social Development.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Social Development and the
     Select Committee on Social Services.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees
        Pension Fund for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2008-09 [RP 241-2009].
2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Amatola Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sedibeng Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Rand Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Overberg Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pelladrift Water Board
        for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bloem Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.
    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Umgeni Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


3.    The Minister of Human Settlements


    (a)     Memorandum of understanding (“MOU’) between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Angola on Cooperation in the Field of Human Settlements, tabled in
        terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa, the Government of the Republic of India
        and the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil on
        Cooperation in the Field of Human Settlements Development, tabled
        in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (c)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
        (“MOU”) between the Government of the Republic of South Africa, the
        Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the
        Federative Republic of Brazil on Cooperation in the Field of Human
        Settlements Development, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction for April 2008 to March 2009.

5.    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs


     a) Government Notice No 1568, published in Government Gazette No
        32746,  dated 27 November 2009: Draft regulations on Local
        Government Disciplinary Code and Procedures for Senior Managers
        published for public comment in terms of section 72 and section 120
        of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Request for proposed withdrawal of declaration of a portion of
        land of the Lowveld National Botanical Garden (LNBG), in terms of
        section 34(2) of the National Environmental Management:
        Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

        Referred to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
        for consideration and report:


    (b)     Statement on allegations of fraud, corruption or any other
        serious malpractices within Stellenbosch Municipality (Western
        Cape) in terms of section 106(1)(a) of the Local Government:
        Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (c)     Statement on allegations of irregularities within Merafong City
        Local Municipality (Gauteng) in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the
        Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (d)     Statement on allegations of fraud, corruption or any other
        serious malpractices within Umjindi Local Municipality (Mpumalanga)
        in terms of section 106(1)(a) of the Local Government: Municipal
        Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (e)     Termination of section 139(1)(b) intervention in Xhariep
        District and Mohokare Local Municipalities (Free State).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


    (f)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality
        (Free State)


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.
                          TUESDAY, 26 JANUARY 2010


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
        Forensic Chemistry Laboratories at the national Department of
        Health – November 2009 [RP 268-2009].


    (b)    The Strategic Plan and Budget of the Auditor-General of South
         Africa for 2010-2013 [RP 266-2009].

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Municipal Budgets for the 2009 Medium-Term Revenue and
        Expenditure Framework (MTREF).

3.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Namakwa Water Board for
        2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bushbuckridge Water
        Board for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
        09.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Albany Coast Water Board
        for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle Northern Water
        for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


4.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No R. 81 published in Government Gazette No 32750
        dated 27 November 2009: Partial commencement of section 26 of the
        Judicial Matters Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 66 of 2008).

     b) Government Notice No R. 1120 published in Government Gazette No
        32750 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations relating to
        Debt Collectors, 2003:  Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of
        1998).


     c) Government Notice No R. 1121 published in Government Gazette No
        32759 dated 27 November 2009: Determination in terms of section 62A
        of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
        of Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002).




     d) Government Notice No R.1055 published in Government Gazette No
        32690 dated 05 November 2009: Amendment of  the Third Schedule, in
        terms of the Insolvency  Act, 1936 (Act No 24 of 1936).


     e) Government Notice No R.1056 published in Government Gazette No
        32690 dated 05 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations in terms of
        the Trust Property Control Act, 1988 (Act No 57 of 1988).


     f) Government Notice No R.1057 published in Government Gazette No
        32690 dated 05 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations in terms of
        the Administration of Estates Act, 1965 (Act No 66 of 1965).


     g) Government Notice No R.1070 published in Government Gazette No
        32700 dated 09 November 2009: Amendment of Regulations in terms of
        the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).

     h) Government Notice No R.72 published in Government Gazette No 32703
        dated 10 November 2009: Referral of matter to existing special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act , 1974 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


     (i)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission for 2008-2009
         [RP 256-2009].
     (j)    Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on the
         Consolidated Legislation pertaining to International Judicial co-
         operation in Civil Matters for 2006.

5.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pebble Bed Modular
         Reactor (Proprietary) Limited for 2008-09, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
         Performance Information for 2008-09.

6.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
        Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) for 2008-09, including the Report
        of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2008-09.


7.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Cooperative Agreement between the United States of America
        (USA) and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) to Foster
        Trade, Investment and Development, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996

    (b)     Explanatory Note of the Cooperative Agreement between the
        United States of America (USA) and the Southern African Customs
        Union (SACU) to Foster Trade, Investment and Development.


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Nala Local Municipal Council (Free
        State).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


    (b)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Indaka Local Municipal Council (KwaZulu-
        Natal).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


    (c)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Okhahlamba  Local Municipal Council
        (KwaZulu-Natal).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


    (d)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Umhlabuyalingana  Local Municipal
        Council (KwaZulu-Natal).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


    (e)     Report on the Performance of Municipalities in the Northern
        Cape for the 2007-08 financial year in terms of section 47(1) and
        (3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act (Act 32 of
        2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.


    (f)     Appointment of Members of the National Council for Correctional
        Services in terms of section 83(2)(h) of the Correctional Services
        Amendment Act, 2008.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development for consideration.


                          THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills
      1) National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B 56D – 2008] – Act No
         22 of 2009 (assented to and signed by President on 26 January
         2010).

      2) Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill [B
         57D – 2008] – Act No 23 of 2009 (assented to and signed by
         President on 20 January 2010).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by
         the Minister of Trade and Industry.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
         Select Committee on Trade and International Relations.

3.    Calling of Joint Sitting

    CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
    COUNCIL OF PROVINCES.


    In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
    South Africa, 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the Joint Rules of
    Parliament, the President of the Republic of South Africa has called a
    joint sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
    Provinces on Thursday, 11 February 2010 at 19:00, in order to deliver
    his State of the Nation Address to Parliament.


TABLINGS


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


     a) Legislative Proposal with regard to the amendment of the Municipal
        Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000) (Hon D B Feldman, Permanent
        Delegate to the National Council of Provinces).


        Referred to the Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
        Proposals.


     b) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Angola on
        Cooperation in the Field of Human Settlements in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Public Services.

                          TUESDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    South African Post Office Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister
         of Communications.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.


    (2)    Protection from Harassment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister
         of Justice and Constitutional Development.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Development.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation
    (a)     Agreement between the European Community and its Member States,
        of the one part, and the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa, of the other part, Amending the Agreement on Trade,
        Development and Cooperation (TDCA), in terms of section 231(2) of
        the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the European
         Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa, of the other part,
         Amending the Agreement on Trade, Development and Cooperation
         (TDCA).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Statement on allegations of fraud, corruption,
        maladministration or any other serious malpractices  within Umvoti
        Municipality (KwaZulu-Natal) in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the
        Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


                           FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
          a) Protection from Harassment Bill [B 1 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 32922 of 1 February 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
             and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
        Safety Authority (including the Maritime Fund) for 2008-2009,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009 [RP 216-2009].



                          TUESDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Communications


          a) South African Post Office Bill [B 2 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             32887 of 22 January 2010.]

             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Communications of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


            In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
            of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
            parliamentary working days

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No 905 published in Government Gazette No 32567
        dated 18 September 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).
    (b)     Government Notice No 936 published in Government Gazette No
        32600   dated 18 September 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).

    (c)     Government Notice No R.1058 published in Government Gazette No
        32692 dated 06 November 2009:  Proclamation of the effective date
        for the National Gambling Exclusions Database, in terms of the
        National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of 2004).


    (d)     Government Notice No 1039 published in Government Gazette No
        32673 dated 06 November 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


    (e)     Government Notice No 1065 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for plugs, socket-outlets and socket-outlet adaptors
        (VC 8008), in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
        Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

    (f)     Government Notice No 1066 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for glow starters for fluorescent lamps (VC 8039), in
        terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act,
        2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (g)     Government Notice No 1067 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for appliance couplers for household and similar
        purposes (VC 8012), in terms of the National Regulator for
        Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (h)     Government Notice No 1068 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for manually operated switches for appliances (VC
        8052), in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
        Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (i)     Government Notice No 1069 published in Government Gazette No
        32694 dated 13 November 2009:  Proposed amendment of the compulsory
        specification for flexible cords for electrical appliances (VC
        8006), in terms of the National Regulator for Compulsory
        Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (j)     Government Notice No R. 1153 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations:  Payment of levy and
        fees with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms
        of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
        (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (k)     Government Notice No R. 1154 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations:  Payment of levy and
        fees with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms
        of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
        (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (l)     Government Notice No R. 1155 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations:  Payment of levy and
        fees with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms
        of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
        (Act No 5 of 2008).


    (m)     Government Notice No R. 1156 published in Government Gazette No
        32781 dated 11 December 2009: Regulations:  Payment of levy and
        fees with regard to compulsory specifications:  Amendment, in terms
        of the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008
        (Act No 5 of 2008).


National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

     a) Submission of petitions from the Leeuwkop and Kroonstad prisoners
        (Hon M P Jacobs, Permanent Delegate to the National Council of
        Provinces).


        Referred to the Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
        Proposals for consideration and report.

                         WEDNESDAY 10 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCMENTS

National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Amendments to the Convention on Prohibitions or
             Restrictions on the use of Certain Conventional Weapons which
             may be deemed to be excessively Injurious or to have
             Indiscriminate effects (CCW), tabled in terms of section
             231(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
             1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on Prohibitions
             or Restrictions on the use of Certain Conventional Weapons
             which may be deemed to be excessively Injurious or to have
             Indiscriminate effects, also known as the Certain Conventional
             Weapons Convention (CCW).


    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Trade and International Relations for consideration and report:
        (a)      Agreement between the European Community and its Member
             States, of the one part, and the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa, of the other part, Amending the Agreement on
             Trade, Development and Cooperation (TDCA), in terms of section
             231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
             European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa, of the other
             part, Amending the Agreement on Trade, Development and
             Cooperation (TDCA).

    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic Development for consideration and report:

        (a)      Membership of South Africa to the International Renewable
             Energy Agency (IRENA), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
             the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Membership of South Africa
             to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Government Notice No 936 published in Government Gazette No
        32600   dated 2 October 2009: Standards Matters in terms of the
        Standards Act, 2008 (Act No 8 of 2008).


        Correction: The above entry replaces item 1(b) published under the
                  name of the Minister of Trade and Industry in the
                  Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports (ATC) of 9
                  February 2010 page 25.


2.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr M T
        Masinga, an additional magistrate at Emlazi, KwaZulu Natal in terms
        of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
        1993).


    (b)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr W J M
        Prinsloo, an additional magistrate at Ermelo, KwaZulu Natal in
        terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).


    (c)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr L B
        Maruwa, an additional magistrate at Daveyton, Gauteng in terms of
        section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (d)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr M K
        Chauke, an additional magistrate at Pretoria, Gauteng in terms of
        section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (e)     Draft Regulations made in terms of section 97(1) of the Child
        Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of 2008).

   3. The Minister of Human Settlements

     a) Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Angola on Cooperation in the Field of Human Settlements, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

   4. The Minister of Police

     a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on Domestic
        Violence for the period January – June 2009, tabled in terms of
        section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of
        1998).

                          FRIDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          b) Protection from Harassment Bill [B 1 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
    Development on the selection of members to serve on the National
    Council for Correctional Services in terms of section 83(2)(h) of the
    Correctional Services Act, 1998 (No. 111 of 1998), dated 12 February
    2010:

    1.      BACKGROUND


        The letter from the Minister of Correctional Services requesting
        consideration of a shortlist of candidates to be appointed as
        representatives of the public on the National Council for
        Correctional Services (NCCS) was referred to the Select Committee
        on Security and Constitutional Development and the Portfolio
        Committee on Correctional Services on 26 January 2010 [ATC, No1-
        2010].


    2.      PROCESS


        The term of office of the current members of the National Council
        for Correctional Services will expire on 28 February 2010. Given
        the time constraints, the Chairpersons of the Committees agreed
        that joint deliberations would be most appropriate in order to
        ensure that the matter was dealt with speedily, and without
        unnecessary delays in the parliamentary process.


        The Committees accordingly met on Thursday, 28 January 2010 to
        receive the Minister of Correctional Services’ briefing on the
        candidates shortlisted. After discussing the process to be
        followed, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development, on 12 February 2010 deliberated and agreed on the
        following candidates to serve on the NCCS in terms of the above-
        mentioned provision:


        1. Dr Kgamadi Joseph Kometsi
        2. Ms Lusanda Rataemane
        3. Dr Maletse Mako
        4. Ms Busi Ngobeni
        5. Ms Lynn Smit
        6. Dr Mohamed Randera
        7. Dr Hema Hargovan
        8. Adv Silas Nkanunu

                         WEDNESDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Division of Revenue Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance. Referred to the Standing Committee on Appropriations and
         the Select Committee on Appropriations.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Finance


           a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed
              sec 77).


          b) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 76).


             Introduction and referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
             for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) The Speech of the Minister of Finance on the National Annual Budget
        – 17 February 2010 [RP 5-2010].

           b) The Budget Review 2010 [RP 4-2010], including –
                • the fiscal framework;
                • revenue proposals for 2010, inclusive of the customs and
                  excise duties; and
                • the estimates of national revenue for 2010.

     c) Division of Revenue Bill [B4-2010], tabled in terms of section
        10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No
        97 of 1997).

           d) Appropriation Bill [B3-2010].

        The fiscal framework and revenue proposals, as well as the speech
        of the Minister of Finance, are referred to the Standing Committee
        on Finance for consideration and report.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Sundays River Valley Local Municipality
        (Eastern Cape).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.
    (b)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Masilonyana Local Municipality (Free
        State).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

    (c)     Statement on allegations of fraud, corruption,
        maladministration or any other serious malpractices  within
        Umhlathuze Municipality (KwaZulu-Natal) in terms of section
        106(1)(b) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act
        No 32 of 2000).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations (the
Committee) on the oversight visit to Mpumalanga Municipalities dated 10
February 2010.

1. Introduction

1.1 Delegation

1.1.1 The oversight visit took place from 21 to 23 September 2009. Meetings
were held at Ermelo and Nelspruit in Mpumalanga. The delegation consisted
of:
         • Hon. CJ de Beer (ANC) (Chairperson of the Committee);
         • Hon. TA Chaane (ANC);
         • Hon. Prince MMM Zulu (IFP) ;
         • Hon. BA Mnguni (ANC);
         • Hon. SD Montsitsi (ANC);
         • Hon. BL Mashile (ANC);
         • Hon. JJ Gunda (ID);
         • Hon. WM Makhubela (COPE); and
         • Hon. TD Harris (DA).

1.1.2 The parliamentary officials who accompanied the delegation were: Mr.
Z Rento (Committee Secretary), Mr. M Mkhize (Content Advisor), Mr. M Tau
(Researcher), and Mr. M Vumazonke (Committee Assistant).

1.2 Terms of reference


1.2.1 The visit formed part of the Committee’s ongoing interaction with
municipalities to monitor collaboration and coordination pertaining to the
provision of municipal services and support given to municipalities by
provincial and national departments. The municipalities in Mpumalanga that
were identified for the visit are: Thaba Chweu Local Municipality, Mkhondo
Local Municipality, Pixley Ka Seme Local Municipality, Govan Mbeki Local
Municipality, Emalahleni Local Municipality, Lekwa Local Municipality, and
Nkomazi Local Municipality

1.2.2 The stakeholders (including national and provincial departments) who
accompanied the Committee on this visit were: Provincial Department of
Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mpumalanga’s Provincial
Treasury, South African Local Government Association, Department of
Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs, National Treasury, Auditor General, Development Bank
of Southern Africa, and ESKOM.


1.3 Purpose of the Visit

1.3.1 The purpose of the oversight visit was to engage with the above-
mentioned municipalities along with national and provincial departments on
the following areas:
    • Development and implementation of municipal budgets;
    • Municipalities’ compliance with the Municipal Finance Management Act,
      Number 56 of 2003;
    • The spending and performance of the municipalities with regards to
      conditional grants;
    • The municipalities’ relations and collaboration with various national
      and provincial departments and entities;
    • Capacity constraints of the municipalities (if any);
    • The extent to which municipal services are provided; and
    • The alignment of municipalities’ Integrated Development Programmes
      with the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy.

2. Stakeholders’ Comments on Mpumalanga’s Municipalities

2.1 Auditor General’s Comments

2.1.1 The Office of the Auditor General (AG) briefed the Committee on the
audit outcomes of the selected municipalities in Mpumalanga. The AG divided
their report into three categories of municipalities, namely: high
capacity, medium capacity and low capacity municipalities.

2.1.2 With respect to municipalities with high capacity, two municipalities
(namely, Mbombela and Govan Mbeki) were given a qualified audit opinion and
three municipalities (namely, Ehlanzeni, Nkangala and Steve Tshwete)
received financially unqualified opinion (with other matters). Out of the
municipalities with medium capacity, one municipality (namely, Nkomazi) was
given a disclaimer audit opinion and another municipality (namely, Albert
Luthuli) received a qualified audit opinion. The other three municipalities
(namely, Umjindi, Gert Sibande and Delmas) were given unqualified audit
opinion (with other matters).

2.1.3 With respect to municipalities with low capacity, two municipalities
(namely, Dipaliseng and Lekwa) received disclaimers, four municipalities
(namely, Bushbuckridge, Thaba Chweu, Mkhondo and Msukaligwa) were given a
qualified audit opinion and three municipalities (namely, J S Moroka,
Emakhazeni and Thembisile) were financially unqualified (with other
matters). In this low capacity category and compared to five municipalities
of this category in the previous year, only three municipalities obtained
disclaimers (namely Dipaliseng, Lekwa and Nkomazi) in the 2008/9 financial
year. The general breakdown in accounting systems that occurred in the
previous year had not been addressed during the current financial year at
Dipaliseng and Lekwa. Nkomazi’s financial management deteriorated in the
2008/9 financial year. Furthermore, AG reported that most municipalities
lacked leadership drive as well as financial reporting competencies to lift
themselves out of the existing difficult situation. Ten municipalities had
qualified audit opinions compared to nine municipalities in the previous
year. Two municipalities (Msukaligwa and Govan Mbeki), that were previously
unqualified, deteriorated to qualifications due to lack of leadership,
monitoring and financial skills. However, one municipality (Ehlanzeni)
improved to financially unqualified (with other matters) as a result of
improved control activities.

2.1.4 The AG office (AG) responded to the Committee’s questions by stating
that most municipalities in Mpumalanga either did not have an audit
committee at all, an audit committee was appointed late, or there was an
audit committee which was not functional. AG reported that some
municipalities in Mpumalanga are sharing audit committees. AG raised
concerns that although it consulted some of the municipalities in relation
to their auditing requirements, it can not contact all of them and
municipalities were not seeking help from AG until it was nearing the
external auditing process. Most municipalities lacked proactive plans when
it relates to auditing.

2.1.5 The AG office (AG) reported that many municipalities who used
consultants failed to respond to auditing questions because municipalities’
management did not understand the work that was done by consultants and
consultants are usually not called to account/ unavailable during the
auditing process. AG advised municipalities to invite consultants that they
used to perform some of their functions when an auditing process was
unfolding. AG reported that it planned to monitor and evaluate the
effectiveness of the use of consultants by municipalities in order to
determine value for money used to pay these consultants in relation to
service delivery and reporting requirements. The AG reported that it was
willing to suggest innovative interventions in municipalities’ activities
but it was constrained by the principle of separation of powers in
Government. The AG reminded the district municipality to play a more active
role in assisting local municipality where needed.

2.2 South African Local Government Association’s Comments

2.2.1 The South Africa Local Government Association (SALGA) reported that
it had identified poor-performing municipalities in Mpumalanga and
developed a programme to assist these municipalities in addressing some of
the challenges raised by the Auditor General. SALGA claimed that this
intervention had already started with municipalities in Bushbuckridge. They
also reported that the Provincial Executive Committee of SALGA had resolved
that municipalities must have their own audit committees dedicated to their
functions. SALGA argued that district municipalities should help local
municipalities in this regard as it was one of their core functions as
district municipalities. Furthermore, SALGA reported that they were in
discussion with National Treasury to send interns to municipalities that
were experiencing challenges in terms of financial management and related
matters.

2.3 National Treasury

2.3.1 National Treasury reported that, in the past, financial management
grants were available to municipalities but these grants were seriously
underspent because municipalities failed to recruit ‘trainable’ interns.

2.3.2 National Treasury also reported that they had designed training
courses aimed at capacitating poor-performing municipalities with financial
skills. But National Treasury indicated that the challenge is that relevant
officials from municipalities, mostly financial and municipal managers, did
not attend workshops/ training sessions. Instead, senior managers send
junior officials to capacity building programmes. In addition to formal
training sessions prepared for municipalities, National Treasury had
prepared circulars and electronic devices. But there is little (if any)
evidence that municipalities in Mpumalanga use these educational resources.

2.3.3 National Treasury advised that Mpumalanga Provincial Treasury should
be at the fore front of the provision of financial skills to municipalities
in its province. National Treasury expressed their dissatisfaction about
the support that was given by the Mpumalanga Provincial Treasury to its
municipalities.

3. Municipalities’ Performance and Analysis

3.1 Emalahleni Local Municipality

3.1.1 Emalahleni Local Municipality (ELM) reported that sector departments
were not participating in their Integrated Development Plan (IDP) and that
this lack of cooperation from sector departments has had a negative impact
on the formulation of credible IDPs. The Committee is of the view that the
Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs should play a
key role in coordinating activities relating to IDPs; ensuring that sector
departments participates in these plans.

3.1.2 ELM also reported that it was experiencing serious challenges with
the management of waste management sites. For example, the sewer system was
over-capacitated and sewerage was spilling to the nearest river/s. What is
of serious concern is the risk that this polluted water is used by
households for domestic purposes (including drinking) and livestock for
drinking purposes.


3.1.3 Furthermore, ELM reported that there are water backlogs in its
municipality. For example, approximately 1200 households did not have
access to clean water. Some of the causes for this inaccessibility to clean
water are as a result of some farmers denying municipality access to their
farm land in order to provide clean water, electricity, and sanitation to
communities living on farm lands.

3.1.4 ELM admitted that it is faced with a major challenge of attracting
and, mainly, retaining scarce skills like finance and engineering because
most of these specialists accept job offers from local mining companies
because they are offering them better remuneration packages than what
municipalities could afford. In other words, specialists may start at
municipalities as interns and proceed to mining companies once they are
fully qualified for their specialization. This practice hampers service
delivery by municipalities

3.1.5 ELM is under the impression that the work of community development
workers (CDWs) is not effective and not efficiently co-ordinated, monitored
nor evaluated. According to CDWs, the main cause for the poor performance
of CDWs is poor coordination. For example, CDWs report to the provincial
office (not to municipalities) because they are employed by them, but they
work at a local government (municipal) level. This poses a challenge since
monitoring and evaluation can not be undertaken because no feedback is
directed to municipalities. Consequently, reviews are not properly
conducted.

3.1.6 ELM reported that some of its roads are being damaged by heavy trucks
that are using roads which are constructed for smaller vehicles. Legally,
there is nothing ELM can use to stop these heavy trucks from driving on
these smaller roads. The Committee is of the view that a partnership
between the departments of Transport and Cooperative Governance and
Traditional Affairs should be formed in order to address this issue.

3.1.7 When responding to the Committee’s questions, ELM admitted that the
use of consultancies had limitations and reported that it plans to develop
its skills in-house. ELM reported that engineering, financial management
and project management are some of the areas where they seriously lack
skills. ELM indicated that service delivery is compromised by lack of
technical skills at a local government level.

3.1.8 ELM is of the view that national departments who owe them money is
letting them down because these national departments know that
municipalities do not have a lot of money but still these departments are
not paying them. ELM strongly believed that if these departments paid them
in time, most of that revenue collected would have been put into productive
use and improve service delivery. ELM committed to supply the Committee
with a list of departments who are not paying them on time.

3.1.9 ELM reported that there is insufficient land in  Mpumalanga  that  the
municipality can use for developmental purposes. Implications are that  most
land was in the hands of farmers. ELM indicated  that  more  municipal  land
was required especially because there is huge service  delivery  backlog  in
its municipality  owing  to  inward  migration  by  households  seeking  job
opportunities in the mining companies in ELM.

3.1.10 National Treasury acknowledged that ELM is experiencing  problems  in
obtaining technical skills. National Treasury is under the  impression  that
the district municipality was to share their  technical  skills  with  local
municipalities who could not afford their  own.  National  Treasury  advised
that local municipalities may want  to  explore  other  recruitment  options
like sourcing  these  scarce  skills  from  neighboring  countries.  Another
option could be to form Public Private Partnership (PPP) with  local  mining
companies.  The  Committee  advises  that  the  Department  of   Cooperative
Governance and Traditional Affairs explores and facilitates these options.

3.1.11 The Department of Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
(COGTA) reported that it had set up a task team to report on the  challenges
faced by all municipalities in South Africa and  that  this  task  team  had
started with Mpumalanga and a report would be made available to  the  public
once  it  has  been  finalised.  COGTA  is  of  the  view  that  the  highly
anticipated report would enable it to address challenges that are  faced  by
local municipalities.

3.1.12 COGTA reported that Municipal Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)  amounting
to R28 million that was  initially  allocated  to  ELM  was  taken  back  by
National Treasury last year because ELM failed to spend this grant.  Failure
to spend this grant was due to late  implementation  of  MIG  programmes  by
ELM. However, after MIG grant was taken back, discussions  took  place  with
an aim of assisting ELM in spending their grant. COGTA reported that,  after
this intervention, ELM is amongst the top municipalities that  are  spending
their MIG well. In other words, interventions  helped  improve  spending  on
MIG. This is good example to be followed by other municipalities.

3.1.13  Eskom  reported  that  they  are  going  to  fast  track  short-term
electricity applications made by ELM. Eskom suggested that there is  a  need
to strengthen the Energy Forum that is headed by SALGA in order  to  address
electricity backlogs effectively. Eskom commented that  the  challenge  they
are facing is that households are occupying land illegally.  Eskom  reported
that informal settlements are being  formed  everywhere  in  Mpumalanga  and
that had increased the demand for municipal  services.  Eskom  advised  that
Government may want to review the  setting  up  of  informal  settlement  in
South Africa. Failure to do so, Eskom argued that Government would not  meet
their long term goal of formalizing informal settlements  in  South  Africa.
For  existing  formal  settlements  in  Mpumalanga,  Eskom   had   developed
electrification  plans  for   them   and   these   plans   are   ready   for
implementation.

3.1.14 Eskom also reported that municipalities  are  invited  to  apply  for
more electrification funding by the Department  of  Energy.  However,  Eskom
reported that the extent to which municipalities can do in terms of  service
delivery is constraint by attitude of farmers. For instance, Eskom  reported
that some farmers refuse to allow municipalities to their land in  order  to
provide municipal services to communities that  are  living  on  farm  land.
Eskom appealed to the Committee for assistance on how to deal  with  farmers
who are violating rights of households in farms to basic services;  a  right
that is enshrined in our Constitution.

3.1.15 The Department of Water and  Environmental  Affairs  (DWEA)  reported
that it had budgeted R6 million to provide the municipality with  water  and
waste water projects.  But, DWEA reported that ELM has not  made  sufficient
allocation for water infrastructure in their capital  budget  and  that  ELM
had not reported water shortages. DWEA encouraged  ELM  to  plan  for  water
projects appropriately. DWEA expressed their  concerns  that  an  increasing
number of mining companies in Mpumalanga were  given  mining  licences,  but
these mining companies had not committed themselves  to  water  conservation
and that has led to water pollution.

3.1.16 The Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) claimed  that  it  was
assisting municipalities with technical  skills  and  funding.  Through  the
Siyenza Manje programme, DBSA reported that it recruited scarce  (technical)
skills from neighbouring countries in order to provide  municipalities  with
these limited technical skills. DBSA advised that, because technical  skills
are scarce in Mpumalanga, municipalities  may  want  to  explore  option  of
sharing these skills instead of head-hunting these skills from one  another.
The Committee is of the view that the Department of  Cooperative  Governance
and  Traditional  Affairs  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  terms  of
facilitating these sharing schemes.

3.1.17 Eskom revealed that it does  not  encourage  municipalities  to  take
loans although it  is  provided  for  in  terms  of  the  Municipal  Finance
Management Act (MFMA). DBSA reported that the  bank  intends  to  meet  with
municipalities in order to discuss and plan on how it  is  to  assist  them.
DBSA also reported that they had met with the Provincial  Treasury  and  the
relevant MECs to plan on how to assist municipalities.

3.2 Govan Mbeki Local Municipality

3.2.1  Govan  Mbeki  Local  Municipality  (GMLM)  admitted  that  it  lacked
financial skills  and  most  financial  positions  are  occupied  by  acting
people. However, GMLM told the Committee that it  has  developed  strategies
to fill vacant positions in the near term. In terms of financial  management
capacity building, GMLM informed the Committee  that  National  Treasury  is
assisting  them  with  training  sessions.  GMLM  plans  to  use   financial
management grant to capacitate the personnel in finance and, for  monitoring
and improvement of financial systems.

3.2.2 Govan Mbeki Local Municipality (GMLM) reported that  the  municipality
had a roll  over  of  R19  million  from  2007/08  financial  year  for  the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant. GMLM argued that this huge roll-over was  as
a result of the delay in the approval of the  business  plan  by  COGTA  and
DWEA. GMLM pointed out that it  has  requested  the  services  of  the  KPMG
Services  (Proprietary)  limited  (KPMG)  to  perform  the  internal   audit
function with the intention  that  KPMG  would  transfer  skills  to  GMLM’s
personnel working with them.

3.2.3  GMLM  admitted  that  it  is  experiencing  some  problems  with  the
eradication of the bucket system  which  resulted  in  the  failure  of  the
Embalenhle project although a large amount of money had been spent.

3.2.4 GMLM reported that the size of their indigent register was  increasing
and that is causing a negative impact on the revenue  collected.  GMLM  also
reported that  the  municipality  was  having  a  problem  with  the  ageing
infrastructure, mainly in Bethal and Mzinoni.  Added  to  these  challenges,
GMLM is experiencing  electricity  problems  in  Bethal.  Furthermore,  GMLM
argued  that  insufficient  voltages  provided  by  Eskom   added   to   the
electricity  problems  faced  by  GMLM.  Similarly   to   Emalahleni   Local
Municipality (refer to section 3.1 above), GMLM is faced  with  a  challenge
of heavy trucks that are damaging roads which are  constructed  for  smaller
vehicles.

3.2.5 COGTA reported that GMLM is not spending their MIG as  expected.  With
respect to the technicians deployed to GMLM, COGTA reported  that  they  did
not receive co-operation and acceptance from municipal  officials  and  that
the deployed officials found the working environment  within  municipalities
unwelcoming and they had to leave.

3.2.6 Eskom reported that it is  in  discussions  with  municipalities  over
applications  for  higher  electricity  voltages   in   order   to   improve
electrification projects.

3.2.7 GMLM reported that DBSA, through the Siyenza Manje  programme,  supply
them with deployees in the field of  finance  and  other  technical  skills.
Unfortunately, GMLM was of the opinion that it did not  benefit  from  these
deployees because deployees are shared  among  municipalities  and  are  not
available when they are mostly needed.  DBSA  requested  to  meet  with  the
municipality to  discuss  the  challenges  municipalities  are  facing  with
respect to DBSA’s deployees.

3.2.8  National  Treasury  reported  that  GMLM  was  not  reporting   their
financial performance in accordance with the  required  standards.  National
Treasury alleged that GMLM is, in some aspects, not providing the  Committee
with the accurate information.

3.2.9 GMLM informed the Committee that it had been partly led down  by  poor
performing contractors. Contractors could not finish some  of  the  projects
owing to technical reasons. An investigation was conducted  and  report  was
made available to the relevant  provincial  Member  of  Executive  Committee
(MEC). GMLM  expect  legal  action  to  be  taken  against  poor  performing
contractors. SALGA reported that it would develop  a  programme  to  monitor
and evaluate the service provided by consultants within municipalities.

3.2.10 The Committee is of the view that National and Provincial  Treasuries
assist GMLM in its plan to spend MIG. GMLM is  encouraged  to  make  use  of
approved reporting guidelines provided by National Treasury.

3.2.11  Similarly  to  Emalahleni  Local  Municipality,  GMLM  informed  the
Committee that it is  experiencing  difficulty  when  it  is  attempting  to
access farm lands in order to provide basic services to  communities  living
on farm lands. GMLM reported that some farmers refuse them entry into  their
farm land. GMLM is of the view that Government should intervene  and  assist
municipalities when they are trying  to  access  farm  lands  for  community
development purposes.

3.2.12 COGTA expressed their dissatisfaction with the rate at which GMLM  is
spending their conditional grants. COGTA is of the view that  GMLM  did  not
plan  accordingly  on  spending  conditional  grants  and  provides  invalid
reasons for their failure to spend conditional grants. COGTA  reported  that
GMLM provides good projections on how they plan to spend  their  grants  but
fails to provide proof that funds are committed. The Committee advised  GMLM
and COGTA to meet and discuss how GMLM is going to  improve  their  spending
trend.

3.3 Pixley Ka Seme Local Municipality
3.3.1 The executive mayor of the Pixley ka Seme  Local  Municipality  (PSLM)
informed  the  Committee  that,  six  months  ago,   Mpumalanga   provincial
executive intervened in the management of PSLM in terms of section 139  (1b)
of the Constitution of the Republic  of  South  Africa,  Act  108  of  1996.
Currently, PSLM is under the management of the administrator.

3.3.2 The administrator of PSLM cited high vacancy rate and  negative  audit
reports as some of the causes for PSLM to be put under  administration.  The
other concern of the PSLM’s residents that led to a public protest was  that
PSLM failed to provide such refuse removal service and its residents  refuse
to pay for this service. The administrator reported  that  the  council  has
conceded to  the  writing-off  of  refuse  removal  debts  over  the  period
starting from July 2008 to August 2008. This had obviously led to a  decline
in the service revenue collected by PSLM over the  2008/09  financial  year.
The high vacancy rate within the finance division means that  PSLM  did  not
have sufficient  expertise  to  management  their  financial  matters  well,
including debtors’ collection. This is one of  the  serious  challenges  for
most municipalities in Mpumalanga.

3.4 Lekwa Local Municipality

3.4.1 Lekwa Local Municipality  (LLM)  reported  that  the  chief  financial
officer and the municipal manager had  resigned  from  LLM.  Due  to  scarce
financial management  skills,  the  budget  and  treasury  unit  of  LLM  is
comprised of only four personnel (that  is,  two  permanent  staff  and  two
interns). Obviously, LLM’s finance and treasury  unit  is  under-capacitated
and that situation has a negative impact on service delivery.

3.4.2 LLM also reported that the former Department of Local  Government  and
Housing had  compiled  a  report  after  investigating  late  submission  of
financial  statements  and  non-compliance  with   the   Municipal   Finance
Management  Act.  It  is  reported  that  LLM’s  council   is   implementing
recommendations  of  the  report.  Furthermore,   LLM   reported   that   it
experienced technical challenges when it was trying to conform  to  the  new
reporting requirements of National Treasury. LLM did not  have  an  internal
auditor.

3.5 Mkhondo Local Municipality

3.5.1 Mkhondo Local Municipality (MLM) reported that  Mpumalanga  provincial
executive intervened in the management of MLM in terms of section  139  (1b)
of the Constitution of the Republic  of  South  Africa,  Act  108  of  1996.
Currently,  MLM  is  under  the  management  of  the  administrator.    This
intervention was as  a  result  of  allegations  of  fraud,  corruption  and
maladministration.  These  allegations  had  led  to  unrests   within   the
municipality.  Consequently,  both  the  municipal  manager  and  the  chief
financial  officer  were  placed  under  special  leave.  MLM  informed  the
Committee that an investigation report would be completed in the  near  term
and a copy of that report would be made available to the Committee.

3.5.2 MLM reported that it did not have funds  to  spend  on  projects  that
were under construction. MLM admitted that its Integrated  Development  Plan
(IDP) was not credible owing to insufficient public participation. In  order
to address that challenge, MLM had asked provincial treasury  to  assist  it
with the development of sound IDP. In the 2009/10 financial  year,  MLM  did
not have sufficient funds to implement sewer treatment plant.  This  project
was postponed for the following financial year.

3.5.3 MLM reported that it had serious  shortage  of  staff  in  the  supply
chain management unit.  Even  worse,  three  staff  members  of  the  afore-
mentioned unit were suspended owing to  allegations  of  supply  chain  mis-
management. MLM reported that it  had  made  late  submission  of  financial
statements  for  the  past  three  years  owing   to   bank   reconciliation
challenges.

3.5.4 MLM informed the Committee that households in rural areas  were  using
water from the river  which  was  polluted  by  live  stocks.  In  order  to
temporary address that  this  undesired  situation,  the  administrator  had
hired five water tankers in order to provide rural  communities  with  clean
water. Mondi Paper Milling Company had  donated  R750  000  towards  service
delivery by MLM. MLM also reported that it  had  unused  land  within  their
jurisdiction.

3.5.5 MLM admitted that they had huge service  delivery  backlogs;  some  of
which were inherited from the past.  In  order  to  address  some  of  these
backlogs, MLM had asked for assistance from Nkangala  District  Municipality
which had received a clean audit opinion in the past. MLM reported  that  it
was receiving great help from Nkangala District Municipality.

3.6  Comments  on  the  Reports  of  Pixley  Ka  Seme,  Lekwa  and   Mkhondo
Municipalities

3.6 1 The Committee is of the opinion  that  there  are  serious  challenges
facing Pixley Ka Seme, Lekwa and Mkhondo municipalities.  Because  of  those
challenges,  the  Committee  committed  itself  to  conducting  a  follow-up
oversight visit to these three  municipalities.  Members  are  in  agreement
that  the  above-mentioned  municipalities  require  urgent  and  aggressive
service enhancement interventions. The Committee  agreed  that  these  three
municipalities  need  help  from  relevant  departments/stakeholders,   like
departments of Water and Environment Affairs,  Co-operative  Governance  and
Traditional Affairs, Eskom, National Treasury, Provincial  Treasury  and  so
forth.

3.6.2  After  much  deliberation  with  these  three   municipalities,   the
Committee was of the view that the level of support that is provided by  the
Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) to these municipalities  requires
serious improvement. The Committee urged DBSA’s representatives  to  upgrade
and fast-track support mechanisms given to these and other municipalities.

3.6.3 The Committee was not completely satisfied with the  reports  provided
by the administrators on the status quo of their municipalities  because  it
felt that  they  only  mentioned  negative  things  that  was  happening  in
municipalities without mentioning any good things (if  any).  The  Committee
raised its concern over litigation whereby officials are taken to court  and
later  settle  dispute  through  alternative   dispute   resolution   (ADR);
resulting in a large amount of money being paid  by  the  municipality.  The
Committee is of the view that litigation should be undertaken only if  there
is high probability for the municipality to win the court  case.  Otherwise,
a municipality may waste money and time  on  unsuccessful  litigations  that
are usually settled out of court  with  huge  financial  implications;  thus
compromising service delivery due  to  wasteful  monetary  and  non-monetary
costs.

3.6.4 The Committee commented that councilors  should  be  discouraged  from
regarding their positions as a tool for making money without  advancing  the
interests of the poor. The Committee subscribes to the initiative that  aims
to ensure that corrupt councilors face ‘the full arm of law’.

3.6.5 With respect to these three municipalities, Auditor  General’s  report
indicated that they lacked  leadership,  technical  and  general  management
skills. To address these skills shortage, the Committee urged  all  relevant
departments/stakeholders   to    assist    these    three    poor-performing
municipalities and others.

3.6.6 The Committee advised that the Department  of  Cooperative  Governance
and Traditional Affairs leads a team of departments and  other  stakeholders
that would collectively design,  implement,  monitor  and  evaluate  service
enhancement interventions.

3.6.7 The Committee is of the view that the existence of  administrators  in
municipalities should be a temporary solution. The  Committee  supports  the
idea of having administrators as temporary caretakers;  transferring  skills
to the municipalities so  that  municipalities  become  self-sufficient  and
independent.  Put  differently,  the  Committee  sees   the   role   of   an
administrator as temporary aimed at helping, coaching, educating,  mentoring
and developing employees of a poor-performing  municipality.  The  Committee
emphasized that much of the success of an administrator is dependent on  the
cooperation  between  an  administrator  and  officials  working  for   that
particular municipality.

3.6.8  National  Treasury  reiterated  that  it  provides  Parliament   with
information on  the  spending  trends  of  municipalities  compiled  through
section 71 of  the  Municipal  Finance  Management  Act.  National  Treasury
appealed to Parliamentary committees to make  use  of  this  information  in
order to get a better understanding of spending  trends  in  municipalities.
For example, National Treasury revealed that a  total  of  R444  million  is
unspent by twelve  (12)  municipalities  in  Mpumalanga.  National  Treasury
informed  the  Committee  that  it  is  only  Parliament’s  committees,  not
National Treasury, who can ensure that municipalities  spend  appropriately.
National Treasury can only withdraw  funds  if  they  were  not  spent.  Put
differently, only Parliament’s committees  can  ensure  that  municipalities
deliver improved services to its citizens.

3.6.9 National Treasury advised Government  that  they  need  to  strengthen
cooperative governance.  National  Treasury  urged  municipalities  to  work
closely with them and to refrain from  denying  that  they  are  in  trouble
until a  disaster  happens.  In  other  words,  National  Treasury  strongly
believed that municipalities ‘grow’ problems into mountains and only try  to
act against them when things are beyond  control.  Recent  service  delivery
protests across the country  attest  to  this  argument.  National  Treasury
confidently stated that some municipalities’ report do not  reveal  problems
in municipalities until service delivery protests erupt.

3.6.10 COGTA admitted that  service  delivery  protests  in  Mpumalanga  are
clear  evidence  that  there  are  deep  service  delivery   challenges   in
Mpumalanga.  COGTA  reported  that  it  plans   to   invite   all   relevant
stakeholders and to discuss better ways of  addressing  unrest  and  service
delivery in Mpumalanga. Report on the  outcomes  of  this  proposed  service
delivery workshop/s in Mpumalanga would be forwarded to the Committee.

3.7 Thaba Chweu Local Municipality

3.7.1  Thaba  Chweu  Local  Municipality  (TCLM)  reported   that   it   had
experienced unrest after it was discovered that an amount  of  R3.2  million
was missing in  the  financial  system.   Although  TCLM  had  recovered  R2
million, R1.2 million  was  still  missing.  Investigation  to  recover  the
latter is underway, TCLM reported. Another challenge reported  by  TCLM  was
that it is finding it difficult to service a loan  that  was  taken  out  in
1972 because it is 76 per cent of their total  funds  comprises  of  grants.
These grants could not be  used  for  other  purposes  other  than  purposes
intended for.

3.7.2 TCLM reported  that  its  mayor  and  thirteen  (13)  councilors  were
suspended  and  protests  were  still  going  on,  demanding  the  remaining
councilors  to  resign  owing  to  poor  service  delivery.   Because   most
councilors were on suspension and their positions are  not  vacant  as  yet,
their positions could not  be  advertised.  The  Committee  expressed  their
disappointment that the remaining councillors did not  come  to  account  to
the Committee when they were mostly expected to do so and  as  provided  for
in terms of section 69 of the Constitution.

3.7.3 TCLM admitted that they have thirty-three (33)  percent  vacancy  rate
which obviously led to  capacity  constraints.  TCLM  attributed  this  high
vacancy rate to inability to recruit scarce  skills  because  municipalities
are offering unattractive  packages  when  they  are  compared  to  packages
offered by the private  sector.  The  Committee  advised  that  TCLM  should
explore other options of developing and retaining scarce  skills,  including
Private  Public  Partnerships.  TCLM  committed  itself  to  providing   the
Committee with additional information on  qualifications  and  vacancy  rate
for their municipality.

3.8 Nkomazi Local Municipality

3.8.1 Nkomazi Local Municipality (NLM)  reported  that  court  hearings  are
demanding time from its leadership. For example, its municipal  manager  and
the chief financial  officer  were  not  present  to  brief  the  Committee.
Instead, they attended court hearings. The Committee is  of  the  view  that
the representative from NLM was a junior  official  who  may  be  unable  to
engage with the Committee at a strategic level.

3.8.2 NLM admitted that they do not have an  up-to-date  indigent  register.
NLM reported that they plan to update it  so  that  they  could  base  their
developmental plans on reliable data.

3.8.3 Similarly to most municipalities visited in Mpumalanga,  NLM  revealed
that they were  struggling  with  the  recruitment  of  scarce  skills.  NLM
reported that, although financial systems are in place, there were no  ‘warm
bodies’ to use and support them. NLM indicated that they lacked other  types
of technical skills like engineering.
3.8.4 NLM reported that  the  sector  departments  are  providing  ‘a  mouth
service’ to it. For example, sector departments had promised to  assist  NLM
in providing better municipal services,  but  they  have  failed  to  honour
their promises. NLM is of the view that much of their weaknesses are  partly
caused by lack of assistance from sector departments.

3.8.5 NLM admitted that their plans are still based on the community  census
that was conducted in 2001. Obviously, NLM’s plans are  not  based  on  real
figures,  but  on  out-dated  numbers  because  NLM  is  experiencing  rapid
population growth due to inward migration as the municipality  is  close  to
the borders of Mozambique and Swaziland.

3.8.6  Overall,  the  Committee  is  not  impressed  with  the  service   of
municipalities visited in Mpumalanga. With respect to questions  of  Members
that  representatives  from  municipalities  could   not   answer,   Members
requested that NLM forward responses to un-answered questions in writing  to
the  Committee’s  Secretariat.  The  Committee  is  of  the  view  that  the
Department  of  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs  (COGTA)
should play a leading role when all  relevant  departments  and  stakeholder
are assisting municipalities; starting with the struggling ones.

3.9 Comments on the Reports of Thaba Chweu and Nkomazi Municipalities

3.9.1 National Treasury  is  of  the  view  that  relevant  departments  and
provincial  treasury   did   not   adequately   monitor   these   struggling
municipalities  in  Mpumalanga.  National  Treasury  suggested   that   more
emphasis must be placed on monitoring and evaluation. National  Treasury  is
of the view that the financial management grant (FMG) is used for  incorrect
purposes. For example, TCLM used FMG for customer care courses and  National
Treasury is of the view that the use of FMG for customer care courses was  a
wasteful and useless expenditure. National Treasury advised  TCLM  that  FMG
was to be used  for  strategic  finance.  According  to  National  Treasury,
municipalities like TCLM  are  not  capacitating  interns  with  appropriate
skills, namely financial management.

3.9.2 The Department of  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
(COGTA) suggested that political support is one of the key requirements  for
sorting out governance issues in Mpumalanga.  COGTA  is  of  the  view  that
political support should precede  a  sound  turnaround  strategy  to  assist
struggling  municipalities.  COGTA  advised   that   municipalities   should
research better ways of spending their grants. For  example,  the  Municipal
Infrastructure  Grant  is  amounting  to  R78  million;  municipalities  are
failing to spend grants according to their business  plans.  COGTA  revealed
that, as a department, they had developed  a  turnaround  strategy  for  all
municipalities in South Africa.  In  addition  to  this  national  strategy,
COGTA had devised  a  special  turnaround  strategy  for  municipalities  in
Mpumalanga in response to a current ‘wave’ of service delivery protests  and
unrests in some of the municipalities in Mpumalanga.

3.9.3 Eskom reported that Thaba Chweu and  Nkomazi  municipalities  are  not
paying their bills on time. Eskom revealed that  it  planned  to  meet  with
Department of Energy and discuss  how  to  assist  municipalities,  starting
with the struggling ones.

3.9.4  South  African   Local   Government   Association   (SALGA)   advised
municipalities to use their scarce resources  effectively.  SALGA  added  on
saying  that  Members  are  expected  to  visit  projects  that  are   being
implemented by municipalities in  order  to  verify  the  success  of  these
projects. SALGA cited an  example  in  Buskbuckridge  where  a  municipality
claimed that they had a successful project but, on inspection, it was  found
that there was no project. SALGA advised municipalities in rural areas  like
Nkomazi Local Municipality to identify innovative ways of  generating  their
own revenue. For example, SALGA reported that there was land  in  Mpumalanga
that was selling for approximately R1 million per plot and these  plots  are
highly sought after for the erection of holiday homes.

3.9.5 The Department of Water  and  Environmental  Affairs  (DWEA)  reported
that it is updating indigent register for Mpumalanga but the  challenge  was
that municipalities lacked appropriate policies. For example,  there  was  a
repetitive illegal connection of water in some municipalities.

4. Recommendations

After  extensive   consideration   and   analysis   of   the   reports   and
verbal/written  submissions  from  the  above-mentioned  municipalities   in
Mpumalanga,  sector  departments  and  other  stakeholders,  the   Committee
recommends the following:

1. The Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional  Affairs  leads
   a task team comprising of National Treasury,  Auditor-General  and  other
   relevant  stakeholders  to  discuss  and  report  on  the   minimum   job
   requirements for management positions in municipalities;
2. The Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional  Affairs  leads
   a task team comprising of National Treasury,  Auditor-General  and  other
   relevant  stakeholders  to  analyse  and  evaluate  the  advantages   and
   disadvantages of shared internal audit committees for municipalities;
3. The Department of Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,  in
   consultation  with  relevant  stakeholders,  develops,   implements   and
   evaluates strategies for improving the effectiveness of ward committees;
4.  The Department of Cooperative Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs  co-
   ordinates, monitors and evaluates the assistance of sector departments to
   municipalities when they are developing Integrated Development Plans;
5.  The  Department  of  Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,
   working together  with  the  Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
   Development, the Department of Rural Development and Land  Reform,  Human
   Rights Commission, South African Local Government  Association,  and  any
   other relevant stakeholders, develops strategies on how to manage farmers
   who refuse municipalities access to their farm land to  provide  services
   to communities that are residing on farm lands;
6.  The  Department  of  Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,
   working together with the structures of community development workers and
   other relevant stakeholders, develops strategies aimed at increasing  the
   effectiveness of community development workers;
7. The Department of Transport, working  together  with  the  Department  of
   Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, expedites the process  of
   road reclassification with an aim of finalizing the  process  within  six
   months from the adoption of this report by the house;
8. The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs leads  a
   team to be tasked with the development of strategies  aimed  at  ensuring
   that municipalities recruit, train and retain key personnel;
9. The Department of Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,  in
   consultation with National and Provincial Treasuries, Development Bank of
   Southern Africa and any other relevant stakeholders, work  together  with
   municipalities  to  develop  their  own   skills   competencies   without
   outsourcing their core functions to consultants and to  develop  policies
   and guidelines for appointing outside consultants;
10.   Statistics South Africa, in consultation with national departments  of
   Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,  Home   Affairs   and
   municipalities, updates statistics of communities in municipalities every
   year in order to ensure that municipalities base their  service  delivery
   plans on reliable data; and
11. The Presidency, working together  with  the  Department  of  Cooperative
   Governance and Traditional Affairs and  National  Treasury,  develops  an
   intergovernmental payment policy aimed at ensuring that interdepartmental
   debts  are  settled  when  they  fall  due  especially  when  a  national
   department owes a municipality.

Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Select Committee  on  Finance  and  Appropriations  on  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional grants by Provincial Departments of Health,  dated  10  February
2010.

The Select Committee on Finance and  Appropriations  having  considered  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional grants by provincial departments of Health, reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Select Committee on Finance was established in terms of section 4(3)  of
the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act  No.9  of  2009.
Among its responsibilities,  the  Committee  is  required  to  consider  and
report on spending issues,  and  on  actual  expenditure  published  by  the
National Treasury. The Committee has adopted a tradition  of  inviting  both
National Treasury and the affected  departments  to  account  on  government
spending. This consultative approach gives the Committee an  opportunity  to
interrogate departments on their spending with a view  to  identifying  gaps
and strengthening public spending.

In line with its mandate,  the  Committee  held  public  hearings  with  the
National  Treasury,  National  Department  of  Health  and  four  Provincial
Departments that receive the Comprehensive HIV and AIDS, Forensic  Pathology
Grant, and Hospital Revitalisation Grant during the 18th of September  2009.
The hearings were prompted by the under spending  within  those  departments
on the first quarter of the financial year 2009/10.

2.    Presentation by National Treasury

The current spending of the Forensic Pathology Grant was reported to  be  at
26.9% of the total  allocation  of  R492  billion.  The  other  grants  were
reported to be under spending were the Comprehensive HIV and AIDS at 19%  of
the total allocation of  R3.5  billion,  Hospital  Revitalisation  Grant  at
18.7% of the total allocation of R3.2 billion.

3.    Presentation by Provinces

3.1.  KwaZulu Natal

The department  indicated  that  the  spending  for  the  first  quarter  on
conditional grants had been at R3.7  billion.  The  Hospital  Revitalisation
grant was reported to be reflecting a slow spending but hoped that it  would
recover in the next  quarter.  It  was  reported  that  the  department  had
managed to spent R46.2  million  of  the  R449  million  allocated  for  the
Hospital Revitalisation grant and that they were at 10.3%.

It was reported that there were specific project that  had  made  the  grant
not to perform and those being Hlabisa  and  Lower  Umfolozi  hospital.  The
reasons for under spending and the  low  expenditure  were  the  hiccups  in
supply chain management processes in the province.
3.1.1.      National Treasury

It was  reported  that  treasury  was  happy  with  the  way  in  which  the
department was now working with them.

3.1.2.      National Department of Health

It was reported that when the grant was introduced, it was  only  meant  for
infrastructure but later it catered for  other  programmes.  The  department
encourages provinces to utilize the grant in order to build more  hospitals.
And that there was a need to improve the working  relationship  between  the
department and the implementing agencies.

3.1.4.      Observation

None or low spending was an indication of no/poor service  delivery  on  the
ground by the province and the department should take that very seriously.

3.1.5.      Resolution

There was a need for the province to focus on  the  monitoring  of  projects
and also  the  strengthening  of  its  relationship  with  the  implementing
agencies.

3.2.  Eastern Cape

The MEC expressed his disappointment with the  statement  made  by  National
Treasury that his department had projected to under spend. It was  mentioned
that the province was only left with an amount of R347 million for the  rest
of the financial year that needed to be spent.

On the HIV and AIDS grant it  was  mentioned  that  they  were  having  many
challenges that made them to under spend. Those related to  compensation  of
employees and the linking of codes with  the  computerised  persal  systems.
And with regards to the Forensic Pathology  problems  encountered  were  the
transfer of funds and service level agreements that were not signed.

It was acknowledged that the two grants  were  having  challenges,  and  the
department had sorted  those  challenges  out.  It  was  reported  that  the
challenge on the forensic pathology was of the implementing agency  (Coega).
It was reported that on both grants the issue was delay in  the  payment  of
the service providers, and that is now in order.

3.2.1.      Observation

The presentation was too brief, insufficient in terms of details on  funding
and progress on these grants.

3.2.2.      Resolution

If there are problems in EC and Health, let them provide the Committee  with
a clear picture of what is happening in the province.  The  department  must
provide a report within three months on the actual spending in  relation  to
the items.

3.3.  Limpopo
The MEC acknowledged that it was a concern that they were not able to  spend
on the grant.  The  MEC  reported  that  they  had  met  with  the  relevant
personnel in resolving the challenges on the spending of the grant.  It  was
reported that the department is engaging the department of Public Works  and
Treasury on how to improve on the spending of  the  Hospital  Revitalisation
grant.

At the moment it was reported that the problem  was  with  the  implementing
agencies that needed to be looked at.  The under spending was  that  of  the
implementing agency terminating contractors and not replacing them on  time.
In future the department would provide a full report  as  requested  by  the
committee from other provinces.

It was reported that new contractors were put in place of  those  that  were
dismissed as of 8 September 2009 and the department  is  hoping  for  better
results. It was also reported that the construction being done was  not  for
a new building but those being demolished.

3.3.1.      National Treasury

The  allocations  were  being  informed  by  the  business  plans  that  are
submitted to the Treasury. On the issue of the interests on the R15  million
it would  remain  with  the  provincial  revenue  funds  or  the  provincial
treasury.

3.3.2.      National Department of Health

It was reported that there was a need for the national department to  assist
with the details of the presentations when provinces do  appear  before  the
committee.

On the issue of the budget being  required  by  provinces  or  not,  it  was
reported that it was based on the business  plans  being  approved  for  the
province and that was what will be funded by National Treasury.

It was also reported that provinces were very polite with  the  implementing
agencies and there was a need for the  committee  to  really  look  at  that
matter.

3.3.4.      Observation

There was a serious need for support for this provincial department.

3.3.5.      Resolution

National  Treasury  together  with  National  Department   of   Health   and
Provincial  Treasury  need  to  join  hands  in  providing  support  to  the
provincial department

The committee resolved  that  there  was  a  need  to  invite  the  national
department of public works in the Committee meetings so as  to  be  able  to
engage them on the matter of the implementation of projects.

3.4.  Gauteng

The MEC mentioned that there was a need to take the debate of  the  size  of
the hospitals with  the  Minister  and  she  would  do  that.  It  was  also
mentioned that the department had been able to spend the grant  in  previous
years and were now specifically  organizing  the  unit  concerned  with  the
grant that had not have sufficient capacity to deliver.

To increase the current benefiting patients from 205 000 to a target of  300
000  beneficiaries.  And  it  was  also  reported  that  the  issue  of  the
department not having made  the  required  percentage  was  the  failure  of
Medical Depot in introducing new IT systems.

3.4.1.      National Department of Health

On the issue of the funds being withhold from the  department  it  was  with
the provincial treasury and the department were to request it from them.  On
the issue of the system failing the province, it was reported  that  it  was
only rolled out to Gauteng and four provinces would follow.  The  department
reported that they did not want to see themselves sitting with  the  problem
of having contractual breach as they had  contracted  the  service  provider
and were in advanced stage on the matter.

It was reported that on the issue of the size of the hospitals that was  the
system being followed by the  department  in  terms  of  policies  and  when
approving those structures they are guided by norms and standards.

3.4.2.      National Treasury

It was reported that Treasury were in a process on finalizing that  rollover
for the province. It was also reported that on the issue  of  the  un  spend
funds they had not received any letter in that regard.

3.4.3. Observations:

The committee acknowledged the fact that the department had managed to  sort
out the two  clinics  in  Zola  and  in  Jabulani  that  has  been  standing
unfinished for some time.
The issue of reliance on consultants by the department is also  contributing
on its poor spending

3.4.4.      Recommendations:

  • The provinces need to resolve the issues of their  capacity  challenges
    and reliance on consultants;
  • They should look at ways of management of the grant properly;
  • Monitoring, evaluation, and control mechanisms must be put in place


4.    Conclusion

The use of consultants and implementing agencies need  to  be  reviewed.  In
future the Provincial Departments of Public Works as  implementing  agencies
need to be part of the deliberations.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance and  Appropriations  on  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional  grants  by  provincial  departments  of  Education,  dated   10
February 2010.

The Select Committee on Finance and  Appropriations  having  considered  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional grants  by  provincial  departments  of  Education,  reports  as
follows:

1.    Introduction
The Select Committee on Finance was established in terms of section 4(3)  of
the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act  No.9  of  2009.
Among its responsibilities,  the  Committee  is  required  to  consider  and
report on spending issues,  and  on  actual  expenditure  published  by  the
National Treasury. The Committee has adopted a tradition  of  inviting  both
National Treasury and the affected  departments  to  account  on  government
spending. This consultative approach gives the Committee an  opportunity  to
interrogate departments on their spending with a view  to  identifying  gaps
and strengthening public spending.

In line with its mandate,  the  Committee  held  public  hearings  with  the
National Treasury, National Department  of  Education  and  five  Provincial
Departments that receive the HIV and  AIDS  (Life  Skills  Education)  grant
during the 16th of September 2009. The hearings were prompted by  the  under
spending within those departments on the  first  quarter  of  the  financial
year 2009/10. The invited five provincial departments had  spent  less  than
15 per cent of the above mentioned grant.

2.    Presentation by National Treasury

The provinces were allocated a total  budget  of  R290.6  billion.  Of  this
amount, provinces have managed to spend R72.4 billion or 24.9  per  cent  of
the allocated budget in  the  first  quarter.  This  represents  a  spending
increase year-on-year of 21.1 per cent or  R12.6  billion  higher  than  the
same period last year when provinces had only spent R59.7 billion.

Education has managed to spend about R30.2 billion or 25.5 per cent  of  the
R118.5 billion combined education budgets and remains the  largest  item  on
provincial budgets (40.8 per cent). The spending  patterns  reflect  a  22.1
per cent or R5.5 billion increase over the same period last year.

The Provincial  Education  Departments  was  allocated  an  amount  of  R5.5
billion. The provincial education departments have  only  spent  about  R1.6
billion or 29.1 per cent of the allocated budget.

3.    Detailed analysis  for  the  first  quarter  (of  the  period  2009/10
      financial year)

Provinces have spent 24.9 per cent or R72.4 billion of budgeted  expenditure
of R290.6 billion for the first quarter into  the  current  financial  year.
Spending to date is at a  higher  level  in  percentage  terms  compared  to
spending against budgets over the same period in the 2008/09 financial  year
(24 per cent).

However, in nominal terms, spending is R12.6 billion or 21.1 per  cent  more
than for the same period last year when provinces had spent  R59.7  billion.
Between provinces, spending ranges from the lowest share of  22.9  per  cent
in Free State and 23.3 per cent in Northern Cape, to  the  highest  at  27.2
per cent in Gauteng and 26.4 per cent in Eastern Cape.

Education budget of R118.5 billion comprises  of  40.8  per  cent  of  total
provincial budgets which indicates that education expenditure  is  at  R30.2
billion or 25.5 per cent of the total Education budget, an increase of  R5.5
billion or 22.1 per cent compared to the R24.7 billion spent over  the  same
period in 2008/09.

Spending by provinces on education ranges from the lowest rate  in  KwaZulu-
Natal at 24.1 per cent and North West at 24.2 per cent  to  the  highest  in
Gauteng at 27.6 per cent and both Mpumalanga and  Free  State  at  26.2  per
cent.

Spending on goods and services (which include learner  and  teacher  support
material) in education is recorded at R2.9 billion or 21.2 per cent  of  the
allocated budget of R13.7 billion. It comprises approximately 11.6 per  cent
of total provincial education budgets, which is exactly the same  percentage
share compared to the 2008/09 financial year.

The bulk of education expenditure is on personnel (71.9 per  cent).  Current
spending on education personnel amounts to R21.7 billion or 24 per  cent  of
the education personnel budgets of R90.5 billion.

Spending by provinces ranges from the lowest in North West at 22.3 per  cent
and both Western Cape and Mpumalanga at 23.4 per cent,  to  the  highest  in
Limpopo and Eastern Cape at 25.5 per cent and 24.4 per cent respectively.

Education capital expenditure is at R1.6 billion or 29.1  per  cent  of  the
R5.5 billion budget. This is a significant increase of  109.7  per  cent  or
R834.3 million more than the R760.5 million spent on capital over  the  same
period last year.

The budget spending by provinces range from  the  lowest  in  Mpumalanga  at
only 17.5 per cent and Gauteng at 18.9 per  cent  to  the  highest  in  Free
State at 57.4 per cent and Northern Cape at 41.9 per cent.

3.1.  Conditional Grants

In Education five Provincial Departments (Gauteng,  Kwazulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga and Northern Cape) has reported an under spending  of  less  than
15 per cent in HIV  and  Aids  (Life  Skills  Education)  Grant  during  the
2009/10  financial  year.  Mpumalanga  was  the  only  Provincial  Education
Department that reported a poor spending of below 15 per  cent  in  National
School Nutrition Programme Grant  while  six  Provincial  Departments  (Free
State, Gauteng, Kwazulu-Natal, Limpopo, Northern Cape and Western Cape)  has
indicated spending that ranges between 15 to 25  per  cent  in  the  current
year.

4.    Presentation by Provinces

4.1.  Mpumalanga

The MEC mentioned that they had accrual amounting to R239 million  emanating
from the previous financial year. It was mentioned that  the  major  problem
of the department was the accruals. It was  mentioned  that  the  department
was having limited internal resources to conduct  effective  monitoring.  It
was also mentioned that they were having capacity constraints and  that  was
making them not to spend the grant.

It was reported that the department had spent  43%  of  their  total  budget
allocation for the current financial year. It was  reported  that  they  had
over spent by R414 million on their personnel and that resulted in  the  non
payment of service providers. It was  reported  that  they  had  managed  to
spend 20% on the National School Nutrition Programme Grant and only 18%  for
the HIV and AIDS Grant.

4.1.1.      National Treasury

Reported that from their side they had done the verification of the  figures
and were correct that the department is  under  spending.  It  was  reported
that there were problems in terms of spending in the text books by  all  the
provinces. On the issue of the accruals  it  was  reported  that  the  issue
might be the spending of funds by departments.

4.1.2.      National Department of Education

It was reported that there was a need for the provincial  treasury  to  look
at the issue of the cash flow as national treasury was doing  that  and  the
national department. On the  issue  of  the  HIV  and  AIDS  grant,  it  was
reported that the trainings were being done during school holidays in  order
not to distract classes.

4.1.3.      Observation

The Department seems to experience problems  in  compliance  with  reporting
systems.

4.1.4.      Resolution

The Department need to gets its house in order  to  ensure  that  it  submit
authentic  information  to  Provincial  Treasury,  and  National   Treasury,
National Department and Parliament.


4.2.  Limpopo

It was reported that the department was having limited  capacity  to  manage
the grant and were only having two  managers  to  monitor  close  to  4  015
schools.  And they had committed R8.9 million for training  and  development
for curriculum advisors. The department was reported  to  be  grossly  under
managed and was having a high vacancy rate.

It was reported that the department was trying to reduce  the  R1.3  billion
projection through goods and services expenditure reduction.

4.2.1.      Observation

The Committee observed a need for this department to be closely monitored.

4.2.2.      Resolution

The National Department of Education, National Treasury and  the  Provincial
Treasury need to monitor and provide support to the department.


4.3.  Northern Cape

The department reported that they had spent all the grants in full  and  the
only challenge was for the infrastructure spending. The  challenge  reported
by the department was at the life skills education in terms of capturing  of
data because of not having life skills  coordinators.  The  expenditure  for
the HIV and AIDS grants was reported to have been  at  5%  and  the  reasons
given were that of the under performance due to  the  transfers  being  made
late.

4.3.1.      Observation

If you underpay (that is, R1.50 per  leaner),  the  department  might  loose
their service providers due to low payment. There are  serious  concerns  on
the quality of food that is given to learners.  Members  from  NC  indicated
that there are a number of schools that are  in  dire  need  of  money  e.g.
Sityanda School. It is not clear on why business plans were submitted  late,
even though national policy are known  in  advance  and  should  proactively
plan. Members were disappointed that the MEC and HOD are not present.

4.3.2.      Resolution

The national Department, National Treasury and  Provincial  Treasury  should
monitor and  provide  support  to  this  Department  especially  with  their
development of business plans and payment of service providers.

4.4.  KwaZulu-Natal

It was reported that the current spending for the HIV/AIDS grants as of  the
end of June 2009 was at 15% and that a portion of the budget  was  allocated
for  training.  Contradictions  were  reported  between   the   Preferential
Procurement  Policy  Framework  (PPPFA)  and  the  Supply  Chain  Management
regulatory framework.

PPPFA and SCM framework: Currently, one needs to award tender to the  lowest
price irrespective of whether they can deliver or not.

4.4.1.      Observation

The department is using its equitable share to top up the grant which  is  a
good thing

4.4.2.      Resolution

The  department  needs  to  plan  proactively  in  order  to  utilize  money
allocated to them.

4.5.  Gauteng

The department reported that their  spending  was  at  20%  for  the  School
Nutrition Grant and at 8.4% for the HIV/AIDS Grant.  It  was  reported  that
the province would be able to spend the monies in the  second  quarter.  The
department reported the issue of the service providers not  being  paid  and
that resulted in the accruals for them.

4.5.1.      Observation

The low spending was an indication of poor planning.

4.5.2.      Resolution

The department needs to plan in advance  since  the  medium  term  framework
provides departments with certainty about how much  will  be  received  over
the medium term period.

5.    Conclusion

The low spending in the Life Skills Education grant might be  an  indication
that provincial departments do not regard HIV prevention as a priority.

The  refusal  by  service  providers  to  provide  service  in  Life  Skills
Education because they are being owed money in other  services  provided  is
an indication that departments do not adhere to the 30 days payment  period.
Secondly this is also an indication that departments  rely  on  only  a  few
service providers and this might create a monopoly of some sort.

Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance and  Appropriations  on  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional grants by Provincial Departments of Arts and Culture,  dated  10
February 2010.

The Select Committee on Finance and  Appropriations  having  considered  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional grants by provincial departments of Arts  and  Culture,  reports
as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Select Committee on Finance was established in terms of section 4(3)  of
the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act  No.9  of  2009.
Among its responsibilities,  the  Committee  is  required  to  consider  and
report on spending issues,  and  on  actual  expenditure  published  by  the
National Treasury. The Committee has adopted a tradition  of  inviting  both
National Treasury and the affected  departments  to  account  on  government
spending. This consultative approach gives the Committee an  opportunity  to
interrogate departments on their spending with a view  to  identifying  gaps
and strengthening public spending.

In line with its mandate,  the  Committee  held  public  hearings  with  the
National Treasury, National Department of Arts  and  Culture  and  all  nine
Provincial Departments that receive the Community Library Conditional  Grant
during the 2nd of September 2009. The hearings were prompted  by  the  under
spending within those departments on the  first  quarter  of  the  financial
year 2009/10. All the provincial departments spent less than 15 per cent  of
the Community Library Services Grant. The strategic goal of  this  grant  is
to enable the  South  African  society  to  gain  access  to  knowledge  and
information that will improve their socio-economic situation.

2.    Presentation by National Treasury

It was reported that all nine provinces spend less than 15 per cent  of  the
allocations  during  the  first  quarter.  Arts   and   Culture   Provincial
Departments spent R32.1 million or only 7.3 per cent of the  R440.6  million
community library services allocation.

Transfers received  amounted  to  21.2  per  cent  of  national  allocation.
Highest spending was in Northern Cape at 12.4 per cent  and  Free  State  at
11.3 per cent. Lowest spending was in Western Cape with  0.9  per  cent  and
Gauteng at 1.4 per cent.

3.    Presentation by provinces

3.1.  Mpumalanga

The department has been allocated R55.956 million of  which  R4.375  million
was transferred by the national department. The province  managed  to  spend
R3.202 million which translates into 5.7 per cent spending.
   1. Reasons given for under spending:

  • The department has requested  a  roll-over  for  an  amount  of  R9.466
    million for the completion of infrastructure projects that are still in
    progress.
  • On compensation of employees the province  is  experiencing  a  lot  of
    resignations as employees move to the provinces for better salaries.
  •  On goods and services the international library books take time before
    they are  delivered.  Again  current  spending  in  certain  goods  and
    services will be done during the year since some activities are  taking
    place during the third and fourth quarter.
  • Transfer to a certain municipality could not be done  due  to  lack  of
    proper business plan.
  • Completion of some infrastructure projects overlapped into the  current
    financial year.

   2. Remedial steps in place to fast track spending:

  • The department assisted  municipalities  in  compiling  their  business
    plans and monitoring will be provided through  an  operational  support
    team (OST).
  • Procurement of library books for the current financial  year  has  been
    done in the previous year.
  • A capital projects implementing agent is engaged in  fast-tracking  the
    appointment of service providers.
  • The  department  has  already  committed  some  funds  for  the  coming
    expenditure.

3.1.3.      Observation

The departmental expenditure planning seems to be a  problem.  For  example,
the total amount of the  grant  that  is  allocated  to  the  department  is
R55.956 million which means  the  25  per  cent  per  quarter  spending  was
supposed to be R13.989 million. The  departmental  presentation  shows  that
the department only planned to spend R4.375  million  that  was  transferred
from the national department.

3.1.4.      Resolution

The department needs to ensure that the planned spending per quarter  is  at
least 25 per cent as recommended by the National Treasury.
The National Department of Arts and Culture should  consider  guidelines  on
the  recommended  salaries  for  librarians   just   to   guide   provincial
departments to pay competitive salaries as staff retention strategy.

3.2.  Limpopo

The department reported that they had  received  an  allocation  of  R55.956
million of which R4.772 was spent  and  this  translates  into  9  per  cent
spending.

   1. Reasons given for under spending:

  • Poor quality of specifications from end users.
  • Provincial moratorium on tenders.
  • Failure by service providers.
  • Lack of capacity within the procurement unit.

   2. Remedial steps in place to fast track spending:

  • The department is discussing with Provincial Department of Public Works
    to resolve problems pertaining to infrastructure projects.
  • The department is further talking to the Independent Development  Trust
    for further support.
  •  The  department  has  also  invited  National   Treasury’s   technical
    assistance unit (TAU) for technical support.
  • The department commissioned an  internal  investigation  task  team  to
    investigate how best to deal  with  the  current  challenges  of  under
    expenditure.

3.2.3.      Observation

The departmental expenditure planning seems to be a  problem.  For  example,
the total amount of the  grant  that  is  allocated  to  the  department  is
R55.956 million which means  the  25  per  cent  per  quarter  spending  was
supposed to be R13.989 million. The  departmental  presentation  shows  that
the department had planned to spend R20 181 million  (of  which  the  actual
expenditure was R4.772 million while R6.698 million  were  committed  funds)
that was transferred from the national department.

3.2.4.      Resolution

The department needs to ensure that the planned spending per quarter  is  at
least 25 per cent as recommended by the National Treasury.
The Department needs to assess whether its current staff  organogram  is  in
line with its core business.

   3. Gauteng

For the financial year 2009/10  the  province  has  been  allocated  R46.043
million of which R29.355 have been transferred to  the  department  and  the
provincial department only managed to spend R665  thousand  which  translate
into 1.4 per cent

   1. Reasons given for under spending:

  • The department uses the local municipalities as the  service  providers
    and the different financial years of municipalities with  that  of  the
    provincial department remains a challenge  for  planning  purposes  and
    project implementation.
  • Staffs in libraries are  only  appointed  on  contract  basis  and  not
    permanently from funding made available from the grant and this  result
    into high staff turnover.
  • The conditions of the conditional grant are  not  addressing  the  core
    funding problem that is experienced in libraries.

3.3.2.      Observation

The Department does not seem to prioritise the libraries  in  its  planning,
monitoring and evaluation.  Again  the  use  of  municipalities  as  service
providers does not  seem  to  enable  the  department  to  spend  the  grant
effectively.

3.3.3.      Resolution

The Department will have to provide a detailed quarterly report  on  how  it
ensures that the transferred funds to municipalities translate  into  actual
expenditure and there is also value for money.

3.4.  Free State

It was reported  that  R40.315  was  allocated  to  the  province  for  this
financial year. It was also reported that an amount of  R5.335  million  was
transferred and of which R3.769 million spent and R1.566 million  being  the
balance. It was also reported that the department had managed  to  spend  9%
in the first quarter.

   1. Reasons given for under spending:

  • An amount of R906 510 which was not paid due to invoices  not  received
    on time.
  • The books order to the value of R867 000 which was also not received on
    time for payment.

3.4.2.      Observation

The province was not providing the Committee with  the  true  reflection  of
their first quarter expenditure.

3.4.3.      Resolution

The department must go back and prepare  a  proper  presentation  that  will
clearly indicate why the department under spent, the challenges or  capacity
constraints within the department and how  the  department  is  planning  to
spent appropriately in future.

3.5.  Northern Cape
The province was  allocated  R28  million  for  the  grant.  The  department
reported that the overall expenditure amounted to 12.4% of the  total  grant
allocation with 17% spent on goods and services, 11.9% spent on  payment  of
capital assets and 15.9% spent on compensation of employees.

The department  reported  that  the  delay  in  the  construction  of  three
libraries was the key challenge. The said libraries  were  only  at  15%  as
completion instead of 50% but the department expect these  libraries  to  be
completed before the year ends.

3.5.1.      Observation

The province does not seem to have any memorandum of understanding in  place
with the municipalities where funds are to be transferred.

3.5.2.      Resolution

The department must ensure that systems and measures are in place to  enable
the provincial department as the transferring department to  play  its  role
within the municipalities where these funds are transferred.

3.6.  North West

The province reported that they have spent 12% of the  allocated  funds  for
the grant. The department also reported that they were having an  allocation
amounting to R7.5 million which was for the building of community  libraries
at Ipeleng, Mamusa, Utlwanang, Maquasie Hills, Lebaleng, and Dertig.

   1. Reasons given for under spending:

  • Scarcity of skills in the librarianship profession;
  • Approval of a tender for books only being approved in May;
  • Delays in providing services for public internet access.
  • It was also reported that the department was having problems  with  its
    staff component as the head of the department was suspended  and  later
    replaced.

3.6.2.      Observation

The MEC is still new and had to do the presentation on her own  without  any
support staff. The absence of the support staff might be  an  indication  of
staffing problems as already indicated.

3.6.3.      Resolution

The Committee will have to conduct an oversight visit to the province  in  a
near future to assess the situation.

3.7.  KwaZulu Natal

The Department reported that they were allocated R26.195  million  and  have
spent 94% of the allocated funds in 2008/09 financial  year.  And  that  the
under expenditure related  to  the  committed  funds  with  respect  to  the
acquisition of mobile library bus and the regional depot in Mazwana.

The department reported that they had applied  for  a  roll-over  of  R1.442
million for capital  expenditure  commitments.  And  that  for  the  2009/10
financial  year  they  were  allocated  R34.147  million  and  had  received
drawings of R3.977 while actual expenditure amounted to R3.616  million.  It
was reported that the under expenditure of R361 000 was due to the delay  in
SITA invoicing for internet connectivity costs for new cybercafe’ sites.

3.7.1.      Observation

The challenges of KwaZulu Natal are similar to those of Gauteng because  the
expenditures  referred  to  by   the   province   are   transfers   to   the
municipalities.

3.7.2.      Resolution

The Department will have to provide a detailed  report  on  how  it  ensures
that  the  transferred  funds  to  municipalities  translate   into   actual
expenditure and there is also value for money.

3.8.  Eastern Cape

It was reported that out of the  R55.5  million  that  was  allocated  R11.6
million has been transferred of which R3.6 million has been spent  and  R4.3
million  committed.  It  was  further  reported  that  the  department   has
projected to under spend by R7.4 million.

It was also reported that the department was only building a single  library
in Mount Ayliff and about 39 libraries would be upgraded.

   1. Reasons given for under spending:

  • Capturing of infrastructure budget;
  • Not managing to spend on the ITC infrastructure due to  delays  in  the
    SITA site visits;
  • Delays in the approval of the procurement plan for library material;
  • 12 vacant posts for public librarians;
  • Some librarians being paid in the wrong codes.

The department further reported that they were engaging  the  department  of
Public Works on  the  issue  of  them  taking  time  in  terms  of  building
infrastructure. And that National Treasury  was  assisting  them  to  unlock
some of their challenges.

3.8.2.      Observation

The department seems to have  capacity  constraints  that  resulted  in  its
inability to implement its plans and  hence  its  reliance  on  implementing
agencies.

3.8.3 Resolution

The Committee will have to conduct an oversight visit to the province  in  a
near future to assess the situation.



3.9.  Western Cape

The department reported that the total  allocation  for  the  grant  in  the
2009/10 financial year was nearly R41 million and had signed a memoranda  of
agreement with 27 municipalities in July to provide  library  services.  The
department reported that they had requested  for  a  rollover  amounting  to
R145 000 for Kannaland Municipality.

   1. Reasons given for under spending:

  • The differences in financial years between municipalities and provinces
    lead to the delay in the transfer of funds.
  • The grant would be divided into two allocations those being the 74%
    transferred to municipalities and 26% used for centrally managed
    projects.

3.9.2.      Observation

The presentation by the department does not assist the Committee  to  get  a
clear picture of what is going within the province.

3.9.3.      Resolution

The Department must go back to prepare  a  presentation  that  will  provide
specifics  where  necessary  to  enable  the   Committee   to   engage   its
presentation further.

4.    Conclusion

  • National Treasury together with the National Department of Arts and
    Culture must ensure that business plans of provinces are in line with
    the 25% minimum expenditure per quarter.
  • The National Department of Arts and Culture must look into providing
    norms and standards on how librarians are being remunerated in line
    with their skills.
  • The use of implementing agencies and also the transfer of funds should
    be motivated by efficient, effective and economic service delivery.
  • National Treasury and National Department of Arts and Culture should
    provide support to provincial departments timeous
  • Provincial departments must sign memorandum of agreements to ensure
    that transfer of funds to municipalities are spend for the allocated
    projects.

Report to be considered.

5.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance and  Appropriations  on  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional grants by provincial  departments  of  Public  Works,  dated  10
February 2010.

The Select Committee on Finance and  Appropriations  having  considered  the
First Quarter spending on capital expenditure, non-capital  expenditure  and
conditional grants by provincial departments of  Public  Works,  reports  as
follows:

1.    INTRODUCTION

The Select Committee on Finance was established in terms of section 4(3)  of
the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act  No.9  of  2009.
Among its responsibilities,  the  Committee  is  required  to  consider  and
report on spending issues,  and  on  actual  expenditure  published  by  the
National Treasury. The Committee has adopted a tradition  of  inviting  both
National Treasury and the affected  departments  to  account  on  government
spending. This consultative approach gives the Committee an  opportunity  to
interrogate departments on their spending with a view  to  identifying  gaps
and strengthening public spending.

In line with its mandate, the Committee held public hearings with  the  view
to interrogate spending by various  provincial  government  departments  for
Public Works Devolution of Property Rate  Funds  Grant.  The  hearings  were
held on 14  October  2009  and  focused  particularly  on  those  provincial
departments that had  under-spent  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  2009/10
financial year.

2.    Presentation by National Treasury

Seven Provincial Departments (Eastern Cape, Free  State,  Gauteng,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, North West  and  Western  Cape)  showed  an  under  spending  in
Devolution of Property Rate Funds Grant.

It was further reported that some provinces were projecting to  under  spend
by R165 million, and the Western Cape being the lead province. It  was  also
indicated that the only province  that  had  managed  to  spend  the  entire
allocation was the Northern Cape. It was also  mentioned  that  the  Western
Cape had projected an over expenditure of R103 966 million.

3.    Presentation by Provinces

3.1.  Western Cape

The province reported the following as being their capacity constraints  and
also as factors that contributed to the under spending:

Constraints remain the  shortage  of  skilled  staff  (particularly  younger
staff) in the  planning,  design  and  execution  phases  in  the  industry.
Funding constraints are causing backlogs in maintenance.

3.1.1.      National Department of Public Works

It was reported that they were not aware  of  the  disjuncture  between  the
coding of I E-Works and BAS and would take the matter forward.
On the issue of the CFO forum it was mentioned that not all  provinces  were
submitting those reports as agreed, and the names would be forwarded to  the
committee.
It was reported that the province  of  the  Eastern  Cape  has  submitted  a
detailed report on the capacity constraints that they were having,  and  the
Western Cape has followed but nothing from others.

3.1.2.      Observation

The Provincial Department did not provide the national department  with  its
capacity constraints challenges in time.

3.1.3.      Resolution

There is a need to assess the actual needs for the grant and this must  also
be matched by authentic billing systems by the municipalities.
The National Department Public Works to provide the committee with  the  CFO
forum format.
3.2.  Eastern Cape

It was reported that the issue of the financial years of the provincial
departments and the municipalities still remains a challenge as they are
not the same.

3.2.1.      National Treasury

It was reported that provinces were not reporting to  National  Treasury  of
whether they would experience any short falls and only now  indicating  that
to this  meeting,  a  need  to  fix  the  matter  together  with  provincial
treasuries. It  was  reported  that  National  Treasury  was  aware  of  the
challenges of the province. And that the grant should continue in  order  to
deal with the problems.

3.2.2.      National Department of Public Works

It was mentioned that there was a need  for  the  following  departments  to
come on board in order to be able to assist with  the  grant  South  African
Local Government Association, and  Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional
Affairs.

3.2.3.      Observation

Poor spending on this grant means municipalities are being  owed  a  lot  of
money and this will compromise service delivery.

3.2.4.      Resolution

The province must deal with its capacity problems in  order  for  it  to  be
able to deliver.

3.3.  Free State

It was reported that municipalities were not  coming  on  board,  the  issue
being that they were not having capacity as they were not  able  to  invoice
the department. It was also reported that a plan has been put  in  place  as
of September 2009. That is helping municipalities in drafting bills  to  the
department. It was also reported  that  the  department  was  having  a  R40
million roll-over from the previous financial year.

The department committed itself  that  they  would  be  able  to  spend  the
allocated amount for the current financial year.  It  was  further  reported
that the department was having capacity to deal with the grant.

3.3.1.      Observation

The approach of drafting the bills for the  municipalities  might  have  its
own pros and cons.

3.3.2.      Resolution

The department must provide the Committee with full details of this payment
plan for perusal within six months after the adoption of the report.

3.4.  Limpopo

It was reported that the provinces was receiving the grant  for  the  second
financial year. It was reported that  the  department  was  relying  on  the
utilization of the BAS and E-Works for the payment of the  rates  and  taxes
as the national  department  was  having  access  to  monitor  in  terms  of
payments.

It was reported  that  only  18  municipalities  had  managed  to  bill  the
department and the rest have not  yet  come  up  with  bills.  It  was  also
reported that the  department  was  having  a  problem  of  the  demarcation
between municipalities and this has led to receipt of bills  that  were  not
belonging to the province.

It was reported that if the province could secure funds for  the  completion
of the compilation of the asset register and  fully  implement  GIAMA,  they
would be able to deliver on the grant.

3.4.1.      National Department of Public Works

It was mentioned that the department has not receive capacity  request  from
them.

3.4.2.      Observation

The departmental presentation has some gaps  and  this  does  not  help  the
Committee to  understand  the  real  challenges  faced  by  the  department.
Further the election and change of political heads had negative  impacts  on
the spending patterns within the department.

3.4.3.      Resolution

The department must provide the Committee with the copy of its improvement
plan that they had initiated. The department must take the Committee very
serious by first verifying any information before its presentation.

3.5.  North West

It was reported that the province was the  only  one  still  using  the  old
Worker system as compared to the BAS being used by other provinces.  It  was
reported  that  the  department  was  not  making  any  transfers   to   any
institutions. It was reported that the department had not  reported  to  the
National Department on their capacity problems  as  they  were  supposed  to
have done so.

It was mentioned that the provinces was having sufficient funds  to  deliver
and would have to follow the model used by Free State.

3.5.1.      National Department of Public Works

It was reported that the  department  was  providing  most  support  to  the
provinces. It was  also  mentioned  that  the  provinces  are  dealing  with
municipalities that were not billing the department.

It was reported that there were many challenges  with  this  grant.  It  was
mentioned that there was a need to move quicker for the funds to be  on  the
equitable share. It  was  also  reported  that  there  was  a  challenge  as
provinces were not providing the department with reports  and  later  expect
to be given the funds for the following quarter.

It was also mentioned that municipalities were not  billing  the  department
on time and that results  in  them  making  putting  interests  out  of  the
process. It was further reported that these issues were being  discussed  at
MINMEC level.

3.5.2.      National Treasury

It was mentioned that there was a need to extend the grant so as to be  able
to deal with the challenges faced by provinces as the grant was  only  meant
for a limited time frame.

3.5.3.      Observation

The province is lacking behind other provinces by continuing to use the  old
Worker system as compared to the BAS being used by other provinces.

3.5.4.      Resolution

The department must provide the Committee on how the grant was spent  during
the 2008/09 financial year.

4.    Conclusion

Some of the challenges for the spending on the grant are failure to bill  by
municipalities or inaccurate billings  by  municipalities  due  to  outdated
assets  registers  and  capacity  constraints  within   departments.   Under
spending on this grant will have a negative  impact  on  cash  flows  within
municipalities and this will worsen the level of basic service delivery.
The projected over spending are indications  that  the  current  allocations
are not in line with the current  needs.  The  Committee  will  continue  to
monitor the spending patterns on this grant.

Report to be considered.

6.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON  THE  ANNUAL  REPORT  FOR
2008/09 OF THE FINANCIAL AND FISCAL COMMISSION, DATED 13 NOVEMBER 2009.


Presentation by Financial and Fiscal Commission

The Committee was briefed by the Financial and Fiscal Commission on its
2008/09 Annual Report.

Performance information

The annual  report  showed  partial  and  non  achievement  of  certain  key
performance measures/indicators. The following table provides details.

|Key performance measure/indicator  |Target achievement                 |
|Approval of the Internal audit     |Partially achieved due to audit    |
|report with management comments    |delays, IT audit not finalised and |
|                                   |budget constraints                 |
|Formulation and adoption of FFC    |Not achieved. Proposed strategy and|
|remuneration strategy and policy   |policy pending Commission approval.|
|                                   |Budget sufficiency considerations  |
|                                   |would in any event have curtailed  |
|                                   |implementation                     |
|Implementation of internship       |Not achieved. Programme suspended  |
|programme by employing 10 interns  |due to budget constraints          |
|by April 2008.                     |                                   |
|Preferential employment of females |Not achieved due to embargo on     |
|as opposed to senior management    |recruitment for new positions and  |
|personnel                          |filling of vacant posts.           |


Annual financial statements

The financial statements of the Commission  received  an  unqualified  audit
opinion from the Auditor-General.

The following table  shows  the  sources  of  the  Commission’s  sources  of
revenue and operating expenses for the financial year 2007/08:

|Sources of operating revenue                   |percentage          |
|Government grants                              |98.1                |
|Interest received                              |0.2                 |
|Foreign donations received                     |1.3                 |
|Gain on sale of plant and equipment            |0.3                 |
|Sundry income                                  |0.1                 |
|Total                                          |100                 |
|Categories of operating expenses               |percentage          |
|Staff costs                                    |60.9                |
|Depreciation and amortisation                  |4.1                 |
|Professional services other operating expenses |3.8                 |
|Other operating expenses                       |31.2                |
|Total                                          |100                 |


Human Resources Management

Financial constraints during the financial year 2008/09  allegedly  impacted
on key aspects of the Commission’s  human  resource  management.  The  staff
vacancy rate stood at 48.44 per cent whereby out of 64 posts  only  33  were
filled. The highest vacancy rate was found in levels 6 –  8  with  77.8  per
cent followed by levels 9 -12 with 55 per cent, levels 3 –  5  with  20  per
cent and levels 13 – 16 with 11.1 per cent. A major impact  in  this  regard
is reportedly evidenced in the area of attracting  on  key  aspects  of  the
Commission’s constitutional mandate

 Further particulars

In July 2009 there was  a  vacant  position  of  the  commissioner  that  is
elected by organized local government. It was reported that  the  Commission
was able to  achieve  what  was  required  of  it  by  different  pieces  of
legislation.  It  was  also  reported  that  the  Commission  has  developed
technical models and have been able to share  those  with  other  government
departments and provinces.

The Commission established a  risk  management  framework.  On  the  2009/10
Annual Submission to the Division of Revenue it was reported  that  National
Treasury accepted the  recommendation  of  the  Commission  on  funding  for
education and Health Care.

On augmenting Local Government  Revenue  it  was  reported  that  government
agreed with the recommendation  in  principle  but  prefers  other  non  tax
measures to be evaluated as well.

They  further  indicated  that  the  Commission  is  99%  dependent  on  the
allocation from the government. The Commission  is  however  receiving  less
than what they have requested from National Treasury. It was  also  reported
that they were experiencing a high staff turn over especially  in  the  core
business such as research, and if there can be more  funding  the  challenge
could be addressed.

The Commission highlighted the following challenges:

  • The Commission’s information technology infrastructure on which  it  is
    highly dependent needs to be replaced.
  • The Money Bills Amendment Procedures and Related Matters Act No.  9  of
    2009 has introduced an additional responsibility on the budget  process
    for the Commission (section 9 (7)(a)).
  •  The  cost  of  compliance  continues  to  rise  with  audit  fees  now
    constituting more than 5% of the Commission’s budget.
  • The cost of travel necessitated by the need for stakeholder  engagement
    remains a major constraint.
  • All of  the  above  has  required  constant  reprioritisation  and  the
    implementation of austerity measures in order for the Commission to  be
    in a position to at least not default in the discharge of its mandate.
  • This has the potential to undermine the effectiveness of the Commission
    in delivery of its mandate.

Committee Findings:
  • The Committee observed a need for the adjustment  of  the  Commission’s
    budget.
  • Provinces were not making use of the Commission  as  it  was  there  to
    assist them.
  • The matter of the high staff turn  over  and  high  vacancy  rate  will
    negatively impact on the work of the Commission.
  • There was a need for the Commission  to  have  relationships  with  the
    National Human Research Council and the Statistics South Africa.

Recommendations:

  • The Committee recommends that National  Treasury  considers  increasing
    the budget of the Commission as they were now unable to  fulfill  their
    mandate as required by Section 220 of the Constitution of the  Republic
    of South Africa Act No. 108 of 1996 as amended.
  • The Committee recommends that all Provinces  should  make  use  of  the
    Commission as the Commission  is  playing  a  meaningful  role  in  the
    Division of Revenue Bill.

Report to be considered

                         THURSDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committee of papers tabled


    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr M
             T Masinga, an additional magistrate at Emlazi, KwaZulu-Natal in
             terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).


        (b)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr W
             J M Prinsloo, an additional magistrate at Ermelo, KwaZulu-Natal
             in terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act
             No 90 of 1993).


        (c)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr L
             B Maruwa, an additional magistrate at Daveyton, Gauteng in
             terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).


        (d)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr M
             K Chauke, an additional magistrate at Pretoria, Gauteng in
             terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).

2.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 18 February 2010:
        (a)      Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill [B 7B –
             2009] (National Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Education
             and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.


                          FRIDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


   (a)      Report of the South African delegation to the 121st Inter-
        Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly in Geneva from 18-21 October
        2009.


        Referred to the Parliamentary Group on International Relations for
        consideration.


CREDA INSERT - T100219e-insert1 – 152-170
CREDA INSERT - T100219e-insert2 – 171-174
CREDA INSERT - T100219e-insert3 – 175-178
CREDA INSERT - T100219e-insert4 – 179-189
CREDA INSERT - T100219e-insert5 – 189-204
CREDA INSERT - T100219e-insert6 – 205-213
                         THURSDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) South African Post Office Bill [B 2 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled
    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

               a) The Budget Review 2010 [RP 4-2010], including –
           • the fiscal framework;
               • revenue proposals for 2010, inclusive of the customs and
                 excise duties; and
           • the estimates of national revenue for 2010.

          b) The Speech of the Minister of Finance on the National Annual
             Budget – 17 February 2010 [RP 5-2010].

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

        a) Submission of petitions from Mr R R Sewpersadh.


    Referred to the Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative
    Proposals for consideration and report

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces
1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Development on Membership
      of South Africa to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA),
      dated 23 February 2010:

      The Select Committee on Economic Development, having considered the
      Membership of South Africa to the International Renewable Energy
      Agency (IRENA), recommends that the House, in terms of section 231 (2)
      of the Constitution, approve the said Membership.
      Report to be considered.

