---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-05
---

WEDNESDAY, 05 MAY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                            NO NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I’ve been informed that the
Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of motion today.




                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 34 – Trade and Industry:

Vote No 35 – Tourism:
The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, members of the executive
council of provinces, members of the NCOP, hon members of other Houses that
may be here, ladies and gentlemen, in addressing this House on previous
occasions, we have consistently argued that preserving and enhancing South
Africa’s industrial capacity is intertwined with the challenge of promoting
a broader and more equitable distribution of economic activity throughout
the country.

The impact of the recent global economic crisis and recession on the
patterns of economic development in our country has reinforced our view.
Strong economic forces continue to underpin the tendency to concentrate on
economic activity in established urban areas whilst simultaneously
excluding from economic opportunities people who reside outside these
areas. As we previously reported to the House, industrial development has
enormous potential to generate decent work, including through overcoming
regional disparities in economic development.

The Industrial Policy Action Plan, now commonly referred to as Ipap 2, is a
three-year rolling Industrial Policy Action Plan for the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period commencing in the 2010-11 financial
year and ending in the 2012-13 financial year. It is designed to expand our
industrial base in critical sectors of production and value-added activity
with the bias towards those that are more labour absorbing.

The analysis underpinning Ipap 2 starts by recognising that we need to
place our economy on a new and different growth path. There are critical
imbalances which became evident during the recession and even before. The
most important of these is that when we grew – before the recession –
consumption-driven sectors led by credit finance grew at about twice the
rate of production sectors.

The Ipap 2 then identified a series of crosscutting as well as sectoral
interventions. The most important crosscutting interventions are those
which require drastic changes in our procurement regime as well as in the
manner in which we are engaging in industrial financing. The Ipap 2 is a
product of collaborative and collective work by the economic and employment
clusters in Cabinet. Although the Department of Trade and Industry stands
at the centre of much of industrial policy and practice, Ipap’s success is
critically dependent on bringing about greater coherence and mutual support
between ourselves and other government departments and agencies.

Hon members, we are well aware that achieving success will be an enormous
challenge. We believe that, were it not for our intervention in several
areas of the economy, we may, in fact, face a greater danger of de-
industrialisation than is now the case. Our support programmes for the
motor industry, for example, have been one recent success. The recent
investment commitments by Volkwagen South Africa, BMW South Africa, and the
Ford Motor Company of South Africa bring in an investment of about R9
billion between 2009 and 2013; and we support at least 3 500 direct jobs in
vehicle assembly. These investments will in turn catalyse an estimated R4
billion of the investment by component manufacturers, sustaining the
further 20 000 jobs during the same period. These investments were all
supported by the work we did on the Automotive Investment Scheme.

In assessing the previous Motor Industry Development Programme, the extent
of the auto component sector’s significant multiplier impact through strong
backward linkages to other sectors of the economy, as well as its potential
to make a significant contribution to create decent work, became more
apparent. Our new programme will extend existing benefits previously only
available to light vehicle manufacturers and first to their suppliers
through the Productive Asset Allowance of the Motor Industry Development
Programme to all firms in the automotive component sector.

A second example of successful intervention is the government assistance
programme introduced in 2008, which has put South Africa on the global map
as a supplier of business process services. A total of 6 000 jobs have
already been created in the past two and a half years. The challenge, now,
is to attract new investments in the context of increasing competition for
investment in this sector. We will, this year, be embarking on a review of
our strategy to ensure that it is responsive to new realities in the
sector.

Further progress can be reported in respect of the Enterprise Investment
Programme, amongst others. A total of 290 projects investing R6,1 billion
and creating 11 336 jobs have received approval for Manufacturing
Investment Programme grant funding, in the past year. More than 60% of the
approved companies are in sectors prioritised in our first Industrial
Policy Action Plan, namely capital equipment, automotives, chemicals,
plastics, pharmaceuticals, forestry, and furniture. A total of 68% of these
approved projects have already started production. The Tourism Support
Programme which is the other subcomponent of the Enterprise Investment
Programme, EIP, has granted approval to 164 projects with a projected
investment of R2,3 billion, creating approximately 5 000 jobs.

A third example of successful support for development is through the Black
Business Supplier Development Programme, BBSDP, which assists and prepares
black entrepreneurs to take up business opportunities by providing training
and access to productivity and competitiveness-enhancing knowledge
services. During the past year, more than 4 000 enterprises across all
provinces received technical and standards training, productivity-enhancing
computer software, and marketing and promotional materials. New guidelines
will come into effect in the second quarter of this financial year,
extending the scope of this assistance. This will include a partial grant
for productivity-enhancing technology, acquisition of tools, equipment and
machinery for enterprises that have strong potential for further growth and
integration into the formal industrial supply chains.

In the context of these evidence-based achievements, we are convinced that
we need to move swiftly forward with the work which we have identified in
Ipap 2. We are, now, as I have been saying, firmly in implementation mode.
This Ipap 2 kicked off at the beginning of the financial year on 1 April
and all the quarters which we have identified started on that date.

Hon members, I had an opportunity to speak on matters of trade policy in
the National Assembly yesterday. I don’t want to repeat the points in
detail here. I do, however, welcome the continued keen active interest of
the National Council of Provinces in international trade matters and we
look forward to continue to work with and to brief you further on many of
the important matters. We obviously indicated, yesterday and in the past
hour, that the Trade Policy Paper underwent a number of processes and it’s
close to being finalised. We indicated that there are some very important
developments taking place in the Southern African region, particularly with
a forthcoming summit of heads of state and governments of the Southern
African Customs Union to debate and discuss a way forward to turn SACU from
a mere arrangement of convenience built around the revenue-sharing formula
into a real instrument for developmental integration.

We have indicated that we will pursue the work to enhance and develop the
free trade area which came into force in the Southern African Development
Community, SADC, in 2008; and we are also genuinely committed to extending
African integration through pursuing the Trilateral SADC-East African
Community-Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, Comesa, free trade
arrangements and when they come into force, we’ll put in place a free trade
area quite literally from Cape to Cairo in an area of 700 billion people.

We pointed out some important developments which will be taking place in
our relations with countries of the global South; the Southern African
Customs Union, SACU-Mercosur Preferential Trade Agreement is now before
Parliament for ratification. We are working energetically on trade
negotiations with India and when those processes are complete we have
committees to work on the trilateral arrangement between Mercosur, India
and SACU. We’ve indicated that we do not see much prospect of the World
Trade Organisation, WTO, completing, this year, very important issues that
are at stake there, but our commitment is to continue to engage with
parliamentarians on all of these matters.

Hon members, industrial policy requires a supportive regulatory environment
to support business and protect consumers. In 2008, the Department of Trade
and Industry piloted three major pieces of legislation through Parliament
which were assented to by the President last year; and two of them are
intended to come into force in October this year. The new legislation in
question will impact on all our citizens.

Firstly, there is the new Companies Act. This simplifies business
registration, reduces unnecessary onerous financial reporting burdens on
small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs, and provides new protection
against unscrupulous practices for businesses in financial distress. We
believe that this is a major piece of policy reform and, in fact, we are
embarking on road shows around the country right now to alert businesses
about the importance of this legislation.

Secondly, the new Consumer Protection Act provides, for the first time,
safeguards for consumers through compulsory product description and
labelling, product safety regulations, product choice and information
disclosure. In addition to these two, the implementation of the Competition
Amendment Act – which has now passed into the custody of the Department of
Economic Development - will allow sector-wide and general market inquiries
to be conducted to deal with uncompetitive outcomes and restraints on
competition in key sectors of our economy.

To implement these new pieces of legislation, the necessary regulatory
processes will be finalised this year. Given that the new laws will impact
on all our citizens in all our provinces, we are beginning – as I said – to
initiate and undertake widespread education and awareness campaigns, not
only on the Companies Act, but also on the Consumer Protection Act and on
the competition legislation. With regard to the Fifa 2010 World Cup, we
have published for comment the Fifa Ticketing Regulations. These
regulations seek to ensure that the granting of temporary licences provides
opportunities for small, medium and micro enterprises from previously
disadvantaged communities.

I thank all the MECs and provincial legal authorities for their co-
operation in developing the 2010 liquor policy and regulations. While we
have been concentrating on developing new regulations, we are, at the same
time, engaged in undertaking an impact assessment and comprehensive review
of the gambling industry and legislation pertaining to this.

In consultation with colleagues at provincial level, we have established a
Gambling Review Commission to assess the extent of gambling activities and
their socioeconomic impact. The commission has conducted public hearings
and will produce a report which we intend tabling in Parliament in the
second half of this year.

Chairperson, enterprise development remains a key objective. We continue to
learn as we implement. Based on this learning, part of our response to
improve support for SMME’s is based on the one-stop-shop framework. This
framework provides for the collocation of SMME’s support services through
the relevant agencies at both national and provincial government level. The
Small Enterprise Development Agency, Seda, is engaging with both provincial
and municipal structures not only to collocate, but to cofund the delivery
of some of the products and services within the Seda branches.

In addition to this, we continue with the implementation of our broad-based
black economic empowerment, BBBEE, initiatives. Following the closure of
the public commentary period, a team of the DTI and National Treasury is
now working on aligning the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act,
PPPFA, with the BBBEE Act. One of the aims of this alignment is to
strengthen industrial development in support of the new growth path in our
economy. We will further strengthen the broad-based black economic
empowerment legislation by creating a punitive dispensation to prevent
circumvention of broad-based black economic empowerment while developing
incentives to promote greater compliance with BBBEE policy.

The launch of the BBBEE Advisory Council earlier this year signifies an
important milestone. This is so because one of the key functions of the
council will be to monitor the implementation of broad-based black economic
empowerment by all organs of state, public entities, government
departments, sector charter councils, and the general public at large.
Aspects of the Act that require immediate attention include dealing with
fronting, the policy implementation framework, regulation of the
verification process and refinement of the codes; work is proceeding on all
these matters.

In the area of co-operatives development, in consultation with the National
Economic, Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, we are finalising the Co-
operatives Development Strategy and a Co-operatives Amendment Bill. My
colleague, Deputy Minister Ntuli, will spell out some of the key issues
later in the debate.

Hon members, with regard to regional economic development, our efforts have
not always yielded the requisite results. However, as I indicated earlier,
we believe that industrial development is a key component for addressing
unbalanced regional development. Going
forward, our policy focus will be on financial and institutional support as
well as specific measures to support and develop small-scale industries
through the promotion of regional industrial clusters. Our regional
industrial clusters programme will have the following features: firstly,
the use of an industrial cluster approach to unlock economic development in
underdeveloped areas.

Secondly, there will be identification of economic regions agglomerating a
number of municipalities within and across provinces, and implementing of
the targeted economic development strategies for each economic region.

Thirdly, there will be concentration and co-ordination of various support
measures within the DTI with support programmes from other governments,
state-owned enterprises and the private sector organisations to support
enterprises within an identified cluster.

Fourthly, there will be provision of a wide range of business development
support services to enterprises within supported clusters.

In addition to all of these, we intend to work energetically with the other
spheres of government to support local economic development.

Chairperson, as part of these efforts to broaden participation in economic
activity, the DTI is also increasing support for entrepreneurial
development. We have begun doing so by undertaking innovative,
collaborative and strategic partnerships with institutions of higher
learning. We have also set targets for skills development to produce
additional engineers, technicians, and other skilled people to increase the
number of qualified people in a variety of areas.

The advancement of women’s economic empowerment cannot simply be a
platitude. We have, therefore, integrated gender equity measures into our
programmes to facilitate the participation of women in the economy and to
enhance their contribution to the overall objective of empowerment. Further
initiatives for this year include seeking Cabinet approval for
strengthening the SA Women Entrepreneurs’ Network as an Apex body for women
sectoral organisations. This work has been spearheaded by Deputy Minister
Ntuli. We will also be approaching the Cabinet with a strategy on gender
and women economic empowerment outlining integrated solutions that include
directly tackling barriers that prevent women’s economic emancipation.

In addition, given the higher than average rate of unemployment that our
youth is facing, interventions will seek to increase the participation of
youth in the economy and create jobs for young people. We will be
submitting the Youth Development Strategy to Cabinet for approval during
this financial year.

Finally, to deliver on our mandate, the DTI has to be a high-performing
organisation. Beginning with the new Human Resource Strategy, we are well
on the road to developing a professional programme for economists,
specialising in industrial policy and sector work. All in all, greater
support will be provided for our bursary scheme, our postgraduate research
programme and internship programmes as well as various functional skills
and management development programmes. Good progress has been made in
filling our senior management positions. In addition to this, we are
focusing on the development of women in the department to create a pool of
talent for senior management positions.

Finally, Chairperson, in light of the challenges facing the Public Service
around financial mismanagement, I would like to commend the department on
its efforts in continuously receiving unqualified audit reports from the
Auditor-General and in ensuring that suppliers are paid within a 30-day
period. I thank our Deputy Ministers, MaNtuli who is with us today, and
Thandi Tobias-Pokolo, who, unfortunately, is ill; the director-general and
the staff of the DTI; the chief executive officers, and the chairs of the
boards and all the workers in the various agencies. I thank you and I trust
that this House will support the DTI’s Budget Vote. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, just allow me to welcome hon
Watson who is back in the House after a long absence. [Applause.] We are
happy to see your happy face and that you are back in the House again. I
hope you will heal quickly. Please don’t strain yourself. You should take
it easy.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, thank you for the good wishes, phone calls,
messages and prayers. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, when we celebrated the 50-day
countdown to our hosting of the World Cup two weeks ago, we reflected on
how far we had come since May 2004 when we won that right to host the World
Cup. As South Africans and as a host country, we have consistently defied
conventional wisdom and exceeded expectations in so many areas.
The World Cup has brought the three levels of government, the private
sector, NGOs and citizens together across all the provinces. We have all
worked very hard and the time is almost upon us to reap the rewards of our
combined efforts.

We all know that tourism is one of the pinnacle sectors in terms of its
capacity to fuel global economic activity and also the creation of
employment. In 2009 we saw a worldwide downturn in tourism and travel
activity, with figures from the United Nations World Tourism Organisation,
UNWTO which indicated that international arrivals fell by an estimated 4%
compared to 2008. However, in South Africa, we managed to outperform not
only that trend, but also the performance of most of our international
competitors. We saw growth in foreign arrivals of 3,6%, which is especially
positive considering that many of our primary source markets in Europe were
severely depressed in terms of consumer spending.

In total, we welcomed more than 9,9 million foreign arrivals to South
Africa last year. Our government has identified tourism as a key
contributing sector to the medium-term strategic priorities for growing the
economy and creating decent work. Last year, that led to the decision to
form a new standalone national Department of Tourism. Over the next three
years we will be phasing in the filling of positions in the department in
line with our financial resources.

The department recognises the national priority of creating decent
employment through inclusive economic growth. In this regard, we will
increase job and entrepreneurial opportunities and also encourage the
meaningful participation of previously disadvantaged communities and
individuals. In the medium term, the department aims to increase investment
in the tourism sector and internal tourism, but also to deliver a world-
class visitor experience. We will also focus on entrenching a culture of
tourism amongst South Africans and increasing the sector’s contribution to
job creation and economic growth.

The department is now finalising the National Tourism Sector Strategy which
will set out a vision for a successful world-leading industry and an
ambitious path to achieve this. It is envisaged that this strategy will
address the government and the tourism industry’s objectives in terms of,
amongst others, economic growth, investment and transformation within the
travel and tourism sector. It will also talk to people development, rural
development, job creation, domestic and foreign arrivals with very specific
targets and the delivery of a world-class visitor experience. We are
planning to launch the strategy for public comment before the end of May
2010.

The Tourism Grading Council of South Africa, which forms part of South
African Tourism, successfully completed a review of the grading system for
accommodation establishments. This will improve levels of service delivery
in the implementation of the grading system across our country. One of the
actions from the review recommendations was the recent appointment of
provincial master assessors who will focus on strengthening relationships
with the industry, but they will also be assisting provinces in achieving
their competitive potential.

We are also constantly expanding our stock of quality assured accommodation
establishments across the country. A total of 7 710 establishments had been
graded as of September 2009 compared to about 4 600 in 2005. The
development of World Cup infrastructure will impact positively on growth in
various ways and across numerous industries. We will host a truly world-
class event which will enhance South Africa as a tourism destination within
the global community. The championship will be a showcase that will
introduce South Africa to millions more visitors. The media coverage and
the focus on our country in the run-up to and during the event will be
unprecedented.

In terms of our own figures, we expect 34 billion people cumulatively to
watch the World Cup from 11 June to 11 July. It is a massive opportunity.
In terms of accommodation our department conducted an audit and we know
that we have more than 200 000 rooms available across the country, which
will more than fulfil the World Cup needs. We now have a very good picture
of the number of accommodation establishments and rooms in our country and
also, very importantly, where they are situated. This will be our strategic
advantage in terms of our future planning.

On the issue of pricing, we launched an investigation in February in
response to persistent allegations of excessive price hikes and also the
requests from members of the select and portfolio committees. I am happy to
report, and that report has been made public, that the results of the audit
indicated that the vast majority of our accommodation establishments were
not charging exorbitant rates, and the facts and the figures are there for
all members to analyse and look at. They are broken down by region, by
city, and so on.

In terms of information provision, we have launched a national tourism
contact centre for South Africa as a single point of call for all tourism-
related information. The contact centre consists of a comprehensive website
and the call centre which is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week
and will serve customers in seven international languages. The website and
the call centre provide a wide range of accurate and up-to-date information
on tourism and travel.

This includes information on attractions, activities, experiences,
services, restaurants and routes across the entire country. In addition to
that, on Vote 35 we have state-of-the-art visitor information centres. A
number of members were present when we launched that. That was in Mangaung,
Polokwane and Nelson Mandela Metro, Mbombela and Rustenburg. These centres
will leave a lasting legacy for tourism in terms of information provision
and service excellence.

All across our country, our stadiums have all been designed as world-class,
multipurpose facilities, capable of hosting not only sporting events, but
also music and cultural events. Through ensuring that there is an
integrated and co-ordinated intergovernmental approach to securing the
hosting rights of strategic international events, the department intends to
boost future events tourism. We have the figures available for members as
to how many conferences and international meetings were held, how many we
have won the rights to host over the next few years, and how many of those
we are in the process of bidding for.

We also recognise the significance of national events as a source of
domestic tourism revenue that we put in place to drive growth in this area.
These mechanisms will include packaging easily accessible information about
provincial and local events through interdepartmental information systems.

On behalf of the department, I would like to thank the chairperson, hon
Gamede, and members of our select committee for their input and dedication.
I am also grateful to our dedicated colleagues in the department and the
acting director-general, Mr Dirk van Schalkwyk, for their commitment and
hard work. I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the newly
appointed director-general Mr Kingsley Makhubela, who is sitting in the
public gallery there. At present, he is the deputy director-general in the
Department of International Relations and Co-operation, Chief of Protocol
in Government. He will start as our director-general on 1 June.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Minister for her passion for the
industry and for her support. To the hundreds of thousands of visitors that
we are expecting to the World Cup, I would like to welcome them and
encourage them to enjoy our special South African hospitality and the
diversity that our provinces are going to offer. It is an experience that
you will never forget. To my fellow South Africans, our time has come.
Let’s host that event with distinction. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, the committee supports both Budget Votes, the
one on Trade and Industry and the other one on Tourism. I will deal with
both departments, but my colleagues will deal specifically with each
department separately.

We are happy as a committee that both departments have been getting a clean
bill on their finances. We commend them for that. During the first decade
of freedom government succeeded to a moderately significant degree in
promoting the implementation of policies on industrial development,
enterprise promotion and broad-based black economic empowerment. Although
government programmes qualitatively assisted the poor, its redistributive
capacity failed to integrate the poor into the mainstream economy except
for a smaller section of the black population.

This failure was attributed to the adoption of restrictive macroeconomic
indicators and targets. The previous government’s industrial plan fell
short on creating labour-intensive jobs and reintegrating small and micro
enterprises into the mainstream economy.

The economy had an average growth rate of 3% from 1995 to 2002, but the
rise in unemployment from 1,9 million to 4,4 million during the same period
effectively meant a jobless growth. The economy had shed jobs in the
manufacturing and mining sectors and showed growth in financial and
services sectors. In its national general council, NGC, in 2005 the ANC
concluded that central challenges facing our movement in the second decade
are to defeat poverty and substantially reduce the level of unemployment.

Therefore, it is against this background that the 2010 strategic plan of
the Department of Trade and Industry, DTI, needs to be analysed for its
compatibility with the ANC’s strategy and tactics. Against this backdrop of
the 2007-08 economic recession, the DTI’s Medium-Term Strategic Framework,
MTSF, has identified the rapid fall in gross domestic product, GDP, and
substantial rise in unemployment as major challenges that require urgent
intervention by government.
According to the 2010 Budget Review, GDP declined by 1,8% in 2009 compared
to the annual growth of 4,9% between 2006 and 2008. As has been said, the
official unemployment rate was about 24% to 26% in 2009 compared to the
annual average of 22% in 2006 and 2008 as the hon Minister said in the
interview on TV this morning.

In light of this, one needs to examine the strategic plan of the DTI to
ascertain whether it addresses the ANC’s goals of decent work, economic
growth, infrastructure development and balanced global trade as levers for
fundamentally transforming the South African economy.

In the 2010 Division of Revenue, provinces were allocated R261 billion and
local government R938 million. The DTI implemented policy interventions in
the automotive, clothing and textile sectors.

Challenges that were identified include lack of mainstreaming of the
Industrial Policy Action Plan, Ipap, in state-owned infrastructure
projects. We call on the department to intensify its co-ordination with
provinces in support of industrial interventions in labour-intensive
sectors.

On empowerment enterprise development and development finance, the
challenge has been fragmented on interdepartmental and intergovernmental co-
ordination. The department must address the issue of access to start-up
finance and micro loans even for townships and rural areas. There are
situations where communities would be assisted to get finance of about
R100 000, but they would say you must put up about R10 000 first. This
issue is a challenge.

As the Minister also said in the media yesterday, we envisage investors
investing about R105 billion. We urge the department to make the cost of
doing business cheaper and accessible so that these investors come in. In
Richards Bay, for example, a desert has been lying fallow since 2002.
However, a few weeks ago, it did get some funds from the department and
there is some action now. In trying to make business better, we would like
the department to facilitate the access in doing that.

During our oversight visit to Mtubatuba a few months back, we identified
challenges where people had markets - plants or something - but they were
short of markets. The Small Enterprise Development Agency, Seda, was
contacted on the spot, but to date we haven’t gone far with that issue. The
same thing happened when there was the Taking Parliament to the People
event in Limpopo. People were saying, “We can assist and help ourselves but
we need markets to sell these things so that we can fend for ourselves.”

There is an issue which I raised with the director-general about a
committee member, Mr Khuzwayo, who said something about accessing these
offices as they are far away from the rural areas. He was once asked to
drive to an office that was about 75km away, only to sit in a meeting for
two minutes to arrange the next meeting. That is the nature of the
inaccessibility of offices. That meeting was aimed at setting up a business
plan.

We commend your leadership and participation in the World Trade
Organisation, WTO, and hope that your further participation in the
forthcoming round of negotiations assists the country. The country needs
more participation on India, Brazil and South Africa, Ibsa, and Brazil,
Russia, India, China, Bric, so that it becomes Brazil, Russia, India,
China, South Africa, Bricsa.

We would want to strengthen the south-south relations on the European
Union, EU. Today we have ratified one agreement on the EU, the African
Union, AU, and Southern African Development Community, SADC. We are happy
as a committee that the Ipap 2 is moving and is now in motion and is in the
implementation phase.

On the issue of tourism, I would be referring to two of the ANC’s
identified priority areas for the next five years, namely the creation of
decent work and sustainable livelihoods, education and capacitating our
people to play productive roles in building our nation and to fill
positions of employment successfully.

A sustainable increase in the number of both domestic and foreign tourists
has resulted in the continued creation of decent jobs in the tourism
sector. It is estimated that for every 11 tourists who arrive, a job is
created. On this basis, it is projected that direct employment will
increase from 600 000 to 800 000 over the medium term.

In total tourism has contributed R356 billion to our national economy since
2003, with an average spend of R8 300 per tourist, even though our target
was R9 900. The aim is to increase this average and the direct contribution
of tourism to South Africa’s GDP by 3%, as the hon Minister has said. It is
at 3,6 over the medium term.

Business tourism currently represents approximately 6% of all foreign
arrivals in South Africa. This represents more than half a million visitors
per year who come to South Africa for meetings, incentives, conferences and
events. In 2008 these business tourists spent an average of R5 600 when in
South Africa. This is an increase of 40%.

The prevailing international conditions did not cause the ANC-led
government to retreat and withdraw as has been the case in so many other
countries. They are rather provided a space for moving towards a
significantly more labour-intensive growth trajectory.

ANC policy recognises that our cultural heritage sources and facilities,
including those previously neglected, should be popularised, preserved,
democratised, opened and belong to all people. It also follows that because
we are proud of our rich culture and heritage we want the rest of the world
to also feel, see and experience these emotional assets.

The 2010 Budget was tabled within the context of a deep global crisis
brought on by the crisis in the financial sector in developed countries.
Although not immune to the ensuing global economic downturn, South African
tourism has so far resisted the financial crisis better than any other
sector. There is growing evidence that tourism and travel can make a
valuable contribution to the process of economic recovery.

There are still many areas that remain undiscovered by tourists and these
areas range from our cultural villages in deep rural areas to our heritage
places that define our new democracy and the heart of South Africa’s
attraction.

It is important to note that South Africa is home to eight World Heritage
Sites. All these places are of outstanding value to humanity. The
transformation process, which is a key issue in tourism, has over the past
16 years undergone a number of phases, each building upon what has gone
before, but with a necessary continuity and change, as demanded by the ANC
and by the objective conditions that face our economy.

We are entering a new phase of a new growth path. It is this new growth
path that today’s Budget Vote debate must speak to. For far too long
tourism has lacked the necessary economic transformative component of
building broad-based black economic empowerment, BBBEE. In particular, the
sector lacked in building one of the most important components of broad-
based black economic empowerment - that of social capital - whereby the
broadest sections of our communities become economically empowered by
collectively owning their wealth.

When we look at the annual report, there are certain issues which were
raised by the Auditor-General. We hope the department has been taking care
in respect of these issues ever since they were raised last March.

The use of consultants by the department was another issue of concern. We
think this is improving. The committee supports the budget.

Mrs S S CHEN: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, all MECs, my
hon colleagues, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, while recovery
from the global economic crisis is evident in many parts of the world, our
country is still in the midst of an economic recession in which the
manufacturing and mining sectors have been the most affected.

Turning the economy around necessitates a new way of thinking and this
entails making difficult decisions that shape the country’s policies and
programmes for the years ahead.

Further, government will need to forge relations with the business sector
and organised labour to effectively deliver on public services, with
persistent unemployment and high levels of inequality characterising the
country. It is important that future policies create and offer all South
Africans better economic opportunities

The National Treasury has projected a 1,5% growth in the South African
economy in 2010. The projected growth this year is expected to be driven by
increased consumer spending and government investment in infrastructure.
But the challenges still remain in the downstream economy characterised by
a vulnerable manufacturing sector. Local manufacturing is currently at a
disadvantage and is unable to compete with manufacturing in other countries
due to the lack of skilled labour, the lack of investment in this sector,
and the high price of raw materials required for manufacturing.

Although significant growth in the automotive industry was realised through
the Motor Industry Development Programme, the majority of the components
used in the production process were imported. The revenue that could
potentially have been generated by local manufacturers was lost to imports
of components produced internationally.
There are many who argue that South African manufacturing is of poor
quality, largely because of the lack of skilled labour. However, the
reality is that the training of the workforce will only take place if a
need for skilled workers is created.

Currently, manufacturers are being severely hampered, largely because they
are unable to purchase raw materials at good value, due to high import
duties. Many factories in the country have gone out of business because
their customers were able to source and buy imported goods at a far lower
price than those produced locally. We need to look seriously at drastically
reducing the current duties imposed on the import of raw materials used for
manufacturing. To be able to compete in the global market, we should
consider the idea of imposing a zero rating on raw materials that are
unobtainable in South Africa and raise tariffs on downstream industries to
promote competitiveness and prevent loss of revenue from tariffs.

In the meantime, the Department of Trade and Industry, DTI, should also
review and renegotiate trade agreements that have become either outdated or
redundant, such as those relating to the Southern African Customs Union,
SACU, which has long-standing, outdated agreements with our neighbouring
countries which allow duty-free imports that benefit the countries
involved, but at great cost to South Africa.

Our country is in desperate need of investors. The government must align
itself with the business sector and form relationships that will allow
local manufacturing to prosper by creating a friendly business environment
as well as an attractive incentive scheme.

In just over a month, the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup will take place in
South Africa. This historic event will bring with it many opportunities, as
well as many possible risks for our nation, such as a potential economic
downfall, following the World Cup.

The Department of Tourism is well prepared for the World Cup, although the
recent global economic crisis as well as the restrictions that Fifa has
placed on local industry have created many difficulties.

Both the DTI and the Department of Tourism should formulate an evaluation
plan that will measure the effect of the World Cup in terms of its
influence on the economy. It is important to understand the actual value of
hosting such events in relation to the money and efforts we spend on
planning and preparing for them.

In addition, we need to ensure the integration of tourism priorities and
plans into local, provincial, as well as national government planning, and
facilitate interdepartmental contribution to tourism growth. There is also
too much separation between the overseas departments and better
communication is needed between them. Resources and information should be
shared between governmental departments. The departments will be more
financially and strategically effective if there is efficient and
consistent communication.

Sharing of knowledge and ideas between all nine provinces is also important
through joint initiatives between the three spheres of government to reduce
duplication and costs. This will create a better understanding of how each
department is working towards branding South Africa internationally. I
thank you.

Mr A WINDE (Western Cape): Chairperson, I feel privileged to be part of
this debate. I will start off with trade and industry and the economy. I
think we have just come through a downturn that has seen us shed 880 000
jobs over the past four quarters.

One wonders, if we did not have this massive window in front of us called
the 2010 World Cup, what would that job shedding actually have been
because, as a country, we have invested a huge amount of money in
infrastructure. I think that has helped us to cushion a major part of that
downturn blow.

However, that made me think specifically about the Western Cape, where an
infrastructure upgrade and investment we have of R14 billion. We have seen,
over the very short while, upgrades in various ways: We have seen upgrades
in a really great looking and a functional new airport, and we have seen
the building of a wonderful new stadium, amongst other projects.

Then one wants to contrast that with how we deliver on our housing. One
just has to look at those two, infrastructure and housing, where we are
inundated with problems of houses cracking and falling to pieces. Both of
these form part of the economy. They both play a major role in our economy
and I think what we need to do is to spend a bit of time in investigating
why, on the one hand, we have been so successful and, on the other hand, we
have failed so dismally.

I would also like to talk a little bit about trade matters, as the Minister
also mentioned. There is one concern that I have. There was a very
successful visit to the UK not so long ago by the President. One of the
matters that was discussed there was the doubling of trade - the doubling
of trade over the next five years.

We are already two months into that next five years since that discussion
took place. And, I think, if we really want to be serious about doubling
trade with one of our major trading partners over the next five years, we
need to see a plan.

I am prepared to commit from the Western Cape. I do think doubling is quite
in order and I am prepared to commit wherever possible from the Western
Cape to reach that target. But I think we need to actually have a fully
fledged plan on the table to be able to achieve and reach at least
somewhere towards that goal.

I also want to talk about the SMME Development and specifically refer to
the City of Cape Town with reference to an item that is being tabled at the
moment where we have policy differences between the national government’s
policies and the provincial government’s policies. And that is specifically
around BEE. I think the City of Cape Town can be a prime case and we really
need to investigate that to see if there are differences. That is how
democracy works.

We learn from each other and one should be given the space to actually
prove that there are policies that are different and that we actually adopt
those policies. It has been shown since 2006, in the City of Cape Town,
that there have been major differences with regard to procurement,
specifically from the Human Development Index, HDI, and SMMEs.

In the city we have seen 10 000 vendors in 2007 increase to 15 000 in 2010.
And at the same time, we also have seen that the HDI and SMME component
makes up 80% of that component. That really shows that it is the policy
difference and it has worked. I think we need to put that challenge out
there to say let us look at that policy difference and see how we can
actually influence the other side to make a difference.

I also want to say to the Minister that perhaps we need to re-examine the
training layoff scheme and the money that has been made available. I know
that in the National Assembly the President has answered the question just
a while ago that 15 000 jobs have been saved by that scheme. I am not sure
where those 15 000 jobs are. So far the report I have shows 2 399 jobs, but
perhaps we are a bit short on some of the reporting and perhaps closer to
5 000. But I really think we need a different look at it; I am not sure.

I think there is a wrong perception on how to actually apply for it,
because I do believe that we need to use this opportunity to reskill and to
use our skills development process to make a difference there. But,
Minister, I think we seriously need to actually have a look at that system;
there are some shortfalls there. We should have seen much better use of
that opportunity and we just have not seen it.

I also want to talk about the programme that we ran over the past nine to
ten months. That programme is called Work and Skills for 100 000. We have
put up a challenge to businesses and said that we are prepared to partner
with them. We put R1 000 a month per learner for a 12-month period with a
service level agreement, SLA, to say we want to have a skills development
programme for people who have shown commitment to pass matric but cannot
find jobs.

That is the biggest component of the unemployed out there, people who have
actually got a school qualification – not a tertiary qualification - but
because they don’t have work experience they can’t get a job. We are
partners with industry. Sometimes industries have come up to R10 000 a
month per student. We have an unbelievable success rate with it.

We have had students coming out through partnership with convention
centres, with Koöperatieve Wijnbouwers Vereniging, and with the hospitality
industry. We have shown huge success in it and we are going to be rolling
it out again this year. That, perhaps, is something that we need to also
look at, and see if we can learn from each other in that respect.

I want to talk a little bit about the industrial development zone, and I
want to thank the Minister because the DTI has actually partnered with it
in the Western Cape to continue with the study into the IDZ in Saldanha
Bay. I know that there is a study on the IDZ that is going on at the
moment.

Minister, perhaps this is another area that we can have a look at. Perhaps
we can tweak and maybe change some ANC policies that are fairly stringent
around labour laws, etc, in the IDZ. Let us use it as a test case and if it
fails then we will face the political music but if it succeeds it could be
a success for the whole country.

Minister, I would also like to talk about the oil and gas industry. I think
that is one area where we, specifically in the Western Cape, are failing. I
think as a country we are failing.

Early in this democracy, our President, Nelson Mandela, led two delegations
into Africa; at that stage, Africa contributed 7% of the world’s oil. Since
then we have had a lot of talks and I must say the province as well has had
a lot to talk about. Now we are contributing 12% of the world’s oil and we
are still not in any space.

We should logistically and financially be the oil capital of Africa; it is
still owned by the Americans and other nations but not in Africa. I think
we need to play a far more prominent role there. I actually look forward to
the national Minister perhaps partnering with us in the Western Cape
regarding that.

If I had time, I would move onto the private sector, but I must just say a
few things about tourism during the 2010 World Cup. From the Western Cape
side, we are ready and I think this is a massive opportunity for us. I must
mention one thing and that is around the BBC basing themselves in Cape
Town.

Perhaps I should ask not the Minister but other members of the ANC in this
House to speak to their colleagues in the Western Cape. We rented out the
top of Somerset Hospital for R57 000, for the period of the World Cup. They
are saying that the R57 000 is ridiculous; we should have charged them much
more.

All I can say to you is that they are building a glass box on top of the
hospital and there will be four views in BBC presentation for 32 days. It
will even include the mountains of Cape Town, the waterfront, the stadium
and the city’s skyline. You cannot buy that kind of marketing and exposure
for South Africa as far as tourism is concerned.

Let us not get into some petty political fight over R57 000 for the rental.
They are going to leave all of that behind as a legacy for the film
industry. Perhaps we need to slow down a bit on that fight.

I must also talk about what we are busy doing. The Minister spoke about the
national policy and the roll-out, at national level, on tourism. It is also
something that we really need to look at. When you go into any
international marketing platform and you see South Africa the way we are,
specifically our municipalities being involved in trying to market our
provinces, we don’t show one committed and united face as South Africans.

I think we need to make a big difference and change because, quite frankly,
even in this House, if I were to say to any member of this House, “Would
you like to go to Matzikama Local Municipality on holiday?”, how many
actually know where Matzikama Local Municipality is? [Interjections.] You
know it, I am glad. But, I promise you, when you go to South Africa they do
know, and when you go to the international market they don’t know at all.
At the moment we are confusing the market out there. It is the biggest
opportunity for job creation to come out of tourism. Minister, we’ll
support you if you could get all of that into one space. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr A J NYAMBI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, MECs, hon Members of Parliament,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to open my debate by
quoting the late President of Mozambique, Samora Machel:

   In reality, a country that does not ensure the involvement of all its
   population at all levels of economic activity is certainly going to
   perform well below its actual potential.


Minister and Deputy Minister, we were fortunate to start this term of the
fourth democratic Parliament by visiting your office and all public
entities that are part of the Department of Trade and Industry, DTI. The
visit and the interaction was a real eye-opener to the committee, also with
regard to the challenges ahead of us. It was during that visit that the aim
of their department was clarified.

Chairperson, allow me to quote the Minister in his strategic plan and what
was said on that day:

   The aim of the Department of Trade and Industry is to lead and
   facilitate access to sustainable economic activity and employment of all
   South Africans through its understanding of the economy, its ability to
   identify economic opportunities and potential, and its anticipation of
   the future. The department also aims to catalyse economic transformation
   and development ... In this way, the department will contribute to
   achieving government’s vision of an adaptive and restructured economy,
   characterised by accelerated economic growth, employment creation and
   greater equity by 2014.

The analysis makes an overview that locates the trade and industry sector
in the realm of ANC resolutions and policy statements.

As part of the politically negotiated settlement, the ANC in the 1990s
began developing an economic policy perspective for a future democratic
state to transform the South African colonial economy and society into an
economy based on greater equity, nonracialism and a higher standard of
living. This process is testimony to the mission of the national democratic
revolution which seeks to ensure that every South African, especially the
poor, experiences an improving quality of life. The national democratic
revolution, NDR, strives to build a developmental state shaped by the
socioeconomic dynamics of South African society. The ANC-led government
began to lead and to implement programmes that began to address economic
challenges of the 1990s.

This represented a paradigm shift from the exploitative and racially
entrenched economic disparities of the past to a pathway that sought to
widen the available resources for use by all citizens of the country. The
government commenced the task of embarking on the implementation of the
industrial policy which ensures more investment in such critical areas as
infrastructure; the manufacturing of electronic, transport,
telecommunication, textile and other goods; efficient commercial
agricultural production; ecotourism; and housing construction.

During the first decade of freedom, the government succeeded to a
moderately significant degree in putting in place measures that promoted
the implementation of policies of industrial development, enterprise
promotion and broad-based black economic empowerment. Though the government
programmes qualitatively assisted the poor, its redistributive capacity
failed to integrate the poor into the mainstream economy, except for a
smaller section of the black population. The National Council of Provinces’
interaction with the Greater Tubatse Municipality bears testimony to that.

With an economy mainly driven by growth in the financial and services
sectors, and the shedding of jobs mainly in the manufacturing and mining
sectors, it is imperative that, in the light of those challenges and the
speech by the Minister today, the DTI’s strategic plan indeed addresses the
ANC’s goals of decent work, economic growth, infrastructure development and
balanced global trade as levers for fundamentally transforming the South
African economy. Linked to these, it is imperative to gauge the
effectiveness of the instruments that the DTI has utilised to advance in
support of a developmental state.

These instruments include the use of developmental finance institutions’
incentives for industrial and trade promotion; regulatory bodies to
eliminate antimonopoly behaviour; enterprise development through broad-
based black economic empowerment; and reaffirmation of support for the co-
operative movement. The challenges need to take into account the
developmental role of provinces and their ability to provide social
services, as outlined in the 2010 division of revenue.

With regard to the DTI’s strategic plan, the critical issues are, to
mention a few, empowerment; enterprise development and development finance;
support for small, medium and micro economies, SMMEs; broad-based black
economic empowerment; and competitiveness of the local and provincial
economies.

Minister and Deputy Minister, the department needs to be applauded for its
role in assisting with the enforcement of legislation as that has dealt
with a huge impediment, especially in liquor regulation and unfair business
practices. However, we are mindful of the challenges ahead.

The resolution on accelerated shared growth advocates for measures to be
taken in addressing monopoly pricing and other forms of rent seeking and
anticompetitive behaviour. We are definitely looking forward to the
Consumer Protection Act which will come into force this year to protect
consumers and build their confidence in markets.

In conclusion, Minister and Deputy Minister, indeed, very significantly,
the performance agreement you signed with the President on Friday 30 April
also requires you to work with other Ministers in the cluster to produce a
clear, detailed, costed and multipronged strategy to reduce youth
unemployment. This is a very important priority focus which we, as members,
are to take and devote particular attention to as we move forward. The ANC
supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo weNdlu, abahlonishwa oNgqongqoshe bobabili
namaPhini abo, izinhloko zeMinyango ezikhona namalungu ahloniphekile akule
Ndlu, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe Wezokuvakasha waleli lizwe, ezokuvakasha yinto
esigxile kuyo ngenxa ka-2010 kuleli lizwe. Ngiyazi ukuthi kulo nyaka
uMnyango wakho uthole uxhaso lwemali olwengeziwe kuhulumeni wethu ukuze
ukwazi ukusizakala futhi uhlangabezane nezimfuno zokusiza abantu bakuleli
lizwe.

UMnyango wakho kufanele ubhekisise ukuthi yonke imikhakha kahulumeni
imelelekile ukuze abantu basizakale. Abantu bakithi abahlezi eSoweto
kuphela, abahlezi eMlazi kuphela, abantu bakithi bahlezi kwaNongoma,
eNkandla, KwaMhlabuyalingana, yilapho kuhlezi khona abantu bakithi. Ngifuna
ukubona lo-2010 ukuthi uzokwazi yini ukulinganisa abantu bakithi bazuze
bonke kulolu hlelo olukhona.

Ngiyazi ukuthi kuyona yomibili le Minyango lukhona uhlelo olukhona
lokuxosha indlala noma ukususa ikati eziko. Nalento yokwakha amathuba
omsebenzi, bahlonishwa kufane siyibheke ukuthi ihamba kanjani, iyakwazi
yini ukusiza abantu bakithi ngoba kukhona umthethomgomo okuthiwa i-
Industrial Policy Action Plan - angazi noma kwenziwa umqondo wami omfushane
noma kwenziwa ukuthi ngimfushane angikwazi ukubona ngale, angiboni ukuthi
izokwazi ukuthatha abantu bakithi ibabeke lapho sifisa babe khona.

Ngaleyo ndlela mhlonishwa ngiyazi ukuthi le Minyango yenu uma ihlangene
kungaba khona ukusizakala kwabantu bakithi ezingeni lempilo, kusukela
kuhulumeni wasekhaya, uhulumeni wezifundazwe, kanye nohulumeni kazwelonke,
bayosizakala abantu bakithi uma lezi zinto zingenzeka.

Siyi-IFP, asinakho nokuncane ukungabaza ukweseka lesi sabelomali ngoba
sizosiza bona abantu bakithi abakade bekhala, behlupheka bengenakho ukudla,
njengamanje kukhona abalale bangadlanga, ukusizakala kwalaba bantu
kuzokwenza izinto zenzeke. Niphinde nibheke mhlonishwa indaba yalawa
mabhange angafuni ukunikeza abantu bakithi imalimboleko ukuze basizakale,
ngoba awukho umsebenzi engingawenza ngingenayo indawo lapho kufanele
ngisizakale khona. Kuyisicelo sami njengomuntu waseNingizimu ne-Afrika
ukuba nikwazi ukusiza kuyo yonke leyo mikhakha. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon House Chairperson, two Ministers and their
Deputies, heads of departments who are present here and the hon members of
this House, hon Minister of Tourism, we are focusing on tourism because of
the 2010 soccer event that will take place in this country. I know that
your department has received an increased budget allocation from our
government so that it can meet the needs of the people of this country.

Your department should see to it that all the spheres of government are
represented so that the people will be able to get service delivery. Our
people are not found in Soweto or Umlazi only, but they are also found in
KwaNongoma, Nkandla, and KwaMhlabuyalingana – that is where our people are
living. I want to see if this 2010 event can provide all our people with
equal benefits from its present programmes.

I know that both these departments have programmes aimed at alleviating
hunger. We must look at how the creation of job opportunities is driven,
hon Ministers; we must see if it is able to provide for our people as there
is a policy that is known as the Industrial Policy Action Plan. I am not
sure whether it is because I am ignorant or short-sighted, but I cannot
foresee it putting our people where we want them to be.

Therefore, hon Minister, I know that if your two departments work together,
our people can be catered for as far as their lives are concerned - from
local, provincial and national government. Our people will be able to
receive assistance if these things can happen.

As the IFP we do not have the slightest doubt that this budget allocation
will be able to provide for our people who have been complaining and
struggling without food. And as we speak, there are others who went to bed
on empty stomachs, but if these people are provided for, better things will
happen. Therefore, we support this Budget Vote. Ministers, you need to
review the issue of these banks that do not want to give loans to our
people so that they will be able to find assistance because one cannot do
anything without a place to perform any kind of job. It is my plea as a
South African that you assist in all those areas. Thank you.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson and Ministers, it is clear that, as South
Africans, we need to do something drastic to create economic growth and get
South Africa out of the downturn of the economic cycle. Figures show that,
whilst our exports grew to R448 billion in 2008, they are back to the 2007
level of R350 billion.

The export market is becoming very complicated because of the profound
alteration and shifts. Therefore, to premise our economic growth on the
basis of substantially increasing our manufactured exports – a conventional
approach to industrial policy in South Africa – may boomerang on South
Africa.

Greece, in particular, and other European countries are experiencing
serious economic problems. The notion of a virtually limitless overseas
market, especially in the prosperous north and west, needs to be shaken
off. If plan A, which is your Industrial Policy Action Plan, Ipapm 2, does
not live up to expectations, does the department have a plan B or C?

Related to that is the issue of the strong rand and the impact that it has
on exports at the moment.

The third issue regarding the Department of Trade and Industry’s, DTI’s,
input, is that car manufacturing is in trouble all over the world. Given
the fact that the DTI is investing a lot of money into supporting the car
manufacturers, it’s necessary that we ask if it would not be better to have
a niche market, specifically regarding the proposed electric car that is
being marketed as a South African product.
It is a bit unfortunate that one only has four minutes to speak on these
issues, but I just want to make three remarks with regard to tourism. The
first is that I’m very happy that a director-general, DG, has been
appointed. I think it is step in the right direction. Unfortunately,
however, once again the appointment proved that the ANC sticks with the
redeployment policy and the same officials are kept in circulation.

The second issue concerns the 2010 Fifa World Cup and the remarks that the
hon Minister made. I think we can agree that the 2010 Fifa World Cup is
indeed a window of opportunity, and that South Africa will host a very
good, productive and safe Fifa World Cup. However, for a province like the
Northern Cape, the benefits of the 2010 Soccer World Cup are few and far
between, and it’s necessary that we now go to the next level in terms of
the capital infrastructure development of our country and specifically the
development of our rural provinces with the same impetus that was created
with the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

The last issue regarding tourism is changing the mind-set of South Africa
and continuously increasing investment in the rural areas. In this regard
we know that the majority of South Africans travel extensively, not
necessarily to go to tourist sites, but to visit their families. I think
the good thing about the Minister’s legacy is the Sho’t Left campaign.
Cope, I think, wants to suggest that those initiatives be taken further and
also that more should be invested in rural tourism development. We have a
lot of opportunities in that area, but unfortunately they don’t always
materialise.

I want to conclude by saying that I hope that this is not the last time
that we see the Minister of Tourism, and I hope that he won’t be redeployed
to a different position in the world economy. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs B M Ntuli): Chairperson of
the NCOP, Minister Rob Davies, Minister Van Schalkwyk, hon MECs, hon
Members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, it is 36 days and about 7 hours
to the showpiece 2010 World Cup. For those who have tickets to the opening
game, life seems to be an endless wait. This could be likened to how our
communities feel - waiting for a better life. People want to feel the
presence of the Department of Trade and Industry on the ground.

As a believer, it is my conviction that the development of our people, no
matter how daunting the task may be, can be realised. I believe that our
country has the potential we need to eradicate poverty. All we need is a
leadership that is ready, capable and equal to the task of responding to
the aspirations of our people. We can create a world-class economy, working
together with everyone willing to do this. This is our country, and other
people see the potential ...
... eMzansi. Thina simile eJordani, abanye bayawela - iculo lelo. [... in
South Africa. We are standing at the River Jordan; others are crossing over
– that is a hymn.]

Last year, I reported a process initiated by my office to meet all the
provincial MECs for economic development in order to co-ordinate our work
better. This, I am pleased to report, has been done. I wish to thank all
the MECs for the extremely warm manner in which these meetings took place.
While the nine provinces differ in many areas, there were common points
raised across the board. Here are some comments related to these visits.

The main issue raised was the lack of a cohesive and efficient
communication system amongst the three spheres of government, resulting in
national government not always knowing what the provinces are doing and
vice versa.

Through great effort by the Empowerment and Enterprise Development
Division, EEDD, and the various provincial heads of departments, a forum
has been established to map the way forward. This forum had its meeting,
and from the side of the Department of Trade and Industry, we have assigned
a provincial champion to spearhead projects in each province. The list is
available. We also have our call centre, which you all know.

We are particularly, but not exclusively, focusing on projects that will
revive industries in the former homeland areas. Together with our
provincial counterparts, we have identified a number of buildings that
belong to the former development agencies that have fallen into disuse to
use as incubators; we will supply the necessary tools that can be used by
the entrepreneurs and provide assistance and so on.

On co-operatives, for this year, we are speeding up our efforts to initiate
the formation of an advisory body for co-operatives. I must be honest and
mention that this has not been an easy task because not everyone shared a
common perspective on the way forward. We will convene an inclusive meeting
to continue with our efforts and harness the collective wisdom of all
parties to see this body to fruition. I know I have the absolute support of
my Minister, Minister Rob Davies, for this effort.

Experience and research have shown that the biggest challenge confronting
co-operatives is in the area of education and training. In this regard,
government, through its strategy and legislation, intends to establish a
national co-operatives academy dedicated to providing education and
training to co-operatives and small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs.
The aim of the Department of Trade and Industry is to lead and facilitate
access to sustainable economic activities and employment of South Africans
through its understanding, and knowledge of economic opportunities. Let us
do our work differently. It must not be work as usual.

We are also working together with provinces to facilitate access to
international and local markets for co-operatives by utilising and
accessing the Export Marketing and Investment Assistance scheme, Emia,
support for co-operatives. Last year, we sent 11 co-operatives to the Milan
exhibition; 8 arts and craft co-operatives to the handicraft exhibition in
Portugal; and 4 co-operatives to the Decorex exhibition that took place in
Johannesburg. We intend to double these figures in this financial year. We
also need to give not only more people this opportunity, but also different
people.

On the funding aspect, we are working closely with provinces to increase
access to finance for co-operatives. The establishment of the National Co-
operative Development Agency, NCDA, will play a major role in this regard.
Last year, we managed to disburse R35 million supporting 180 co-operatives
projects: 44 projects in KZN; 48 in the Eastern Cape; 29 in Gauteng; 16 in
Limpopo; 15 in the Western Cape; and another 15 in the Northern Cape. We
would like to reach out to the remaining provinces as well.

We have also signed a memorandum of understanding with Proudly South
African in order to facilitate market access to co-operatives by extending
them the Proudly South African procurement facility.

Asithenge ekhaya bakithi. [Let us buy from our local markets.]

Let’s ask government departments to support SMMEs and co-operatives. Give
us just 30% of their procurement.

Ake bathenge kithi. [Let them buy from us.]

As a popular song goes, we must “make the circle bigger”. We have to
broaden economic participation. We have a generation of young people out of
work. We have numbers of women in informal business who, if not provided
with opportunities, will never enter the economic mainstream. Let us invest
in our people, black and white. Let’s come out of our cosy offices and go
to the people down there.

I am inviting young people and women to come to the fore. I am also
appealing to hon members to direct us to communities where we can offer
support for economic activities. Yesterday, I mentioned visiting a bakery
run in a container in KwaZulu-Natal. I want to see more of those bakeries
in all provinces. We are working on that. Each province might get
approximately four to five, depending on the availability of resources. I
know you have the potential. The Sakhakulunge Co-op Bakery is a real
success in Kokstad. Viva Kokstad! We also want to do away with the
bureaucracy - big volumes of application forms; intimidating tender
documents; long waits for funding; board meeting after board meeting; etc.
We want to do away with that.
If we are honest, we have not been a spectacular success in this area of
enterprise development amongst rural and peri-urban communities. This year,
we want to escalate our work rate. We are continuing the programme started
by previous Deputy Ministers of taking the Department of Trade and Industry
to the people. We aim to do it in a slightly different manner as per a
Cabinet directive that we move away from the mass meeting type of event to
a more focused approach. This is South Africa, our land. We are here to
stay. Let’s make South Africa a better place.

The Small Enterprise Development Agency, Seda, will be key in this
programme, and we encourage the efforts by Seda to have a presence in each
district municipality of our country. It should be more visible. In the
Western Cape, we have the REO Door; in Gauteng, we have the Gauteng
Propeller. Please, be visible on the ground; I’m begging you.

With regard to our programmes for women enterprise, I have met with the
provincial chairpersons of the SA Women Entrepreneurs’ Network, Sawen, as
well as the Sawen board to find a way to make our work have a greater
impact. We reconstructed the board into an interim advisory board with full
provincial representation. It is now going to be a bottom-up structure and
not a top-down structure representing women on the ground.

The TechnoGirl programme run by the gender unit will continue and take
place in the Northern Cape in August this year. This is part of our
contribution to the five priorities of government, where girl learners in
matric from rural and semi-urban areas are taken on an entrepreneurship and
life skills camp. We have just signed a memorandum of understanding with
Microsoft for innovation skills technology transfer. I’m saying, let’s work
together.

I am also pleased to announce that we are continuing with the Technology
for Women in Business Programme, Twib, including the annual awards for
women who are applying technology in their businesses. This year, we will
upscale this programme to make it accessible to more women in the rural
areas, as well as to link this with the overall plan of the Ministry. In
our pursuit not only to meet but also to exceed the expectations of the
five priorities of government, our department is looking at methods that,
together with the provincial colleagues, we can initiate during this
financial year. I have also had discussions with various people from
academic institutions and the private sector who are willing to offer some
assistance to meet our development goals. You are also invited, hon
members.

On technical training, management skills and co-operative compliance
training, we need a co-operative academy. We will ask the assistance of
Minister Blade Nzimande in utilising the sector education and training
authorities, Setas, in this regard. We have a challenge to review and amend
the Co-operatives Act, Act 14 of 2005.

I wish to thank Minister Rob Davies for the industrious manner in which he
is leading the Ministry. Thank you to the Deputy Minister Tobias-Pokolo –
and we wish her a speedy recovery in hospital - for her support as well. My
gratitude goes to hon members of the committee who are keeping us on our
toes. Thanks to Director-General Tshediso Matona, Acting Deputy Director-
General Mr Sipho Zikode, and all the other officials who make my job a
little easier.

To the young people of South Africa, I want to give a few words of wisdom:
Plan while others are playing; study while others are sleeping; decide
while others are delaying; prepare while others are daydreaming; begin
while others are procrastinating; work while others are wishing; save while
others are waiting; listen while others are talking; smile while others are
frowning; comment while others are criticising; and persist while others
are quitting. Don’t quit. You cannot quit before you start.

Sengigcina-ke Sihlalo ... [Chairperson, in closing ...]

... I want to say to us, let me end by inviting all business bodies – the
National African Federated Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Nafcoc; the
National African Farmers Union of South Africa, Nafu; the Metrology
Instrumentation Group, Mig ...
Wat is daai ander een nou? Die Handelsinstituut. [What’s the name again?
The Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut.]

... and others to come to the fore. Let’s talk and see how we can build
this beautiful South Africa of ours. Let’s also go out there and support
Bafana Bafana, hon members. You are all invited to contribute to this fight
against poverty. No idea is stupid, no matter how small it is. Let’s work
while others are sleeping; plan while others are procrastinating; listen
while others are complaining; and persist while others are quitting.
Together, we can do more.

Asisebenzisane-ke maqabane, asisebenzisane-ke bahlobo bami, malungu
ahloniphekile akule Ndlu-ngiyabona senginesikhashana esincane lapha,
ngithanda ukuthi asingabe sisazenza izinto ngendlela ebesijwayele ukuzenza
ngayo.

Kunendatshana engiyifunde kwenye incwadi ethi: Kwakukhona umama
owayejabulela usuku lwakhe lokuzalwa wathuma indoda yakhe wathi kuyo:
“Hamba uyongithengela umlenze wemvu”, wayejwayele-ke ukuthi uma efika
laphaya afike akusike lokhu okusekugcineni, kodwa indoda yabuya nakho
ingakusikanga, wase ebuza umntwana wathi kungani ungayisikanga le nyama?
Yaphendula indoda yathi:“Angazi ngikhohliwe ukuyisika, yase ibuza ukuthi
kambe yini kufanele isikwe?”.Waphendula ngokuthi, asibuze umama ngoba
senzela yena. Mama, kungani siyisika le nyama esekugcineni? Waphendula
umama wathi: “Bengibona umama wami eyisika”. Ubaba wathi asishayele ucingo
ugogo, ngempela bamshayele ucingo ugogo, “gogo kungani wawuyisika le nyama
esekugcineni? Waphendula ugogo wathi: “Bengiyisika ngoba ibhodwe lami
lalilincane. [Uhleko.]

Ngicela senze izinto ngendlela ehlukile, singenzi izinto ebezenziwa uma
singazi ukuthi abanye babezenzelani, kodwa senze izinto ezizosiphumelelisa.
Ngiyabonga Sihlalo ngethuba onginikeze lona. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Let us work together, comrades and colleagues. Hon members of this House,
I am aware that I’m left with little time. I would like to say that we
should stop doing things the way we used to.

There is a short story that I read in a certain book which read thus. There
was a mother who was celebrating her birthday who said to her husband: “Go
and buy me a leg of a lamb”. She used to cut the piece of meat at the end
of the leg of lamb, but the husband returned without cutting it, then the
child asked Why didn’t you cut the piece of meat at the end?” The husband
answered and said: I don’t know; I forgot to cut it.” Then he asked, “By
the way, why does it have to be cut?” He answered by saying, “Let us ask
mother because we are doing it for her”. “Mother, why do we cut this meat
at the end?” The mother answered and said: “I used to see my mother cutting
it.” The father said, “Let us phone grandmother”. Well indeed they phoned
the grandmother, and asked, “Grandmother, why did you cut the piece of meat
at the end?” The grandmother answered and said, I used to cut it because my
pot was small”. [Laughter.]

I request that we do things in a different way; let us not do things in a
certain way if we do not know why the others were doing them in that way,
but let us do things so that we can prosper. Chairperson, thank you for the
opportunity you gave me.]

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, Ministers, departmental staff, Deputy Ministers,
hon members, you know, Deputy Minister, that we are so good. I hope that
the DA and Cope ... I see the member of Cope has gone to report to I don’t
know which leader, Shilowa or Lekota. So, it is a pity.

Chairperson, tourism is one of the world’s major industries, if not the
largest. In South Africa, we are still growing our industry to reach its
full potential in order to tap into this money spinner, swell local
opportunities and create jobs to fight poverty and to showcase our land and
the splendour and diversity of our region. In order to have the edge in our
industry, we have to think afresh about what we do and do it better. In
this regard, we welcome the Minister’s initiative to develop new products
and to grow the industry.

Ons kan baie leer by ander lande, maar ons het soveel eiesoortighede wat
ons kan bemark om Suid-Afrika ’n voorkeurbestemming te maak. Daarom moet
ons eers ons eie sterkpunte uitbou en bemarkbaar verpak sodat ons land vir
talle reisigers meer aantreklik gemaak kan word. So word ons ’n leier in
die bedryf en ’n trekpleister.

Ons het in die afgelope jare gesien dat geleentheidstoerisme toeneem. Ons
het van ekotoerisme gehoor en ook kultuurbelewenisse. Toe het Suid-Afrika
avontuurlustiges begin trek. Daarmee saam het mediese toeriste toegeneem,
mense wat vir vakansies en operasies hierheen kom. Ons het al ons deel van
konferensietoerisme gekry en gaan binnekort weer die krag van sporttoerisme
sien wanneer die spanne, personeel en ondersteuners van die beste
sokkerspanne op aarde hierheen kom om mee te ding in die wêreld se grootste
skouspel, die Fifa-Sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[We can learn a lot from other countries, but we have our own distinctive
character which could be marketed to make South Africa a preferred
destination. For this reason we should, firstly, consolidate our strengths
and package them in a way that is marketable so that our country would be
more attractive to a greater number of travellers. In this way we will
become a leader in the industry and a draw-card.

Over the past few years we have seen that event tourism has increased. We
have heard of ecotourism and also cultural experiences. Then South Africa
started attracting adventure seekers. At the same time, medical tourism has
also increased, with people who come here for holidays and medical
procedures. We already have our share of conference tourism and will
shortly experience the power of sports tourism when the teams, staff and
supporters of the best soccer teams in the world come here to compete in
the world’s most spectacular event, the Fifa World Cup Tournament.]

We are proud and agree that it is our time. It is a great chance to occupy,
for a whole month, prime television space and have the attention of
billions of people across the globe. They will feed on soccer, but they
will also take note that this pageant takes place in our wonderful country.
I thank the Minister, his deputy, the department, our tourism agency South
African Tourism, and all other role-players for their hard work to market
South Africa at the highest level and, especially, for focusing beyond the
soccer spectacle and looking towards the future of South African tourism as
a whole.

In this regard, we are looking forward to receiving your proposals to
review the existing legal framework for tourism, Minister. We also welcome
on board the new director-general, Mr Kingsley Makhubela. I would also like
to congratulate our team, led by Minister Van Schalkwyk, for outperforming
most international markets in 2009. I hope the hon Winde listens to this,
Chair. Together with the increase in the number of arrivals and growth in
income, they have achieved this even in difficult economic times. This
fact, together with the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup boost, is a firm base
from which to grow our industry.

We know how vulnerable tourism is to negative perceptions. That is out of
our control, specifically the DA’s perceptions. In light of this, we wish
to ask our Minister to also engage his Cabinet colleagues to formulate a
strategy to deal with the World Health Organisation’s precautionary advice
to tourists, including soccer players and fans, to avoid mosquito bites and
contact with raw meat, in order to avoid infection by Rift Valley fever
germs. Please deal with this swiftly. Hopefully, we will have a cold spell
soon to kill the carrier of this disease before the bulk of the soccer
crowds arrive.

Voorsitter, ek het nog ’n paar gedagtes oor die bevordering en uitbou van
ons bedryf hier in Suid-Afrika. Die Minister en sy span is deeglik bewus
daarvan dat streekstoerisme ’n al hoe belangriker faktor geword het vir ons
bedryf. Ons sal graag wil sien hoe bure en ander besoekers van ons
vasteland ons meer besoek. Ons sal egter ook opnuut moet kyk na ons
binnelandse toerisme. Al is dit net vir vakansies, is dit ’n uiters
belangrike onderdeel van ons toerisme-landskap en behoort ons ook te gaan
kyk na hoe kleiner dorpies en afgeleë streke meer baat kan vind. Ons het
juwele op die platteland, in al ons provinsies, wat wag om besoek te word.

Ek weet die Minister en sy span werk gereeld en goed saam met die
provinsies, asook munisipale toerisme-instellings. Van my kant, in die
Nasionale Raad van Provinsies, sal ek wil sien dat hierdie samewerking
uitgebou word, moontlik in die wetsontwerp geformaliseer sal word, groter
koördinering sal bring, en dat dit ’n kragtige instrument sal word om
toerisme op ’n nuwe pad te plaas. Ons is ook bekommerd oor toutrekkery of
tydrowende verwarring tussen sodanige entiteite, soos op die “Eiland” Wes-
Kaap, waar eers die Stad Kaapstad en toe die Wes-Kaapse regering ’n aktiewe
rol begin speel het wat voorkom of dit verlamming in die hand kan werk.

Daar kan nie gapings in ons bemarkingsnet ontstaan of onnodige oorvleueling
geduld word nie. Ons glo die Minister gee leiding en sal ons mettertyd
inlig oor watter uitweg gevolg sal word. Die Minister en sy span verstaan
dat ons in hierdie Raad ’n besondere plaaslike en provinsiale
belangstelling het. Ons kan dalk kyk na ’n toerisme-skou wat om die beurt,
of op ’n aflos-grondslag, by provinsies sal aandoen. Die Indaba-skou in
Durban is ’n instelling wat internasionaal bekend is, maar dit kan aangevul
word met meer streekspesifieke produkte om kleiner ondernemers ook ’n
uitstalvenster te bied. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, I have a few more ideas with regard to promoting and
expanding our industry here in South Africa. The Minister and his team are
very much aware that regional tourism is increasingly becoming a very
important factor in our industry. We would like to see that our neighbours,
and other visitors from our continent, visit us more often. However, we
will once again have to look at domestic tourism. Even if it is just for
holidays, it is an extremely important component of our tourism landscape
and we should also explore how smaller towns and remote areas can benefit
more. We have gems in the rural areas in all our provinces, which are
waiting to be explored.

I know the Minister and his team are working regularly and effectively with
the provinces, as well as municipal institutions. From my side, in the
National Council of Provinces, I would like to see this co-operation
extended, possibly formulated into the Bill, resulting in better co-
ordination, and that this will become a powerful tool, which will propel
tourism in a new direction. We are also concerned about the squabbling or
time-consuming confusion among such entities, like on the “Island” Western
Cape where, first, the City of Cape Town and then the Western Cape
government started playing a more active role, which appears to have
promoted paralysis.

The development of gaps in our marketing system or unnecessary overlapping
shouldn’t be tolerated. We believe that the Minister is providing guidance
and will in time inform us as to what option will be followed. The Minister
and his team understand that we in this Council have a particular interest
both locally and provincially. Maybe we can consider a tourism exhibition
which could alternate between the provinces. The Indaba Expo in Durban is
an initiative that has become known internationally, but this can be
supplemented with more regionally specific products to showcase smaller
entrepreneurs.]

If I may, I would like to suggest a reality show, for both television and
radio, where awareness amongst our young people will be created about
service delivery in the industry. They may compete to prepare and plan
products where they can cater, clean, and conduct programmes to treat
visitors. This would also serve as an educational medium to raise the bar
in South African tourism.

Secondly, I would like to see more young people without jobs being involved
in the industry as volunteers. A kind of youth service could be devised
where youngsters can work for a stipend to gain skills and experience or
even to build up credits in different activities under mentors, something
which may finally help them to either find employment or to encourage
entrepreneurs to create new products.

Let us join hands and build our country and its economy through tourism. We
support this Budget Vote and wish the Minister and his team, as well as
Bafana Bafana Godspeed.

Chairperson, I want to conclude by saying that - the member from the
Northern Cape has left - it is very easy to come here and say things about
certain other things, but if my memory serves me, I recall that Treasury
has just given R100 million to the Northern Cape, which is meant for
upliftment. So, I don’t know where the member gets his facts, but sometimes
when you have difficulty in terms of leadership, and he is talking about
cadre deployment, I think the cadre deployment starts in Cope. We don’t
know whether Shilowa wants to deploy Lekota or Lekota deploy Shilowa. We
support this Budget Vote, and I thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I want to thank hon
members who contributed to this debate for their thoughtful contributions.
I believe that most hon members have understood that we can’t continue to
oscillate around whatever the economic cycles deliver to us. For example,
when we are in the midst of a bad cycle like we are at the moment, we have
unemployment of 25,2%. But when we are at the height of a boom as we were
before the recession in 2008, unemployment never got below 22,8%.

I also think that hon members have understood that what we need to do is to
bring about structural changes in our economy. We need to place our economy
on a structurally different growth path, one which can create much more
decent work for our people. It is in that context that I think hon members
have also understood what the Industrial Policy Action Plan 2, Ipap 2, has
been crafting.

Ipap 2 is essentially contributing to this quest through its focus on value-
added activities. As I said in my speech, it was one very important
imbalance that we have. Our consumption sectors grew about twice as fast as
our production sectors. This is an unsustainable situation that we can’t
tolerate any longer.

Hon Winde asked what would have happened to jobs if we hadn’t had the World
Cup and so on. I think that’s precisely the point - the main driver of our
economic development now is our infrastructure programme. That’s the main
driver which is also our main countercyclical response, not just the World
Cup, but all the other projects of infrastructure development.

The point is, though, that we have been getting too little industrial
development opportunity that flows from that. It is precisely for that
reason that we have identified a major change in the procurement regime.
Work is under way to try and identify this much more clearly and to come up
with clear steps that can be implemented. That is exactly why we want to
change the procurement regime. Even from today’s debate I realise that
there is now sufficient consensus that the Ipap 2 represents a way forward
for us.

The challenge now is to implement it. It is exactly that challenge that I
think is important for parliamentary oversight committees and this House.
We have a number of things that we do in trying to achieve great
implementation: internal monthly oversight meetings; reporting to the
cluster; reporting to Cabinet every six months; and so on. We also
contribute to the new monitoring and evaluation process in government as
well.

What a number of colleagues realised here is that co-ordination is quite
critical. That’s co-ordination between the different national departments
and agencies that are responsible for parts of the programme, and also co-
ordination across the spheres of government. I think this House could pay a
lot of attention to that aspect. We will approach that with the spirit of
co-operative governance. In that regard, we will work constructively with
any province, including those that are under other parties. For example, I
don’t know what the issues around the oil and gas centre are, but this is a
province-specific programme. However, if there are ways in which we can
support that, I’m sure one will find that our department will be
forthcoming.

Furthermore, we can engage further in the training lay-off programme which
has been raised by MEC Winde. However, I don’t want to engage in the
statistics debate around the training lay-off programme because I don’t
know all the facts involved. Let me just say that one of the most
successful users of that programme was BMW South Africa, which became the
first firm to invest again after the recession passed. The training lay-off
was a way in which it skilled up its workers for the new investments.

We want to co-operate on the case of Mr Khuzwayo that was mentioned by hon
Gamede. How can somebody walk into one small business agency and be told to
go to another one or to go and attend another meeting somewhere else.
That’s where the collocation, the shared services, and all that, between
the different agencies operating in the different spheres of government
must take place. We must address that one.

We can work together on the issue of trade and trade promotion, just to
give MEC Winde some comfort. Between 2000 and 2008 our trade with the
United Kingdom, UK, actually doubled, and then it cut by 40% in 2009. So,
doubling it is not such a huge target; but it does require efforts on our
part. More importantly, we want to change the structure of that trade. Too
much of it is probably products and raw materials. We need to increase the
value-added products there. Let’s work together on that.

But, for goodness’ sake, let us not think that the UK and the traditional
markets of the North are the only places where we need to get involved.
There are plenty of other places like, for example, Africa and our South-
South trade. Let’s get actively involved in all that. We’ll work together
with you.

We are prepared to work - as you have already indicated - on industrial
development zones, IDZs. But let’s understand what the department
understands about IDZs. Industrial development zones in our law are areas
where you get duty-free entry of components which you use for export of
goods; you get the advantages of the concentrated infrastructure; and some
other incentives. That’s what an IDZ is. There are a whole lot of other
issues like, for example, the governance of IDZs within provinces,
municipalities and national government that we need to address, and plenty
of other issues around the financing of IDZs. We can work on those; we can
work on our studies; and we can identify possibilities.

However, be very honest with communities when you start talking about these
things. If you mean IDZs, say IDZs. If you mean export processing zones,
those are areas where what you typically do is to suspend the labour law. I
was up in Saldanha - on May Day actually – and I didn’t detect any appetite
among the people at the rally. I have to see a suspension of the labour
law. Let me just say that we also, more often than not, don’t think that
the success of the IDZs around the world has been shown to be a real
factor. This race for the bottom on labour conditions is not something that
South Africa can get involved in in a sustainable manner. That has been
established for a very long time. So, I’m afraid you’ll have to win a
national election if you want to turn IDZs into export processing zones,
EPZs, because we won’t co-operate on that one.

Let me answer just one more point on the auto industry as I’ve got a little
bit of time. Yes, it’s true that the components manufacturing industry is
much more job intensive. Even the figures that I gave you double the
figures. Just to repeat: Of the three investments this year, R9 billion of
the investment will sustain 3 500 jobs, but R4 billion investments in
components sustaining 20 000 jobs will come of that. Lower investment, more
jobs in components! But the relationship between the two is a critical one.
If you don’t have an original equipment manufacturer, OEM, base, you might
have a components industry; that’s a reality in South Africa.

Indeed, through some of the work that we have done we are deepening the
local content. In the last four investments, the percentage of local
components is well over 50%. I think it’s nearly 60%. This is because we
have a 20% automotive investment scheme, AIS, and a 30% for those who are
prepared to go a step further. If you want to qualify for the AIS, you have
to create more jobs and buy more locally. That’s exactly what we are trying
to do. We are trying to use our tools to push the automotive manufacturers
to acquire more components. Some of them are talking about coming together
and acquiring a bigger base of common products. That is the sort of work we
want to do.
Yes, we want to support the electric car and other green-energy-intensive
vehicles, not just by one manufacturer, but by all of them. We want to
position our motor industry so we are not producing the gas guzzlers of the
world. However, we are working with them on a number of projects. So these
are the kinds of projects that we want to attract into South Africa. We are
also moving in the direction of public transport vehicles. When we invest
in public transport vehicles, we must make sure that those are actually
manufactured in South Africa.

In conclusion, I think that the National Council of Provinces, NCOP, has
got a very critical role to play. We will not be able to make the
structural changes in our economy unless we achieve a higher level of co-
ordination. That’s for sure, that’s for sure.

I keep telling everybody about what happened in the past. I’m not going to
tell you the answer, but I’ll pose the question: Which project was
identified to be exactly the same work in Ipap 2 as in Ipap 1? There is one
because some government department didn’t do the work. We can’t just do it
like that. We have got to hold each other accountable. We are looking for
creative oversight that can follow our progress, identify areas where we
are not achieving success, and then try to unblock those blockages. That’s
the work of oversight and that’s what I want to encourage this House to do.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Minister, just for your information, this
morning we were rationalising the portfolios of the House Chairs. One of
the portfolios we created just this morning is that of co-operative
governance to co-ordinate that work and make sure that the work is done in
a proper manner. We have all agreed as political parties here. Am I right,
Tim? Tim, am I correct? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, I would like to respond to four
issues. The first one is the issue of the new tourism legislation raised by
the hon member Adams. We will table that in Parliament in the third quarter
of this year, and then we, obviously, will engage the members of the select
committee as well as the portfolio committee.

The second issue is the one raised by the chairperson of the select
committee. It is the issue of our inbound markets, our source market for
inbound tourism, and, yes, we have experienced good growth for some of the
markets in the last year. We can look at some of the increases: from Asia,
we had 3,7%; from the African air markets 3,3%, and from the African land
markets 5,7%. However, with regard to China and India, two very important
future markets, we had a 12,4% increase from China. It’s from a relatively
low base, but it is impressive growth in any language. Then, from India,
there was a 17,5% increase.

With regard to our traditional markets, I would like to echo the point that
Minister Davies made with regard to the traditional markets in terms of
trade. They continue to be important markets, but we must take note of the
fact that growth from those markets is slowing down. We must refocus and
reprioritise, look at new markets, as well, invest in those new markets,
and develop those new markets.

Then, with regard to the issue of business tourism that the chairperson
also raised, I announced yesterday in the National Assembly that we will
start a National Convention Bureau under the auspices of South African
Tourism. We will invest in that. Now, that unit, that bureau, will assist
companies, provinces, and local municipalities who bid for international
events to prepare those bids but also to co-ordinate, as a country, those
bids. Very often, we undermine each other, and other countries walk away
with those very important international events. That will definitely make
our approach more professional in that regard.

I would also like to respond to the issue of redeployment raised by the hon
member Sinclair. It was also raised yesterday in the National Assembly by
the hon members from the DA. Normally, when this issue is raised, it is
raised as redeployment, and very often it is raised with a very subtle race
dimension. Yesterday in the National Assembly, it was done, not so subtly,
by the DA but actually in a very unfortunate, very distasteful way, with
regard to another appointment that I made, a senior appointment in one of
our public entities. We dealt with that issue there.

However, let me respond to this issue in a very straightforward manner.
When we, as the ANC government, appoint people, and we appoint people with
what the opposition thinks is not enough experience, they ask how we can
appoint people without experience. On the other hand, when you appoint
people with experience, they say it is redeployment, and we are just
shifting people around; we are shifting around the deck chairs. I think the
opposition should really decide what they want.

I think the hon member Adams dealt very effectively with this insistence
from the DA on redeployment, this coming from a party that is on the verge
of redeploying their president. [Interjections.] When, in the ANC
government, we are looking at appointing people – when we appoint boards,
obviously, we are looking at balances, but I’ve always understood that to
be the policy of the DA, of Cope, of everybody - of course, you look at
language, gender, and all those issues. So, I don’t know why we are
criticised on that issue. When we appoint people in executive positions,
you always look at who the best man or woman for that position is. That is
the only criterion. [Interjections.]

I said yesterday that in my six years in Cabinet, I’ve not had one
experience where the President or Cabinet asked a question and put pressure
on any Minister to say that in a specific position he or she should appoint
somebody who is African or white. This has never happened, not once. It is
always on merit. [Interjections.]

The DA is now interjecting. Let me respond to it in this way. When we have
to appoint ambassadors, we look very carefully at who we have to appoint.
When we were approaching government to appoint the hon former member
Gibson, did we say that we didn’t want to appoint this member, because he
criticised us too much, very often in a way that went against our grain and
our being; or did we say that, possibly, it is good for the country, and he
may make a contribution? When we were approached to appoint, and lobby to
appoint, Mr Leon, what did we say? We said: Let’s be open about this and
maybe he can make a contribution.

And it did not stop there. We were approached to appoint Sheila Camerer, to
appoint Sandra Botha, and not once did we raise this issue publicly and say
that it is redeployment, that it is unfair. They are all from one
background. Not once did this happen, so I honestly think that the
opposition should also deal with this issue more fairly and not abuse this
House and the National Assembly, attacking people and public servants when
they cannot defend themselves. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 11 – Public Service and Administration:

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson of the
NCOP, Cabinet colleagues present here, Deputy Minister for the Public
Service and Administration, Chairperson of the Select Committee on Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, members of the select
committee, Chairperson of the Public Service Commission, hon delegates of
the House, the portfolio leadership in the Ministry, our distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen, avuxeni [greetings].

Thank you very much for affording us an opportunity to address this House
on this very important day - the day for the presentation of our Budget
Vote for the financial year 2010-11. Under normal circumstances, debates on
budgets are financial statements accompanied by activities of the
departments. In that narrow sense, we often would like to expect, a
presentation to inform the nation, through Parliament, on how we are going
to spend the money allocated to us. In this case, we will be talking about
the R651 million, of which R380 million is for the Department of Public
Service and Administration; R117 million for the Public Administration
Leadership and Management Academy, Palama; R133 million for the Public
Service Commission, PSC; R19 million for the Public Service Sector
Education and Training Authority, PSETA; and R14 million for the Centre for
Public Service Innovation, CPSI.

We will do so and give a detailed breakdown of how much of these we will be
spending, in each case, on personnel-related activities versus core
programmes.

This occasion also presents us space to share with the nation, through this
august House, what we are planning to spend our budget on, and as a means
to providing information for members of the House to hold us accountable
for the things we identify as priorities. This information will also
empower the nation to manage their expectations at the minimum around those
issues we commit ourselves to doing.

It is also a moment to account for the things we did before this financial
year, as well as to project the political state of affairs on issues of
governance and administration.

We made commitments when addressing the National Assembly on 21 April this
year, to the effect that we will do the following. Through innovation, we
will continue to search for ideas that work in order to respond to the
demanding Public Service environment. We will give priority attention to
the capacity development programme to prepare public servants at entry to
the service and continue enhancing their competency in dealing with their
day-to-day programmes. We maintain our unwavering stance on the continued
fight against corruption. We will strengthen our efforts to maintain sound
labour relations. We will conclude the debate on the single Public Service.
We will stabilise the senior management service, SMS, in managing issues of
recruitment and work contracts. We will further redefine the architecture
of our Public Service to respond to the expectation of a developmental
Public Service. We will soon finalise the discussion on the corporate forms
of both the Public Service Commission, PSC, and the Public Administration
Leadership and Management Academy, commonly referred to as Palama.

We are gathered here today still in a mood of Freedom Day celebrations,
remembering a peaceful breakthrough to democracy in 1994. As we celebrate,
it is critical that we remind each other that the democratic South Africa
born 16 years ago found her existence in compliance with the principles of
nonracialism, nonsexism, democracy and unity.

South Africans should be made aware that our public administration is
responsive to these characteristic features of our country -
characteristics of nonracialism, nonsexism, democracy and unity. They
transcend our public administration.

We pronounced, as enshrined in our Constitution, that South Africa belongs
to all who live in it, united in our diversity, and we made it a policy
position that our staffing norms should reflect the demographic
representation according to the racial mix of our people in the country and
in the respective provinces.

We also introduced a policy of affirmative action so as to redress the
historical racial imbalance in affording employment and promotion
opportunities to previously disadvantaged racial groups in the country.
This year, we will communicate the state of compliance with these policies
by all our government departments nationally and in the provinces.

Our public administration subscribes to the principle of nonsexism. In this
regard, we developed a policy and passed legislation to ensure employment
equity in the workplace in general, and in the Public Service in
particular. We want to acknowledge on this matter that our compliance rate
leaves room for improvement. In dealing with this aspect and also the issue
of disability management, the Department of Public Service and
Administration launched a guiding document for all government departments
in March last year. That was a contribution to such interventions at the
deployment of job access strategy.

This document prescribes, among other things, the following steps – and we
need to stress these steps, for these are the steps that hon members
present here, when doing oversight work, may check government departments
on as tools that can be used to deal with issues of compliance with the
employment equity requirements: ensure that the human resources, HR, plans
incorporate employment equity; set departmental numeric targets according
to national targets; create an enabling environment; develop implementation
plans; ensure continuous monitoring and evaluation of the plans; and
consult with relevant stakeholders as well as give progress reports on
implementation.

This year, we will step up awareness campaigns on the provision of this
document, so that, from next year on, we will insist on compliance. Our
public administration is also founded on the principle of democracy. We
created the Public Service Co-ordinating Bargaining Council, PSCBC, and the
SA Local Government Bargaining Council, SALGBC, as vehicles to ensure that
workplace democracy takes place through organised collective bargaining
processes.

The principle of unity in our Public Service finds expression in the
historical transformation journey of our Public Service, from fragmentation
to one administration based on the following founding values: a high
standard of professional ethics; efficient, economic and effective use of
resources; development-oriented public service; providing service
impartially, fairly, equitably and without bias; responsiveness;
accountability; transparency; good human resource management; and
demographic representation.

The PSC develops themes every year on the basis of which they analyse
government’s compliance with these values. As you remember, every year, the
PSC publishes a report on the state of the Public Service which is based on
compliance with these founding values. This year’s theme is Innovation in
Service Delivery.

We are aware at this point that there is general inaction on the
recommendations of the PSC, and we took a decision that, with immediate
effect, our Deputy Minister will follow up on noncompliance with these
recommendations. We are saying on this point that when the PSC investigates
an issue, and then writes a report, having made observations and findings
on the performance of departments, those recommendations need to be
implemented. Amongst other things, our Deputy Minister will make sure that
that happens.

The rate at which we fill vacancies in the various departments is cause for
concern. If we regard these vacancies as opportunities for employment, we
will agree that failure to fill them is, in fact, depriving employable
South Africans of the opportunity to enter the job market and compromises
the state’s capacity to deliver on its promises.

During this year, we will give a status report on each department’s
performance profile in this regard, after which we will facilitate that
action be taken to insist on compliance. The other problem is delays in the
filling of vacancies, resulting in so many people in acting positions in
the Public Service. We are weighing options on this matter and we will soon
experiment with one of them.

One possibility in this case is that we may prescribe that we centralise
the management of the appointment of the executive components of the
departments wherein we would further regulate that acting appointments may
only be entertained for advertised posts. We may have to put a requirement
that each advertisement should reflect a date of the interviews.

We are deliberating in this important House today during a time when we
have witnessed and continue to witness confrontations in areas where there
are protests by people demanding, among other things, accelerated service
delivery. I know that our reactions as individuals may differ as to how we
interpret it, but I know that we will all agree that we need a solution to
these challenges. Yes, we need a solution, and that will come if we all
work together to confront the situation.

Last year, addressing this House, we committed ourselves to reviewing the
implementation of the Batho Pele principles. We are happy to announce that
we have since relaunched the programme, focusing more on impact assessment.
We allocated the eight principles of the policy each to a province, as
follows: Eastern Cape focuses on service delivery; Free State on openness
and transparency; Gauteng on value for money; KwaZulu-Natal on information;
Limpopo on courtesy; Northern Cape on accessibility; Western Cape on
redress; North West on consultation and Mpumalanga on all eight principles.

At the end of the financial year, we will account on the roll-out of this
impact assessment exercise, so that this very important policy on the
transformation of service delivery will guide all steps of the activities
of our public servants to ensure quality and access to services.

In this year of outcomes-based performance management, we committed
ourselves to doing things differently. One of the things that we will do
differently relates to how we run the State Information Technology Agency,
Sita, business. There are three questions that are part of the key issues
that we will give attention to during this year, and these are: the review
of the Sita pricing model; the review of and compliance with tightening the
Sita procurement prescripts; and the improvement of the quality of service
for the services of the Sita.

This debate takes place at a time when the country is going through the
process of accounting to the heads of state of the African Union, AU, that
have acceded to the voluntary instrument of the African Peer Review
Mechanism, APRM. We are preparing our second report as a country, which is
due in July this year. The APRM programme, apart from dealing with issues
of compliance with the voluntary instrument, gives us an opportunity to
also mirror ourselves against our own performance on those issues that we
are called upon to respond to.

In the report, we should talk about our compliance with questions in the
following thematic areas: democracy and good governance; socioeconomic
development; corporate services; and economic governance. Of course, there
are issues that were identified as crosscutting and to which we should pay
attention and report on. In order to deal with these issues, we embarked on
provincial visits and organised consultative sessions to reflect on them as
follows. In the Eastern Cape we looked at unblocking the service delivery
challenges; in the Free State land reform management; in Gauteng
stakeholder participation; in KwaZulu-Natal HIV/Aids; in Limpopo inequality
and poverty eradication; in Mpumalanga fighting corruption; in the Northern
Cape violence against children; in North West racial harmony; and in the
Western Cape diversity management.

As you recall, Parliament played an important role during the time of the
country’s self-assessment process and the writing of the country’s review
report. It will be a worthy contribution if this institution of public
representatives can also participate in the process that is now on. My
office is interacting with the leadership of Parliament in this regard, but
importantly, members of this House may use the issues in the APRM report in
doing their oversight work.

In conclusion, and as we are due and ready for the 2010 Fifa soccer kick-
off next month, allow me to indicate that it will not all be holidays for
all public servants, as we made arrangements to make sure that the people
and the guests in the country receive minimum service so that government
will not be seen to be on leave. Government will be active as we are
entertaining, welcoming and showcasing our talents to the world.

Once more, Chairperson, I want to thank you very much for providing this
opportunity for us to present the Budget Vote for the Ministry for the
Public Service and Administration. “Hi khensile” [Thank you]. [Applause.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, hon Minister Masenyane Baloyi, hon House,
distinguished guests, today we have before us a policy debate on the Budget
Vote for the Public Service and Administration that the committee supports.


For any democratic state, its mission, vision, plans and hopes are only
realised if there is strong and effective public administration that can
drive the policy objectives of the governing party. For a developmental
state such as ours, the examination of the effectiveness and the efficiency
of the state are central, and the developmental objective of the state
depends on this effectiveness and efficiency.

This has been declared the year of action by our President in his state of
the nation address and the governing party further declared it to be the
year of working together to speed up effective service delivery to the
people.

South Africa is a developmental state, which is a conscious and deliberate
social construct which must lead the process of overhauling both the
economic as well as the political legacy of apartheid. In the year 1987, on
8 January, the late ANC President Oliver Tambo said in the ANC NEC
statement:

   We must proceed from the position that our task is to win a revolution.


   Political revolutions are about the capture of state power and its use
   to advance the objectives of fundamental social transformation. This
   task must be carried out consciously and intentionally by the
   revolutionary forces to bring about profound change in favour of the
   social classes and strata that have gained power.


    Without the victory of the revolution, revolutionary changes are not
    possible. The state is a vital feature in that effort to bring about
    those revolutionary changes because a new society cannot be built within
    the existing framework.

Five years later we began negotiations at the Convention for a Democratic
South Africa in 1991. The African National Congress put forward what it
envisaged as a united, democratic, nonracial, nonsexist South Africa: a
unitary state where a bill of rights guarantees fundamental rights and
freedoms for all on an equal basis; where people live in an open and
tolerant society; where organs of governments are representative,
competent, and fair in their functioning, and where opportunities are
progressively and rapidly expanded to ensure that all may live under
conditions of dignity and equality.

South Africa’s position as a developmental state is apparent in the way in
which Public Service and public policies are made and implemented in the
country, as well as the boldly stated goal to eradicate poverty through
active state leadership and intervention to achieve the objectives of
democracy and economic growth, development and redistribution. This then
informs the manner in which the state and the Public Service must be
structured and organised. Then the whole question of transformation of the
state comes into play.

Chairperson, when we speak of a united South Africa we have in mind in the
first place the territorial unity and constitutional integrity of our
country. South Africa must be seen and recognised by international
communities as a single nonfragmented entity with a single citizenship, a
nation and a common loyalty, not a quasi-federal feature which some
opposing forces talk about.

There is a need for a strong and effective central government to handle
national tasks, a strong and effective provincial government to deal with
the task of the regions, and a strong and effective local government to
ensure active local involvement in the handling of local matters. The
central government has the responsibility for ensuring that there is a
common framework of policy standards, norms and practices applicable to the
whole country and for seeing to it that all areas of the country have
equitable access to national resources.

Chairperson, all previous national democratic revolutions, especially in
Africa, have been political revolutions. Major democratic governments,
however, seldom destroyed the old machinery of the state. More often they
took over the imperialist-colonial institutions, parliamentary procedures,
multiparty systems, courts, bodies of law, army and the police
organisations and the bureaucratic administration. They appointed their own
nationals as soon as possible to the positions formerly held by the
expatriates of the colonising state.

When the national liberation movements hereto achieved independence they
inherited the old colonial system and went on working along the old lines.
They did not destroy the old state machinery to build a new one. They took
over government and ministerial houses and other privileges. They became a
class of bureaucrats. The tendency in many African countries has been to
maintain all economic as well as political systems. There has been
continuity and not revolution.

However, because the South African national democratic revolution is more
than the general type of political revolution, it has the responsibility to
do more than merely work along the old lines. Our revolution in South
Africa must destroy the old state machinery to build a new one.

This is the central message to all who work in the Public Service and
Administration department. Chairperson, the process of building a new
Public Service cadre forms part of the mega task for creating a
developmental state. There are those placed in the positions of
responsibility who do nothing, either through incapacity or unwillingness
to address the concerns of the people they are meant to serve. Where people
are found to be incapable of performing the task assigned to them, we must
work with speed to either capacitate such people or replace them with more
capable ones. To be a Public Service cadre means service to the people and
a caring attitude in dealing with citizens.

The ANC is committed to transforming the state in a manner that benefits
our people. There is no room for using the resources of the state for self-
enrichment and acting from narrow selfish interests. Selfishness is alien
to the values of the ANC. We expect the leading Public Service cadre to
earnestly listen to the people’s concern, truthfully reflect their wishes,
sincerely help address their hardship and do more to speed up effective
service as echoed by the Minister here.

Chairperson, the ANC, working together with our allies, will engage the
Public Service trade unions and clarify our respective roles in building a
new Public Service cadre for a democratic developmental state.
Revolutionary trade unions must be at the centre of driving quality service
to the people. The ANC agrees with the concept of a transformative trade
union committed to the ongoing transformation of the Public Service, its
structures, systems, ethos, and the way we do things.

A transformative trade union is one which is broad in its thinking,
politically motivated, and defends the interests of its members within the
context of a national democratic society which we are building. It is the
antithesis of a typical English craft union that only looks after the
narrow economic interests of its members to the exclusion of broad
political and social responsibilities within the sector in which it
operates. The ANC believes that the road of transformation that still lies
ahead requires transformative trade unions which are capable of building a
new Public Service cadre.

As parliamentarians, when assessing any Budget Vote, we have to ask
ourselves the questions: What is expected from this institution? In this
case we need to ask the question as to how the Public Service will comply
with the constitutional requirements so as to make it possible for
oversight to be done in such a way that it’s able to measure the progress
in terms of the budget that has been allocated to it. We must also ask on
behalf of the department whether the national fiscus has sufficiently
allocated resources to the department to meet its constitutional
obligations.

The main mandate of the Public Service in terms of the Constitution is to
transform the Public Service; oversee changes to the structures of the
Public Service; establish norms and standards for, among others, human
resource development; issue directives and regulations; formulate a
national anticorruption strategy and exercise oversight over the State
Information Technology Agency.

In carrying out this mandate, the Ministry for the Public Service and
Administration has developed a strategic plan for the medium-term period as
briefed to the committee. From 2010 to 2014 it identified 10 strategic
outputs which have been further broken down into projects with related
matters.

In conclusion, this year’s Budget Vote must be assessed within that
background and we hope that the Ministry will brief the committee quarterly
while other things that are left will be addressed to you. We support the
budget.

Mr J M BEKKER: Chairman, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon colleagues,
and hon visitors. It is a great honour to be part of today’s debate on the
Budget Vote for Public Service and Administration. I believe that this is
the heart of the government. You can have policies, systems, etc, but they
must be implemented and executed at a high standard of efficiency.

Ons gaan binne dae die grootste sportgebeurtenis in die wêreld aanbied.
Besoekers van oor die hele wêreld gaan ons land besoek en hulle gaan
menings vorm oor ons effektiwiteit en vermoë om die land te bestuur. Wat is
die boodskap wat hulle met hulle gaan saamneem? Gaan dit positief of
negatief wees? Gaan dit toerisme en handel in ons land bevoordeel of
benadeel?

As ons kyk na die begroting en die totale beplanning, is dit goed, maar dit
word nie geïmplementeer nie. Ek het die waarnemende direkteur-generaal in
ons komitee gekomplimenteer met die wyse waarop sy dit voorgestel het, maar
dit word nie uitgevoer nie. Die norme en waardes wat gestel word, word nie
uitgevoer nie.

Onbekwame persone, met geen of baie swak opleiding, word in
belangrike poste aangestel. Salarisse van top amptenare vergelyk goed en is
in baie gevalle selfs beter as in die private sektor, maar die sin vir
dissipline en verantwoordelikheid ontbreek, want daar is geen risiko aan
die pos gekoppel dat die persoon moet presteer nie. Korrupsie gedy in al
die staatsdepartemente en veral staatsinstellings. Baie min of niks word
gedoen om die skuldiges te ontmasker en te straf nie.

So, byvoorbeeld, kyk ons na die munisipaliteite. Munisipale bestuurders en
artikel 56-aanstellings beweeg van een raad na die volgende en laat ’n
spoor van onbevoegdheid en korrupsie agter. So gebeur dit ook met die
staatsdiensposte. Niemand behoort aangestel te word wat ’n rekord van swak
administrasie of korrupsie het nie.

Daar bestaan ’n simpatie met die oortreders wat ongekend is. Hulle word
beskou as verdruktes en verontregtes en moet gedurig geleentheid gegun word
om met hul optrede voort te gaan. Hierdie oortreders wat so beskerm word,
is die rede vir al ons probleme. Skuldiges moet ontmasker, vervolg en
gestraf word. Dit is nie die gemeenskap se skuld dat hulle korrup en
oneffektief is nie. Hoekom geniet hulle voorkeurbehandeling? Wat maak hulle
anders as ons gewone burgers?

’n Effektiewe en doeltreffende staatsdiens se waarde is ongekend. Die
nodige stelsels en fondse bestaan in ons land maar, soos reeds genoem, lê
die fout by die toepassing.

Die President het belowe dat Ministers en alle staatsdiensamptenare
prestasiekontrakte gaan teken. Die vraag is: Hoeveel is daar al geteken? Om
te teken het geen waarde as dit nie toegepas word nie. Ek verwys weer na
munisipaliteite. Ons het al by munisipaliteite gesien dat hierdie kontrakte
se waarde nul is. Ek weet van geen munisipale of artikel 56-bestuurder wat
nie sy 100% prestasiebonus kry nie. Hierdie prestasiemeting in die
staatsdiens moet volgens vasgestelde prosedures geskied en moenie gebaseer
wees op of ek van jou hou, of dat jy doen wat ek wil hê nie.

Op hierdie stadium word oneffektiwiteit en korrupsie nie gepenaliseer nie.
As ons na staatsinstellings soos die Landbank, SAUK, SAL en Eskom kyk, dan
het elkeen ’n geskiedenis van ondoeltreffendheid en gevalle van korrupsie.
Groot bedrae is uitbetaal om van amptenare ontslae te raak. Is dit reg dat
die belastingbetalers vir sulke foute moet betaal? Hoekom geniet hierdie
skuldiges soveel simpatie en voorkeurbehandeling?

In die strewe om diens te lewer moet daar gesoek word na maniere om
amptenare met integriteit te werf. Hoeveel poste word deur waarnemende
persone gevul? Is die werwingsbeleid en aanstellingsprosedure ingestel? Wat
bepaal ’n aanstelling? Moet daar nie meer gekyk word na die beginsel van
“fit for purpose” nie?

As ons kyk na die Staatsdienskommissie, wat ’n grondwetlike instelling is
en waarvan vereis word dat hy onpartydig en onafhanklik moet wees, dan kom
daar twyfel in jou gemoed nou dat daar nie meer ’n eie Begrotingspos is
nie, maar dat dit ’n funksie van die departement geword het. Hoe kan jy
skeidsregter oor jouself wees?

Enkelstaatsdiens is ’n onderwerp wat genoem word, om baie probleme op te
los. As dit gebeur beweeg ons heeltemal weg van ons mense aan wie diens
gelewer moet word en gaan beheer oor doeltreffendheid en effektiwiteit nog
swakker wees.

Ek wil afsluit met ’n beroep op die agb President en sy Kabinet. Pas die
beginsels van Batho Pele streng toe. Kom ons sien die hele land se
bevolking raak en probeer aan hulle die bes moontlike diens te lewer, in
plaas van ’n paar kamerade wat beloon moet word omdat hulle goeie
partygenote is. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In a few days we are going to host the world’s biggest sporting event.
Visitors from all over the world will come to our country and form an
opinion on our competence and ability to govern the country. What message
will they be taking back with them? Will it be positive or negative? Will
it promote or prejudice tourism and trade in our country?

When we look at the budget and its overall planning, it is good, but it is
not being implemented. In our committee I complimented the acting director-
general on the way in which she presented it, but these plans are not being
carried through. The norms and values that have been set are not being
executed.

Incompetent persons, with little or very poor training, are appointed to
important positions. The salaries of top officials compare well to and
often even exceed those in the private sector, but the sense of discipline
and responsibility is lacking because there is no risk linked to poor
performance in the post by the incumbent. Corruption is thriving in all of
the state departments and in particular in public institutions. Little or
nothing is being done to expose the culprits and punish them.

Take municipalities, for instance. Municipal managers and section 56
appointees move from one council to the next, leaving behind a trail of
incompetence and corruption. The same happens with Public Service posts.
People with a record of poor administration or corruption should not be
appointed.

The sympathy that prevails with these transgressors is unheard of. They are
regarded as oppressed and aggrieved people who must constantly be granted a
chance to continue with their actions. These transgressors, who are being
protected in this manner, are the reason for all our problems. The guilty
ones should be exposed, prosecuted and punished. It is not the community’s
fault that they are corrupt and incompetent. Why do they enjoy preferential
treatment? What makes them different from the average citizen?

The value of an effective and efficient Public Service is unparalleled. In
our country the systems and funding required are all in place but, as
already mentioned, the difficulty lies with the implementation.

The President has promised that all Ministers and public servants will be
signing performance contracts. The question is: How many have been signed
so far? To have signed is of no value if there is no enforcement. Again I
am referring to municipalities. We have already seen that these contracts
are of no value in municipalities. I know of no municipal or section 56
manager who does not receive his 100% performance bonus. Such performance
measurement in the Public Service should take place according to set
procedures and should not be based on whether I like you or whether you do
what I want you to do.

At this stage there are no penalties for incompetence and corruption.
Looking at state institutions such as the Land Bank, SABC, SAA and Eskom,
each one has a history of incompetence and corruption. Large amounts of
money have been paid to get rid of officials. Is it right that the
taxpayers should be paying for such mistakes? Why do these guilty parties
enjoy so much sympathy and preferential treatment?
In striving to deliver a service, ways should be found of recruiting
officials with integrity. How many posts are filled by acting persons? Are
the recruitment and appointment procedures in place? How are appointments
determined? Shouldn’t there be more emphasis on the principle of being fit
for purpose?

Looking at the Public Service Commission, which is a constitutional body
that is required to be impartial and independent, doubt starts to arise now
that it no longer has its own Budget Vote and has instead become a function
of the department. How can you police yourself?

The subject of a single Public Service has been mentioned as a way of
solving many problems. If this should happen, we will distance ourselves
from those people to whom these services should be rendered, and then
control over competence and efficiency will decline even more.

I want to conclude with an appeal to the hon President and his Cabinet.
Apply the principles of Batho Pele strictly. Let’s take note of the total
population of the country and attempt to render the best possible service
to them, instead of to a few comrades who have to be rewarded for being
such good party members. I thank you.]

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, what ties us together is our shared purpose and
responsibility to transform the South African Public Service into a
formidable, effective vehicle capable of supporting the socioeconomic
development that South Africa and its people need and deserve; a public
administration capable of ensuring human safety and security to each other
and to everyone; ensuring the dignified existence of all our people within
a human rights framework; and working in a trajectory of perpetual
improvement and elevation for all, but particularly providing support for
the poor in order to close the gap and erase the sharp disparities that
mark the livelihoods of the privileged and the underprivileged.

The department’s mandate has evolved over the years from developing policy
towards implementing and facilitating service delivery improvement through
support interventions, information and communications technology, ICT, and
community development workers. The department also participates and plays a
critical role in various public administration and management structures in
the Southern African Development Community, SADC, region and the rest of
the world.

The government’s five major priorities for the current electoral period
include education, health, land reform and rural development, creation of
decent work and the fight against crime. Informed by these priorities the
objectives underpinning the department’s strategic focus include developing
and strengthening the capacity of the state through efficient, effective
and sustainable systems; strengthening the public sector through
institutional reforms; promoting good governance in the public sector and
building an effective and caring government; developing the human resource
capacity of the public sector; and pursuing strategic international
partnerships to consolidate South Africa’s regional and international
agenda.

During this financial year, as the select committee, we will enhance our
oversight function in order to ensure that the Department of Public Service
and Administration, DPSA, implements these strategic priorities, and in
return contributes directly or indirectly towards the achievement of
government’s objectives of equality, improving the quality of education and
health as well as other social services, halving unemployment by 2014, and
stepping up the fight against crime.

As the select committee we believe that in order for the department to
deliver on these priorities, it needs to collaborate with other government
departments and institutions to establish partnerships with civil society.

The department has been allocated a total budget of R651,4 million during
the current financial year. Over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework,
MTEF, period, spending is expected to grow to R684,1 million at an average
annual rate of 0,1%.

During this financial year, the department needs to focus more on outcomes
as it spends its 2010-11 budget. This requires a shift from a focus on
inputs, that is budgets, personnel and equipment, to managing outcomes.
These will relate to the strategic focus areas of the department aligned
with this year’s budget in order to enhance service delivery through
systematic information and knowledge management and collaboration between
institutions within and across spheres of government as well as between
those spheres and private and development sectors. The ANC during its 52nd
national congress in Polokwane resolved that, as the ANC, we should
continue to lead and drive the process of the unification of administration
in the three spheres of government in the single Public Service.

Uppermost on government’s agenda for the ongoing social and economic
upliftment and transformation of our society is improvement in the delivery
of basic and other services to the people of South Africa.

Currently delivery is hampered by weaknesses in numerous areas, including,
amongst others, national frameworks and policies that do not extend to
local government in the areas of service delivery and public
administration, management and marked differences in remuneration and
conditions of service in the Public Service and local government, which
makes mobility and transfer of functions difficult.

The single Public Service is based on the principle that the institutions
across government - whether local, provincial or national - that comprise
the machinery of the state have to work together to effectively fulfil the
needs of the South African society. This means that their structures must
be aligned and structured in such a way that there are no barriers to co-
operation.

The single Public Service initiative seeks to ensure greater alignment
across the three spheres of government in the areas of human resource
management and development, service delivery, information and
communications technology, anticorruption and the design of framework
legislation.

The state is constitutionally bound to ensure that services of a high
quality are delivered to the citizens at their convenience. This means that
government must find the most effective methods and channels to deliver
these services. It calls for a dynamic, modern delivery model and a system
that clusters these services to the convenience of the citizen through a
“single window” - a place where a person can receive a range of government
services, be this a physical structure or by electronic means.

Rather than undermine the distinctiveness of local government as a sphere,
the single Public Service will improve the manner in which the spheres
interrelate and co-operate with each other to ensure enhanced delivery of
services. The Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act of 2005 will assist
by creating the environment for formalising intergovernmental forums and
regulating dispute resolutions.

In 2003 the community development workers, CDWs, were established as a new
cadre of public servants. Their unique contribution was to span the divides
between different spheres of government and between different line
departments that logically are interconnected but are operationally
divided. They make it easier for citizens to negotiate the complex maze of
government departments in order to access public services, particularly
social services and economic opportunities.

President Zuma has further reminded all of us that through working with the
people and supported by our public servants, we will build a developmental
state, improve public services and strengthen democratic institutions.
Community development workers, CDWs, are therefore the critical building
blocks in the actualisation of the developmental state.

Policy for the community development workers’ programme is at an advanced
stage, with consultations finalised in eight provinces. The policy
development process is expected to be completed by April 2010. Therefore,
hon Minister, during this financial year, as this House, we want to see the
CDWs programme strengthened in order to facilitate access to government
services. We support the Budget Vote.
The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: House
Chairperson, hon Minister for the Public Service and Administration, hon
members of the National Council of Provinces, hon Chairperson and members
of the select committee, distinguished guests and fellow South Africans,
House Chairperson, I was away from the office and I asked my staff to give
me a quotation that I could begin my speech with. I said to them that I’d
like to begin the speech with a quotation from Lenin. I received the
quotation which says: “We all live in a yellow submarine”. They
misunderstood me and gave me a quotation from John Lennon when I actually
meant Vladimir Lenin!

But, I came across a quote from Vladimir Lenin and he has the following to
say:

   Victory will belong only to those who have faith in the people, those who
   are immersed in the life-giving spring of popular creativity.


But, I thought I should also share with you, Chairperson, something I came
across from Mahatma Gandhi and it applies to all of us here today, and it
says: “Whatever you do in life will be insignificant, but it is very
important that you do it.”

Madam Chairperson, in the old Natal, the arrival of Indians in 1860 marked
the beginning of an organised scheme whereby approximately 150 000 Indians
arrived to seek gainful employment. While many worked in the sugar fields,
others worked on the wattle and tea plantations and in the coal mines. Some
came as domestic servants, waiters and house servants and were able to
command a respectable salary of just about 20 shillings per month.

These Indians coming from India were to suffer horrific and atrocious
experiences at the hands of many minority European leaders at the time.
However, as bad as the treatment was, these Indians persevered and made
South Africa their home against all odds. For the next 134 years, these
very same Indians were to be exposed to some of the most degrading and
dehumanising forms of treatment. South Africa, as it was then, was
certainly not welcoming to these compatriots from India and the
subcontinent. It was only years and years after that and more so after the
democratic breakthrough of 1994 that ushered in a prosperous dispensation
that South Africa truly became a home for all South Africans.

Our country has traversed a long journey to where we are today. Whilst we
still carry with us the painful imprints of our past coming from our
different backgrounds, today we are a nation and a peace-loving people,
steadfastly committed to constructing a new future based on unity,
equality, respect for each other and tolerance for others’ rights and our
national diversity.

The Republic of South Africa, born 16 years ago, is a firm negation of the
racist chauvinism that was the order of the day back then; and the resolute
affirmation of the historic vision that South Africa, indeed, belongs to
all who live in it, black and white.

The Ministry for the Public Service and Administration, which has the
honour to present its Budget Vote to you today, is part of this vision, and
determines that we shall do all we can to affirm all our people’s yearnings
to belong to a common nation, share a common identity and toil towards a
common future.

We remain resolute in our commitment to never allow public administrations
ever again to be used in schemes to divide and serve only segments of our
South African people, but certainly to be part of the broad movement to
affirm our people’s common and shared values and beliefs.

Madam Chair, it is an honour and a privilege to have been placed in this
department that is so central to the question of service delivery for our
nation. It is also a huge responsibility that is never more keenly felt
than when service delivery protest erupts, and ordinary people voice their
displeasure with the lack of service delivery.

My role is to support the Minister as he leads our collective effort to
achieve the objective as outlined in our legislation. In support of that
role, there are a few priorities that I wish to emphasise here today in
support of the Budget Vote of the department: Firstly, there is the need
for us to build the capacity of the state to deliver on our promises of a
better life for all.

Secondly, we have to review the governance arrangements within the three
spheres of government which align themselves effectively and efficiently to
deliver on our mandate to the people.

Thirdly, there is the need to better harness the power of technology to
support our efforts to modernise the way we do our business as government.

The ANC was elected in 2009 on the back of the Together We Can Do More
campaign.

There is increasing frustration at the general slow pace of delivery, poor
quality, high costs and lack of speedy responsiveness of government to the
challenges of our citizens. This frustration is felt across the spectrum of
South African society, particularly amongst the urban and rural poor.
Whatever the reasons, be it housing, sanitation, unemployment or
desperation, service delivery protests are symptomatic of the challenges
that we face as a nation and as government.

The South African public currently lacks a well-performing Public Service.
Only 58% of our population is satisfied with the services delivered.
Historically, satisfaction rates have been as high as 81% in 2004; and
since then there has been a steady decline in public opinion towards the
current satisfaction levels of 58% in 2009.

Indeed, there are several factors, which many of you will be familiar with,
that account for this perception by the public. Some of you have mentioned
the persistent underperformance by management in the Public Service;
dysfunctional and ineffective back office systems; and slow bureaucratic
decision-making processes that are amongst many other reasons that are
offered for to why this service is perceived as being poor.

All of these, ladies and gentlemen, are undermining the capacity of the
South African state and in turn have reduced its capacity to be an
effective instrument of service to the people. But the key question must
be: What are we going to do to fix these problems?

In his state of the nation address, President Zuma reaffirmed that the
South African government’s commitment to the vision of an inclusive society
is that South Africa belongs to the entire nation, united in its diversity
and the people working together for the greater good and benefit of all.
The South African Constitution emphasises that the priority of the state is
to advance human rights and freedom within a nonracial and nonsexist
framework in which the supremacy of the Constitution and the rule of law
must prevail.

Guided by the principle of the Freedom Charter, as you all have enunciated
here today, South Africa certainly belongs to all who live in it, with the
promotion of a democratic government based on the will of the people.
Government committed itself to build a developmental state that will
address the socioeconomic challenges in the eradication of poverty and the
need to create this better life for all.

The developmental state is thus an effort by the government to build a
nation; to eradicate poverty; promote literacy; and provide health and
decent education as well as grow the economy in a manner that must ensure
that people are not left out, but are certainly fully participating and are
included as part of the solution to the problems.

In declaring this year, 2010, the year of action, our President reminds us
that there is no time for schism, no time for excuses and no time for
complacency and the lackadaisical delivery of services. We are further
reminded that there shall also be no time to claim easy victories and tell
any lies.

Ladies and gentlemen, South Africa’s next revolution must, therefore, be to
get the democratic state working more effectively and efficiently.

An HON MEMBER: Find the DA offices. Do you mean to join the DA?
The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: As the
leader of transforming the state of public service and administration, the
Ministry for the Public Service and Administration is responsible for
providing the governance framework for an efficient and effective Public
Service through, amongst other things, ensuring that its people, processes
and technologies are aligned.

As the custodian of human resources in the civil service, the Department of
Public Service and Administration, DPSA, creates the framework for
recruiting, retaining and training the people who are central to the high-
performance Public Service that we require. Therefore, there would be no
need for me to join the DA.

To effect this outcome, the Ministry for the Public Service and
Administration has a number of levers at its disposal. We have several
directives that deal with specific people’s issues to whom we are
harnessing our strategy to improve and to raise the ethos of the Public
Service.

As our mandate is to transform the Public Service, we are working towards
inculcating the principle of a customer-focused and citizen-centric service
to the people in all public servants.

The aim is to ensure that all citizens in our country receive quality
government service at every service point. In this regard, I have just
completed a very interesting four-day public service and community
engagement outreach programme, and the Minister is about to implement
another of these initiatives in one of the outer-lying provinces in the
country.

The main focus of our programme is to ascertain the level of compliance
with service delivery standards which are central to the Batho Pele
principle. We engage in these programmes in people’s forums to hear the way
people really perceive the quality of public service and make interventions
to raise the quality of service.

I must, however, indicate that, in order to achieve this, we need public
servants who have values, are principledriven and also customer focused as
well as having the mind-set of being people-centred.

Our challenge, ladies and gentlemen, is to make the entire Public Service
share our vision and work diligently to speed up service delivery. Our
critical partners such as trade unions and the public sector will certainly
assist us to enhance the effectiveness of a developmental state. This
sentiment, we are happy to record, was endorsed in the declaration that was
adopted during the public service sector summit held earlier this year. In
this context, it is critical that we enhance the speedy access to
government services.

The community development workers programme, CDWP, was created in 2003 as
the new usher of multiskilled public servants whose role would be to ensure
that government goes to the people to offer services where they live,
especially the urban and rural poor.

It is, however, necessary to mention that, until now, the community
development programme has been implemented through guiding documents. As a
consequence of this, a great variety exists in the implementation process
of the CDWP nationally.

Our department currently has been engaged in a review process of the
community development workers programme, driving towards the establishment
of a consistent policy framework that will guide implementation across the
provinces throughout the country.
We are also engaged in reviewing the community development programme so
that it can play a more dynamic role in the war against poverty. Describing
the CDWP as having foot soldiers in the war against poverty, being the eyes
and ears of the people and the defenders of the poor will certainly become
the mission call of the realigned CDWP. Public Service institutions are
critical and central to the implementation of our programme of action in
the DPSA. Allow me to mention just some of these institutions. Is my time
up, Madam Chairperson? [Interjections.] Madam Chair, thank you very much.

The institutions I wanted to speak about, if I had time, would have been
the Government Employees Medical Scheme, Gems; and the Public Service
Commission. As you heard the Minister say, he has entrusted me with the
responsibility to ensure that there is compliance in the work of the Public
Service Commission. I must tell you that it is a commitment we give this
House that we will certainly attend to that in particular. We will
certainly do our level best to ensure that the PSETA meets the requirements
of improving skills in the Public Service.

In conclusion, we are happy to record that Gems is an institution that
takes care of the medical services of public servants. It is a dynamic
institution and organisation that earns R12 billion in a year. We are happy
to say that it is proceeding very well. Thank you very much, Madam Chair,
for the extra minute. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe nePhini lakho,
mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe ngithi angisho ukuthi uhulumeni wakho ngimbona
ekuthatha njengento ebalulekile ukuthi kuyiswe izidingo zabantu ebantwini.

Lo mnyango wakho kudingeka ukuthi ufinyelelise izidingo kubantu ngokukhulu
ukushesha. Ngiyakubonga ukuthi kubekhona nokunye okwenzekayo kanye nemali
efakiwe eziNdabeni zabaSebenzi ukuze kube khona izinto ezibhekene
nabasebenzi uqobo. Kodwa engakuxwayisa  ngakho Ngqongqoshe ngelinye ilanga
ngikule Ndlu ngathi asizinakekele kahle iziKhungo eziku-Chapter 9, ngathi
kufuneka uphose amehlo ngoba kukhona abantu abasebenza kahle, kanti futhi
izinkinga zabasebenzi zikhona kule minyango.

Kodwa-ke futhi kukhona abantu abenza lezi zikhungo zibe yizinto zemizi
yabo, ngoba ngokomthethosisekelo bayazi ukuthi umnyango wakho awukwazi
ukuwabheka noma ukuwaphenya ngoba bona baphendula kwiNdlu yesiShayamthetho
kaZwelonke. Sengathi leyonto kufuneka ibhekisiswe kahle ngoba iyasikhathaza
thina njengabantu abavotayo kuleli lizwe. Okunye okufanele ukubheke ukuthi
ungathathi amandla anikezwe uMnyango wakho uwadlulisele kwabanye abantu.
UMnyango wakho unikezwe umsebenzi omkhulu wokuthi ubhekelele abasebenzi
nokuqashwa kwabantu.

Ozakwethu bathinte nodaba lwakomasipala - ngoba yizimali zabakhokhi bentela
eziya khona, kufanele baqikelele ukuthi abantu abaqashwa khona bafanelekile
yini ukwenza lowo msebenzi. Uma ungeke ubuveze ubuholi kulokho mhlonishwa
Ngqongqoshe ngiyacabanga ukuthi iNingizimu Afrika iyobe isefini elimnyama,
iyongena ehlathini okwesibili, ngoba labo masipala yibona abasondelene
kakhulu nabantu ngendlela okuyiyonayona.

Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe noma ngazi ukuthi kunezinye izinto ozicabangayo
engingeke ngikwazi ukukuphikisa kuzo ngoba mhlawumbe ucwaningile ngazo
wabona ukuthi ungasebenza kanjani ngazo. Kodwa-ke njenge-IFP siyasiseka
lesi sabelomali, noma-ke amalungu ahloniphekile ebekuxwayisa ngezinto
ezithile engingeze ngangena kuzo ngenxa yemizuzu ezosuke iphele. Ngiyabonga
kakhulu. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Minister and your Deputy, hon
Minister, I see that your administration takes service delivery very
seriously.

Your department needs to speed up the process of service delivery. I am
grateful for what is happening and also for the funds allocated to labour
relations so that there can be something specifically designed for workers.
I once warned you,  Minister, right here in this House, that we must take
care of the Chapter 9 institutions. I said you need to be vigilant because
there are people who do their work perfectly whereas there are labour
issues in these departments.

But, again, there are people who think they own these institutions; they
know that according to the Constitution your department cannot monitor or
investigate them because they are only accountable to the National
Assembly. I think that needs to be looked at carefully because it worries
us as the voters in this country. Another thing that you need to be careful
not to do is to give other people the authority that has been given to your
department. Your department has been given an enormous task to care for the
workers and recruitment.

My comrades tackled the issue of municipalities because it is the
taxpayers’ money that is allocated to them; they must make sure that they
employ suitable people for those jobs. If you cannot show your leadership
skills in that, hon Minister, I think South Africa will be under a dark
cloud, and will be back in the woods for the second time, as these
municipalities are the ones which are closer to the people.

Hon Minister, I know that there are things that I could not disagree with
you on with regard to your thinking because maybe you have researched them
and then concluded how you are going to do them. Nevertheless, as the IFP
we support this budget even though the hon members have warned you about
certain things that I cannot dwell on right now because of time
constraints. Thank you very much.]

Mr B NESI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, acting
director-general, distinguished guests, and hon members, the ANC is in the
process of building a democratic developmental state. The first attribute
of a developmental state under our conditions should be its strategic
capacity – popular legitimacy deriving from its democratic nature and
approach of people-centred and people-driven change. In this regard, it
should be able to lead in the definition of a common national agenda and in
the mobilisation of all society to take part in its implementation.

As the ANC, we maintain that the ongoing transformation of the state is
meant to ensure that these capacities are attained, and the process of
identifying weaknesses and correcting them will be intensified.

This includes engendering new doctrines, culture and practices as well as
ensuring that the state institutions reflect the demographics of the
country. This includes appropriate representation of women and people with
disabilities.

Hon members, this applies to the Public Service in its totality as well as
specialised institutions such as the judiciary, the police, intelligence
agencies and the Defence Force. All these organs should serve the people in
an efficient and impartial manner.

We have observed that there are disabling barriers that seriously influence
the rate of employment of people with disabilities in the Public Service.
These include attitudes, practices and policies of departments; inadequate
provision of appropriate education and vocational training; inaccessible
buildings and public transport; and the impact of rural and informal
settlement environments.

Phaya ezilalini asisakwazi ukuhamba, abantu abakhubazekileyo -bafumana
ubunzima ngenxa yokungabikho kwezithuthi. [There are barriers in the rural
areas and people with disabilities find it difficult because of a lack of
public transport.]
The most critical barriers confronting people with disabilities are the
employment practices in the Public Service. To address these barrier
analysis and a timetable for the reduction and elimination of those
barriers, ineffective communication and co-ordination compounded by a lack
of data on persons with disabilities should be addressed immediately.

As the ANC we believe that implementing these corrective measures requires
more than just references to general political rights. A continuing element
of democratic transformation should be a systematic programme to correct
historical injustices and affirm those deliberately excluded under
apartheid on the basis of race, class and gender.

The need for such affirmative action will decline in the same measure as
all centres of power and influence become broadly representative of the
country’s demographics. In the process, all inequalities that may persist
or arise will need to be addressed.

The Batho Pele policy remains government’s leading campaign to achieve the
desired crucial transformation of the hearts and minds of public servants.
This is a Public Service culture reorientation programme that is aimed at
aligning the behaviour and attitudes of public servants with the practices
of a Batho Pele ethos.

In order to intensify the implementation and impact of this policy, the
Minister for the Public Service and Administration launched the Batho Pele
Impact Assessment which seeks to strengthen the integrated implementation
of Batho Pele and the impact thereof across the three spheres of
government.

This will enhance partnerships, collaborations and better co-ordination
towards the implementation of Batho Pele, and intervene decisively and
coherently in the economy and society to address social and economic
developmental goals.

Government has indicated its determination to build a cadre of community
development workers, CDWs. This is to ensure that government works with the
people as closely as possible to empower them to participate in and benefit
from the process of reconstruction and development. This challenging but
exciting work will require people who are truly committed to serving the
people. These are not people who joined the Public Service merely to have a
job or earn a salary. Rather, these are fellow South Africans who are moved
by our common responsibility to ensure that millions of people break out of
the dehumanising trap of poverty and underdevelopment. They are committed
to the realisation of the goal we have set for ourselves, the goal of
creating a caring and people-centred society. They understand and have
internalised the call for all of us to adhere to a new patriotism.

The department has to play a leading role in helping to identify those
among our population who fit this description to encourage them to take up
the challenge of serving as CDWs.

This is because our work among the people gives us the possibility to get
to know and assess many individuals. We will have to use this knowledge to
ensure that the nation gets the right people as it builds the new Public
Service cadre of CDWs.

Fighting corruption and promoting good governance remain some of the key
priorities of government. Corruption is not only a threat to democratic
institutions, but it also impacts negatively on service delivery and
development.

Khawundiphe amanzi. Ndonqena nokusela amanzi kuba le mizuzu iyabaleka.
[Please give me water. I am tempted not to even drink water because time is
against me.]

Government has established various measures and mechanisms to uproot
corruption in all sectors of society. However, hon members, we want to know
when the special service delivery units will be established in government
departments to tackle corruption head-on as provided for in the Public
Service Act of 1994.

Admittedly, some government departments have attracted attention, as do
some of our municipalities, especially the smaller, more isolated ones in
rural areas. These circumstances have set an urgent agenda for continuing
public service improvement, and the corresponding and required public
service training and management development.

For the Public Service to respond adequately to all these issues raised in
the so-called service-delivery-related protests that we are experiencing,
there is a need ... [Time expired.]

In conclusion, the ANC supports the Budget Vote. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, Minister and your Deputy, hon members, no
one can accuse the government of not displaying good attention. Neither can
anyone accuse the government of not creating new programmes or new
committees. The problem is the lack of implementation.

The people of South Africa have been generally unhappy about public
administration. In the past they suffered at the hands of the Public
Service because of the brutal laws that were administered against them. Now
they are unhappy because there is a general lack of capacity and
corruption. When Batho Pele was introduced, the whole country was happy.
The people thought that an instrument to implement and work properly had
been found. However, the problem is that Batho Pele did not take root.

The Public Service Commission monitors only the application of the Batho
Pele principle that produces the reports. However, people are not happy
about the reports. The reports are only there to do that.

Now, Minister, how can we say that we have a Batho Pele approach? Can the
Minister tell me that I can go to a particular department and see the Batho
Pele principle in action? One cannot get that. Do we have a situation where
there are, for example, 10 nominees that are identified by government in
terms of a Batho Pele award in order to promote the principle? Nothing is
happening.

We are happy to see, when we check issues from the last financial year -
the Minister was there – that some of them have been resolved.

Mthondolovhani, hi ndlela yaleyo ha ku ndhundhuzela. Leyi hi yona ndlela
leyi munhu a fanelaka a tirha hayona. Hina va Cope a hi lavi ku bvinya
leswi mi swi tirhaka; hi lava leswaku mi tirha mi ya emahlweni. Hina ho
tiyisisa leswaku ku tirhiwa hi ndlela leyi; a hi bvinyi ku ya emahlweni ka
mfumo. Xana loko Presidente Jacob Zuma a vurile a ku ... (Translation of
Xitsonga paragraph follows.)

[Mthondolovhani, on that note we praise you. This is the way a person
should work. As Cope, we do not want to sabotage what you are doing; we
want you to work and make progress. What we are doing is to ensure that
work is done in this manner; we don’t sabotage government’s progress. When
President Jacob Zuma said that ...]

... this is the year of action, is it really happening? We must definitely
act because the principal has spoken. I thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, hon members, Minister and
Deputy Minister, without any hesitation or shadow of a doubt, I must say
from the outset that the ANC supports the Budget Vote. Hon Minister and
Deputy Minister, the ANC also supports the agenda of your department of
continuing with the transformation of the Public Service. We support this
Budget Vote not because we are praise singers, but because we know that, as
a caring government, we have a solemn agenda to achieve a better life for
all our people.

As the ANC always says, together we can do more; this is how we want to do
it. We believe that it is incumbent on the executive and Parliament to make
sure that the agenda of ensuring a better quality of life for our people
becomes a reality, not a deferred dream.

The ANC, which is the champion of the liberation of our country, believes
in a united, nonracial, and nonsexist South Africa. Therefore, we want to
support the Ministry for the Public Service and Administration in its
pursuit of a single Public Service. We are aware that only those who do not
want to see a real change in our country are opposed to this. I must also
remind the hon members that we created provinces so that services can reach
our people faster and satisfactorily, not to be homelands of a special
type. [Interjections.] We did this because of our commitment to dismantle
all apartheid social relations and boundaries. We remain firm in our
commitment that our people get the same services, irrespective of their
race and location.

Hon Minister, we would like to request you to move with speed in creating a
single Public Service. We say this because we know that if this is not done
quickly, you will soon see a province that will have no room for black
people - and I mean black people in general. [Interjections.] A good
example in this regard is the province where we are seated. In this
province a black woman was removed from a top position only to have a white
man put in her place. [Interjections.] This was not because she had no
capacity, but to maintain a white male-dominated administration. A young
African man, who has scarce skills, was removed because he is an African
and was therefore perceived to be an ANC member. [Interjections.]

Furthermore, in this province that is led by a woman, one would have
thought that women would be in the majority in senior positions of
administration. But, unfortunately, the opposite is true because women are
not regarded as anything by another woman. I want to put it categorically
that since the DA took over the leadership of the Western Cape, this
province has regressed and recently polled as not only hostile to black
people but plainly a racist province and, of course, it also has its seat
in a racist city of our country. In fact, if truth be told, this has become
a haven for all racists and “verkramptes” [ultraconservatives] in this
province. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Continue, hon
Ntwanambi.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: In this province, particularly after the
elections in 2009, things have gone back to 1948. One continues to see
public leaders dismantling churches. They continue to build uncovered
toilets for people. If one goes to our areas – and I’m telling you all
black areas, not necessarily African areas only – where poor people live,
one will find that services are discontinued.

We continue to see areas where the majority of our people still live in
dirty and neglected areas.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, on a point of order: I would like you to rule in
terms of Rule 46 which says that no member in the Council may deliberately
make a statement which the member knows is false. This is in relation to
the last statement by the speaker.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Harris, can you
indicate which one?
Mr T D HARRIS: Excuse me?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Which statement?

Mr T D HARRIS: The statement that services are deliberately cut off in
black areas.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Are you saying it is
false?

Mr T D HARRIS: I’m saying the member is deliberately making a statement
which she knows is false.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can I come back to you?

Mr T D HARRIS: With a ruling?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can I come back to you
later with an answer to that?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Harris, let me
tell you. Go to Gugulethu now. I will just take you to three streets to
meet the people there so that you can understand better. Those are indigent
people.

I also want to suggest that - like it was ordered - when we go to the
public institutions we must be able to identify the civil servants. We must
have a way of reporting them because they continue to embarrass government.

In conclusion, let me respond to hon Bekker. Hon Bekker, you know that
municipal employees are not represented in this debate. That is why we are
canvassing for one Public Service so that they can be part of what we are
saying. I also want to say I’m so shocked and amused by your inability, hon
Bekker, to differentiate between Minister Shiceka and Minister Baloyi.
Everything you said here is exactly what you said two Fridays ago – every
single word. Maybe the DA has run out of words. Furthermore, it is also so
because this merger between the DA and the ID is nothing but a means of
ensuring the exclusion of Africans, particularly in the Western Cape.

Finally, I also want to remind hon Bekker - he knows very well - that his
leader, Madam Helen Zille, is nothing else but a woman who is supposed to
be a champion of women’s programmes. I can assure you that if one looks at
our statements here in the Western Cape, nothing speaks about anything. I
also want to tell hon members, particularly hon Harris, that we still live
in a city that is not ready to transform, that will never transform, if one
looks at Cape Town.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, on a point of order. I’m asking for
clarity on a point of order. A while ago I had a situation where Helen
Zille, who, as a premier, is a member of this House, was discredited and a
ruling in the Joint Sitting was made wherein the person who insulted the
premier had to apologise. On the same basis I am asking for clarity because
to me this is a point of order when someone is insulting a member of this
House.

Mr A G MATILA: Chairperson, on a point of order: I don’t understand what
the hon member’s point of order is all about. There is a difference in what
was said in the Joint Sitting and what is said now. There is a huge
difference. She did not listen, because here the speaker is just referring
to the differences on the ground. Maybe she needs to explain what it is all
about.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Just hold on. I will
reimburse you your time. Hon member, what is the insult? Can you just
clarify what is the insult at this present juncture?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Madam Chair, Helen Zille, who is a member of this
House, has been targeted by the current speaker on several issues;
insulting her. You can go through them. You can ask for the words because
I’m asking for a ruling. It is not right.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, could you
please explain to me what the insult is?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, she has said that she is not supporting
women; she is not a leader for women; she appoints men; and she builds
toilets without walls, which is not true. [Laughter.] It is not right. We
cannot have a member here ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: You know better!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, may I then
appeal that you take your seat.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: If I get a ruling I would be glad to do so.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Please, can you take
your seat at the present juncture. Just take your seat.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Thank you.

Ms M G BOROTO: Chairperson, on a point of order: I just want to ask the hon
member not to waste our time. She says the speaker is directly attacking
issues and there is no insult. This is a debate in which we debate issues.
So the point of order is not there at all. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, on a point of order: I think three months ago I
gave hon Ntwanambi advice to relieve stress. Hon Ntwanambi, don’t mention
the name of Helen Zille, because you are going to have a very bad night
tonight. Don’t dream about her.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, hon Bloem,
that is not a point of order.

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Mhlalingaphambili, ndinesiphakamiso sonqwanqwado: Ingaba
sisithuko kusini na ukuthi: Awakhi zindlu; akukho zindlu zangasese. Ingaba
sisithuko na eso? [Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it an insult to
say: You don’t build houses; there are no toilets. Is that an insult?]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I explain something
now? I will make a ruling after this. Hon Harris, in the next sitting I
will actually deal with your point of order. Can we proceed? We can’t
continue like this.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, on a point of order: I just want to ask the
hon Chief Whip whether Cope has got the answers, because in her speech she
said the DA doesn’t have them. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, that is not
a point of order and please behave yourself. Hon Ntwanambi, can you
continue?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson ...

Mr A G MATILA: Chairperson, on a point of order: Chairperson, because you
said you will be coming with a ruling around the point of order that was
raised by hon Harris ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I will answer all
points of order.

Mr A G MATILA: ... because she is misleading the House now. I want to check
as to whether ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): That is fine. I will
answer all of them. Thank you. Continue, hon Ntwanambi.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WE BHUNGA: Enkosi Mhlalingaphambili, uyabona ke bantu
beCope bendisanixolele namhlanje. Mhlawumbi ke nani aniziva nonwabile ukuba
andilichaphazeli igama lenu. Nina ke niseza kulwa kuba nemka kwiANC
ninomsindo kwaye niqumbile, nisaqumbile nangoku. Okunifaneleyo nina kukuba
niye kwinkomfa nonyule iinkokheli kwaye nizifune kananjalo ukuba ...
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Chairperson. You see, Cope
members, I didn’t intend mentioning you today.  Maybe you also do not feel
happy when I do not mention your name. You are still going to fight because
you were angry when you left the ANC; you are still angry and disgruntled.
What you need to do is to go to a conference to elect leaders and do some
introspection to find out ...]

... who you are exactly. What is it that you want? The fact of the matter
is that you don’t know what you want. You also don’t know what you are. You
don’t have a vision because you don’t even have a policy. You can’t have an
answer if you don’t have a policy. [Laughter.] Go back and take a look at
yourselves again. Get yourselves a mirror and look at yourselves properly;
you will find yourselves. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Are you brave enough to take a question?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I
thank all hon members for the debate on the Vote. It is a very important
engagement in the service of the separation of powers between Parliament
and the executive. Your inputs are not only fulfilling the democratic
imperative that you hold us accountable for, but also go far in terms of
raising issues that we have to respond to, either today or in the course of
the financial year, as we will engage from time to time.

We value all your inputs, although some provided entertainment. Our resolve
is that whatever you said is based on the understanding that you are as
patriotic as all of us. This message goes to all delegates of this House
irrespective of the political party which you represent.

Hon delegates, you will realise that the underlying position that informs
the way we do things is people-driven. As delegates to this House, from
time to time visiting provinces in your programme of Taking Parliament to
the People, be assured that we will always be available to you so that the
issues that are raised regarding service delivery may also be considered at
our level for making follow-ups.

I believe that you will always find peace with this understanding, as it is
a reality for all of us that the doctrine and practice of the separation of
powers also have a converse part of it, which is power convergence. We are
all Members of Parliament and we are representing two organs of one and the
same state of South Africa. Our parliamentary liaison officers will always
be a link between you and us.

The other interesting part of our relationship is that we share a common
partner, which is the Public Service Commission. Together we need to go
down to the communities and also weld our relationships around common
programmes of action. When we go to communities we will also go to those
which hon members said represent the past and not the present South Africa.
We will go to all of them.

One of the other priority issues which we will pursue is to make sure that
we do all we can to facilitate the delivery of services with a view to
impacting on people’s lives, giving them first preference, Batho Pele. In
his own words the Chairperson of the Public Service Commission, Dr Ralph
Mgijima, said in one of the reports that:

   Given the complex and multifaceted nature of rural poverty, the required
   interventions to address rural underdevelopment are also complex,
   needing to be multisectoral and integrated in nature.

Let us work together, clear in our understanding that we have respective
mandates and we are committed to serving the nation according to the oath
we signed as individuals in becoming Members of Parliament.

Last week at about 14:45 in the afternoon, I signed a performance agreement
with the President of the Republic of South Africa. I committed myself to
leading this department differently so that we can realise our outcome of
an efficient and development-oriented Public Service.

In conclusion, allow me to thank my support staff, the leadership of the
portfolios, the Public Service Commission and the Deputy Minister for the
support. I should take this opportunity to announce that whereas we have
our acting director-general, today, we have taken a decision today to
appoint a permanent director-general. As we are speaking I want to indicate
that Blake Mosley-Lefatola will resume his duties as DG in no time. We want
to lead by example when we say that we need to fill vacancies as speedily
as possible.

I take this opportunity to say thank you very much for allowing us to
present the Budget Vote. Before I go back, it is important that we thank
the chairperson of the committee, hon Mokgobi. You are right when you say
that we were ready when we took over in 1994 because we graduated from the
university of wisdom and unity. We were ready then, we are ready now and we
will be ready tomorrow.

We are taking our cue from what Samora Machel said - that the struggle is a
school of unity. We derived and we drank from that school. That is why we
are ready. It is true that we would present quarterly reports and even more
than that, but the minimum we are going to do.

Things that Mr Bekker said will slightly address some of the things Mr
Makhubela and Mr Zulu raised. The Public Service Commission is independent.
We want to impress, raise and invite all of you to support the independence
of the Public Service Commission. What is happening is that the Public
Service Commission is funded through transfer funds from the Department of
Public Service and Administration, DPSA, Vote 11. This is not undermining
the independence of the Public Service Commission.
The arrangement before was not the best. We are looking for a final
position. The Public Service Commission, as an independent institution
appointed by this Parliament, has to be funded according to that. Remember,
it was yourselves as Parliament who appointed former Member of Parliament,
Prof Kader Asmal, who led a commission, an ad hoc committee, to look at the
review of the Chapter 9 institutions including the Chapter 10 institution
of the Public Service Commission.

The corporate form of this entity will be finalised in no time. There is no
one who is trying to undermine the independence of the Public Service
Commission. The Deputy Minister will strengthen the executive
responsibility to make sure that the executive oversight is done. This will
ensure that government departments respond to the recommendations of the
Public Service Commission. Parliament has that responsibility at political
oversight level.

Some people say the Public Service Commission does not have teeth; some say
it has two sets of teeth - one set with Parliament and the other with the
executive. It is up to those of us with whom the teeth reside to sharpen
them so that they must bite as we support the Public Service Commission.

Mr Bekker, the time has come for us to remind people, amongst other things,
of what Shakespeare said. In one of his sonnets titled The Parting, Michael
Drayton said, and I quote:
   Since there’s no help, come let us kiss and part.

And Shakespeare:

   Love is not love which alters when it alteration finds,
   Or bends with the remover to remove:
   O no! it is an ever-fixed mark ...

That time has come and we have pronounced that we will do our best to train
and expose our public servants to whatever it takes for them to rise to the
level, as Mr Makhubela said, of internalising their obligations and service
to this country to make sure that the policies that we developed are
implemented. If they can’t rise to that level, the parting time has
arrived. That is the time that we will also call upon Parliament and this
House to support us as we deal with these issues.

Baba Zulu, on the issue around the special service unit we indicated when
we pronounced that we are going to create this, during the Public Service
Week in June we are going to pronounce where we stand.

It is true, hon Nesi, that the issue of disability is a very serious issue.
I indicated that in March last year we launched guiding principles. We have
committed ourselves and the nine steps that we spoke about will be
popularised. Next year our priority is to make sure that there is
compliance. If there is no compliance, whether in the Eastern Cape or the
Western Cape, we will make sure it is there.

The Ministry in the Presidency responsible for performance monitoring and
evaluation monitors governance in the whole of the Republic of South
Africa. We don’t have any part of this country that is a state on its own.
We are part of one state. South Africa is a unitary state. That is what we
are going to do.

Comrade Chief Whip, we assure you, as we conclude, that when we speak about
compliance we mean compliance. We are going to make sure that compliance is
there and it is done. South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in
our diversity. That is what the Constitution says, taking a cue from what
the Freedom Charter said, namely that South Africa belongs to all who live
in it, black and white.

When we fill positions, our staffing norms are instructive that the
population of your public servants in any area must be reflective of the
demographics in that particular area. There is no excuse for that. There is
no holy cow. We are going to address all these things.

If I have not commented on any of the things that you said, we should get
together at a later stage. At this time it is not possible for me to
respond to all of them. We are together to engage on all these issues. We
thank you for the time you gave us, Chairperson.

I ntiyiso lowu hanyaka tatana Mugwena leswaku loko hi vulavula hi ku ku
fanele ku tirhiwa. Xikombiso xa kahle lexi mi nga ta xi twisisa hi ri ku ta
tlurhuka ritshuri ehenhla ka nhloko ya xisiwana. Loko ri nga tlurhuki
hinkwerhu hi fanele ku koka kahle naswona yi nga koki onge letin’wana ti
pane hi joko xikeyi hikuva yi nga ti tlimba swi nga fanelanga.

Hi kona tanihi Ndzawulo ya Vukorhokeri bya Vaaki na Mafambiselo hi tirha ku
fana na vadzambi. Loko hi ku tshinya u nga twi hi kala hi tshinela ekusuhi
i ta swi twa kunene. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Mugwena, it is really true when we say that work must be done. A good
example that you can understand is that all people must dedicate themselves
to hard work to eradicate poverty. If not, we must all join hands and exert
the same effort, and not work as individuals.

That is when the Department of Public Service and Administration will come
on board as supervisors. When we issue a warning and there is no
compliance, then we will be bound to put tough measures in place.]

Thank you very much.

Debat concluded.

The Council adjourned at 17:42.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by
         the Minister of Finance.


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance.

    Please note:  The above item replaces item 1 under Announcements in the
               ATC of 4 May 2010, where the Bill submitted in terms of Joint
               Rule 159 was incorrectly referred to the Standing Committee
               on Appropriations and the Select Committee on Appropriations.



