---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 February 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-02-17
---

WEDNESDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)


The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy President,
distinguished Cabinet colleagues, hon members, the Governor of the SA
Reserve Bank and Deputy Governors, the former Governor of the Reserve Bank,
the finance family or the MECs for finance, ambassadors, high commissioners
and members of the diplomatic corps, friends and allies, compatriots in the
gallery and wherever you might be watching us or listening to us in South
Africa, my family and the Deputy Minister’s family who are present today,
fellow South Africans, ladies and gentlemen, it is my privilege to present
the first Budget of the administration of President Zuma to this House just
eight months after our appointment.

Last week we had the special honour of hosting former President Mandela in
Parliament. He exuded his inimitable magic upon all of us. He reminded us
of what we have achieved in our struggle for freedom and in our democratic
journey. He reminded us that South Africans are capable of extraordinary
things. We are, as you also reminded us, Mr President, an extraordinary
people – we might not believe it sometimes, but we are.

Twenty years ago we showed the world that we could unite around a common
cause – a democratic, nonracial, nonsexist South Africa. We showed
ourselves, and the world, that we could compete politically and yet find a
shared understanding on matters of common concern to all of us – building a
better South Africa for our children and grandchildren. Now we must use
this remarkable national capability to address energetically and urgently
the problems of jobs, growth and poverty.

As you pointed out, Mr President, none of us can rest or sleep peacefully
until every South African can say, “I can see a better future. I can find a
job. I can learn a skill.” [Applause.] Every South African needs to be able
to say, “Hard work will enable me, and my family to have shelter and food.
If my children work hard at school and college, they will have a better
future and a thousand opportunities available to them”. Zenzele ikamva
lakho. [Create your own future.]

Our people need hope. Our people want government to lead. We will lead.
[Applause.] Our people want government, business, labour and social
organisations, including our friends on this side of the House, to work
together to create a better economic future. [Applause.] Our people want to
be positively energised so that they can take the initiative to improve
their own lives and communities. Our people want action on jobs, growth and
poverty. We must build a new common purpose so that we can use all of our
talents, skills and resources to tackle our economic and social challenges.


Mr President, you have said we must do things differently. We cannot do the
same old things and expect different results, and several members had said
that in the last few days as well. Both South Africa and the world at large
must look and are looking for different answers and solutions. So the first
message of this Budget is that all of us, whether you are in Sandton or
Upington, in Lusikisiki or Marabastad, must be prepared to do things
differently, not just government. [Applause.]

President Zuma has rightly challenged us to re-examine our plans and to set
a more deliberate and more focused course. Cabinet has agreed on a set of
outcomes that will shape our policies and programmes for the years ahead.
The Public Service has begun an organisational restructuring that is driven
by the imperative of service delivery. A new engagement between government,
the business sector and organised labour is being forged, through which we
will mobilise our creativity, our determination and our sheer grit to build
a durable, developmental, just and prosperous nation. In forging this
engagement we will build on the foundations laid over the past two decades.
We will also have the courage and humility to do things differently.

The key dimensions of our transformation challenge are clear and well
known. One in four adults seeking work is unemployed and almost half of our
young people, as the President indicated yesterday, have not found work.
Income inequality is amongst the highest in the world and half of our
population - 50% - survives on 8% of national income. That is not
sustainable.

Closely associated with inequality and economic vulnerability, we confront
several social challenges: an HIV and TB pandemic, unacceptably high rates
of crime, angry communities and dysfunctional schools. So we have to do
things differently. We have to act now to strengthen the institutions
through which public services are delivered and to transform the structure
of our economy so that all South Africans can share in the opportunities
that our country offers.
We are deeply mindful that economic development and public service delivery
are about much more than the numbers through which we measure progress. As
development economist – I must thank Minister Manuel; he gave me this
article to read - Amiya Bagchi has observed, successful developmental
states are built not just through public policy and state action, but also
through national identity, social cohesion and responsible citizenship
through building social capital that reinforces trust and co-operation, in
the place of conflict and fragmentation. And that is the lesson and
challenge for all of us.

This is surely the central theme in our vision for the next 20 years, that
we should succeed in forging a common purpose that dominates over narrow,
sectarian interests. As South Africans we have learnt over the past 20
years that our shared humanity, our generosity, our resilience and our
capacity to deal honestly with each other present a formidable capacity to
fight adversity, to find common ground and to move forward together. In an
important sense this is our most precious national asset – our social
capital, if you like, in the making.

These capabilities now face their sternest test. In the construction of a
more just economic order, we must again, in our own way, demonstrate to the
world that it is possible to find an agreed way forward, a path in which
inequality and narrow self-interest give way to a longer-term, inclusive
and broad-based development path.

We will host a great sporting festival this year – the 2010 Fifa World Cup
- which has been a considerable test of our agility and delivery capacity.
We have achieved a remarkable goal – we need to score a few as well ...
[Laughter.] ... in completing the 2010 stadiums in good time. And as we
rightly enjoy and take pride in this achievement, we know that we must
extend the same extraordinary efforts to addressing our critical social and
economic challenges. So, Minister Stofile, if we can deliver the stadiums,
why can’t we deliver better economic growth and jobs for our people? In
this process we will be ambitious yet realistic, we will be bold yet
pragmatic and we will be creative and inventive, yet we will build on
sound, secure foundations.

In delivering on its developmental mandate, Mr President, in pursuing the
social and economic outcomes that we desire, government is ready to forge a
new growth path and to work tirelessly to build a future in which all South
Africans can take pride and share in the benefits.

My privilege today, Mr President, is to elaborate on some of the economic
and fiscal dimensions of the challenge you have set us and to share with
the House and all South Africans the spending and revenue plans and some of
the projects and programmes that the government will undertake over the
period ahead.

If we look at the global recovery and South Africa’s economic outlook in
this context, in the past year the world economy has gone through its
deepest recession in over 70 years. Brought on by a crisis in the financial
sector in developed countries, an estimated 34 million people have lost
their jobs globally. Through a co-ordinated effort by the G20, involving
extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy interventions, a depression has
been staved off.

After declining by 0,8% in 2009, the world economy is expected to grow by
3,9% this year, driven largely by the momentum of China’s industrial
expansion, urbanisation and modernisation. Yet many commentators caution
that these positive trends may be short-lived, and that the world economy
may yet experience a second recessionary wave. So we are not out of the
woods yet.

Employment creation in developed countries remains weak. Large fiscal
deficits and emerging asset price bubbles in Asia signal that the recovery
is still fragile. As with the boom period prior to 2008, the global
recession will entail sweeping changes to the world economic landscape.
Major industries from automobiles to telecommunications and energy are
undergoing rapid restructuring and evolution. What about South Africa?

Domestically, after five years of strong growth during which about two
million jobs were created, our economy shrank by an estimated 1,8% last
year. Mining output fell by about 7% and manufacturing by over 12%.
Consumption and private investment contracted and about 900 000 people lost
their jobs.

Members of the House will recall that in October last year, in tabling the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS, I indicated that recovery from
this deterioration would be slow and uneven. We projected that growth this
year would be just 1,5%. But we’ve got some good news for you. Things are
looking slightly better. Our growth expectation for 2010 is now 2,3%,
rising to 3,6% by 2012. [Applause.] Household consumption expenditure will
improve during the course of this year as confidence improves and household
debt levels abate. We expect gross fixed capital formation to record growth
of 5,8% and to strengthen further in 2011 and beyond. The most recent
employment statistics show an increase of 89 000 jobs between September and
December last year. Consumer price inflation has declined over the course
of the last year and is expected to remain around 6% over the period ahead.


These are significant improvements in the economic outlook but not yet
enough to address our challenges of jobs, higher growth and poverty
reduction. It is for this reason that we have to look beyond our current
way of doing things.

The recent crisis and its aftermath have led to a serious introspection and
rethinking of what were thought to be robust and superior economic models.
We signalled in last year’s Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement that South
Africa needs a new growth path and we outlined several key elements in the
growth strategies of successful nations around the world. Since then, there
has been robust debate on several aspects of economic policy. There is
substantial agreement that our key challenges are job creation, poverty
reduction and faster economic growth. So, What is to be done? - a slogan
familiar to some of you in this House. [Laughter.]

Allow me to quote from Cosatu’s recent statement:

   Unemployment remains far higher than in any comparable country in the
   world, and as a consequence poverty is widespread, and we now have world-
   record levels of inequality.

   ... it is essential that we urgently adopt a completely new growth path
   to transform our economy into one based on labour-intensive industry and
   one that meets the basic needs of our people.

We agree with Cosatu. I’m sure all of you do. [Applause.] Our economy needs
to be transformed to meet the needs of all of our people. We also agree
that growth on its own is insufficient to solve our unemployment problem.
We need to expand the capacity of the economy to grow sustainably and we
need growth that is more labour absorbing.

We also find ourselves in agreement with the CEO of Business Leadership
South Africa, who wrote the following in this week’s Sunday Times:

   The fact is that South Africa is not making sufficient progress because
   there is no shared vision that prioritises growth as a national goal.


   The first step would be for society, led by government, but with
   business, labour and civil society in close support, to agree on a vision
   of doubling the size of the economy within a generation.

It is time to put aside our differences and recognise that we have a shared
vision of a new economy in the making. We have a shared intent to expand
income and employment over the period ahead. We have a shared appreciation
for the role of investment and enterprise in underpinning growth and we
share a common commitment to improve service delivery and build a
competitive economy.

This Budget outlines several aspects of a new growth path for our country.
Firstly, there is a concerted effort to reduce joblessness among young
people in South Africa. The President yesterday explained the number of
young people we have and their status in our society. We cannot rest until
we find a solution to this challenge. Secondly, there is support for labour-
intensive industries through industrial policy interventions, skills
development, public employment programmes and a rural development strategy;
thirdly, sustaining high levels of public and private investment and
raising our savings levels; fourthly, improving the performance and
effectiveness of the state, especially the provision of quality education
and training at all levels; fifthly, reforms to increase inclusion and
participation in the labour market alongside efforts to improve competition
in product markets; sixthly, keeping inflation low, striving for a stable
and competitive exchange rate and providing a buffer against global
volatility; and finally, raising productivity and competitiveness, and
opening up the economy to investment and trade opportunities that can boost
exports.

We need to produce the goods and services that other people desire to have
and that we can export to the rest of the world. That is our key challenge:
How do we produce goods that we can sell to the rest of the world?

Our approach to employment creation includes measures to encourage
industries and services that have significant job potential, stepped-up
implementation of the Expanded Public Works Programme, investment in
further education and skills development, encouragement of small business
development and entrepreneurship and a new focus on promoting youth
employment. In other words, there is no one simple answer. There are many
things that we will have to do - and we now have a clear idea of what they
are - in order to turn the situation around.
Turning an economy around and achieving the kind of transformation required
to draw the millions of unemployed people into the economy is not an easy
task. We must be honest with our people about that. It will not happen
tomorrow morning. It will take time and forward-looking policies that are
effectively implemented, but we will start today. It will take hard work.
We must have the courage to make difficult choices about investment
priorities, industrial policy options, spending priorities, technology
alternatives and trade strategies.

We operate in a global village where our fortunes are partly dependent on
how well we are able to leverage off the global economy. Other countries
are not standing still. Brazil, India, China and a host of other middle-
income countries are actively taking steps to improve their
competitiveness, raise their skills levels, invest in infrastructure and
remove obstacles to growth and employment. The determination that we need
to develop collectively is that South Africa will not be left behind.
[Applause.]

Let me take this opportunity to commend Minister Davies and his team for
the detailed work that he spoke about a day ago and that has gone into
developing an industrial policy action plan. As part of our growth path, it
will contribute to transforming our economy towards a more labour-absorbing
and dynamic one.

Climate change and concerns over global energy supply present both
challenges and opportunities for South Africa. Industries must be helped to
manage scarce resources more efficiently and to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions through appropriate pricing of energy. This is necessary to
enable investment in sustainable technologies. Green economy initiatives
will create new opportunities for enterprise development, job creation and
the renewal of commercial and residential environments. This must play a
crucial part in our new growth path. Innovation and enterprise development
are rightly the key focus areas of the work of the economic and employment
cluster led by Ministers Nkwinti and Pandor. Over the next year, the
cluster will oversee the development of sectoral strategies and actions to
raise output, employment, productivity and exports.

Another component of our employment strategy is to promote job creation for
our youth. Many South Africans, speaking of their own experiences on the
streets of our cities, at factory gates and in rural communities, have
urged us to take steps to make it easier for young people to find work.
Labour market data confirms that employers are reluctant to hire
inexperienced workseekers, while school-leavers lack basic workplace
competencies. Furthermore, our bargaining arrangements push up entry-level
wages, pricing out inexperienced workseekers.

Under the leadership of the Department of Labour and Minister Mdladlana,
initiatives are in progress to improve information services to help young
people access jobs and training opportunities. We propose to support these
reforms through a subsidy to employers that will lower the cost of hiring
young people without work experience. Under consideration, as the President
mentioned, is a cash reimbursement to employers for a two-year period,
operating through the Sars payroll tax platform, subject to minimum labour
standards. It will be available to tax-compliant businesses – so, those of
you who are not compliant, start paying your tax, please. See, a tax man
does not lose his habits easily. [Laughter.]

Nongovernmental organisations and municipalities will also qualify for
this. Our preliminary estimate is that about 800 000 people will qualify.
The aim is to raise employment of young school leavers by a further 500 000
by 2013. Our intention is that young people should benefit from this
initiative by early next year if we can get consensus among all the role-
players.

A discussion document setting out further details of the youth wage subsidy
proposals will be tabled by the end of March. [Applause.] No, you need to
get a little more energised than that. [Applause.] Otherwise the public
will think we are all asleep here, you see? [Laughter.] Ditiro tsa bašwa.
[Jobs for young people.]

Monetary and exchange rate considerations are also important elements both
in adapting to global developments and in creating an environment
supportive of growth and employment creation. Let us remind ourselves about
what section 224(1) of the Constitution says about the mandate of the
Reserve Bank:

   The primary object of the South African Reserve Bank is to protect the
   value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable
   economic growth in the Republic.

As required by the Constitution, the bank should pursue its mandate
independently and without fear, favour or prejudice. [Applause.] So,
Governor, please note, everybody agrees. The Governor and I will consult
regularly to ensure that South Africa is prepared to respond with agility
and flexibility to the changing economic circumstances around us. The
global financial crisis has illustrated the need for central banks to take
a broader view of the economy in managing inflation, including growth,
employment trends, asset prices, financial sector stability and
competitiveness of the exchange rate.

Our inflation-targeting framework incorporates such flexibility and allows
inflation to deviate from the target in event of such shocks. In such
cases, the bank is required to explain clearly to the public the timeframe
over which inflation will be adjusted back to and within the target range
without unnecessary instability in output and interest rates.

A credible monetary policy framework that focuses on managing inflation is
crucial to reducing long-term borrowing costs and providing confidence
about the future. These are necessary to stimulate investment, employment
and competitiveness, particularly among exporters and import-competing
industries. At present our level of inflation is higher than that of our
trading partners, which lowers our competitiveness. Low and stable
inflation is also essential to protect the living standards of workers and
the poor.

I wish to confirm that the Reserve Bank will continue to pursue a target
for consumer price index, CPI, inflation of 3% to 6%. [Applause.] Governor
Marcus and I have agreed that monetary policy should be conducted in a
consistent and transparent manner within a flexible inflation-targeting
framework. The role of the bank in maintaining financial stability will
also be enhanced. That is the lesson from our global crisis.

Improved communication with the public about the role of monetary policy in
supporting growth will increase the effectiveness of the bank in achieving
its mandate. The Governor and I agree that ongoing assessment, discussion
and commentary about our monetary policy by analysts, interested members of
the public and indeed this House, interest groups and the broader research
community, is constructive for the emergence of a social consensus in this
area over the longer term.

Mr Speaker, we are agreed that we need a stable and competitive real
exchange rate, though in today’s world this cannot be translated into a
straightforward fixed price of the rand. Government is concerned that, at
certain times, rapid capital inflows that may be required to sustain
investment spending have the unintended consequence of appreciating the
currency. We have therefore agreed with the Reserve Bank that we will
continue to take steps to counter the volatility of the exchange rate and
to lean against the wind during periods of rapid capital inflows, including
reserve accumulation and further exchange control reform.

Long-term efforts to support the competitiveness of the real exchange rate
include lower wage inflation, lower budget deficits, larger reserves and a
more flexible and dynamic economy. Unfortunately there is no silver bullet
in the pursuit of greater competitiveness. Macroeconomic policy, industrial
policy, trade, labour market and logistics infrastructure all contribute to
creating a more productive economy. And this is the multidimensional view
that we need to develop as we go forward.

We have seen very dramatic changes during the past year in response to the
global recession. The Budget balance has swung from a surplus of 1% of
gross domestic product, GDP, in Minister Manuel’s time in 2007-08 to a
deficit of 7,3% in just two years. This has cushioned the economy against
an even larger decline in output and employment. We have ensured that
spending on economic and social services is maintained, as we have informed
this House before, despite the decline in tax revenue.
This countercyclical response has stood South Africa in good stead by
limiting the human and economic costs of the recession. Unlike many
countries that entered the crisis with already high levels of debt, we do
not have to cut spending or raise tax rates in the short term at the
expense of social development and economic growth. [Applause.] I read that
incorrectly, I should have said, “We have to increase tax rates.”
[Laughter.]

The cost of higher borrowing is, however, greater expenditure on interest.
Our public debt is expected to rise from 23% of GDP in 2008-09 to about 40%
in 2013, and will only stabilise in 2015. Higher government borrowing is
only a temporary solution to our economic challenges. But what we want to
assure you and the South Africans that are listening to us and watching us
is that government – that includes the whole of Cabinet – is fully behind a
policy and approach that will ensure that we don’t overborrow or overspend
and that we follow a sustainable fiscal path. That is the assurance we can
give you. [Applause.]

As the world recovers from the recession, those countries with low levels
of debt will be better placed to take advantage of growth opportunities.
Those burdened with high debt levels will find it more difficult to invest
and trade due to a substantial tax burden, high interest rates and
perceived financial risks. To ensure that future growth and public service
delivery are not compromised by unchecked rises in interest costs, our
medium-term fiscal framework allows for a gradual reduction in the budget
deficit.

The past year has been one of the most challenging periods for revenue
collection since 1994. I think the new commissioner is getting soft on
this. [Laughter.] As a result of the deterioration in the South African
economy, we now expect to raise R69 billion less in tax this year than we
budgeted originally. Consolidated revenue will be R658 billion in 2009-10,
which is R32 billion less than in the past fiscal year. What is the cause
of this drop in revenue?

Firstly, value-added tax will be R22 billion less than the February Budget
Estimate and 5,1% lower than last year. Secondly, corporate income tax will
be R30 billion less than expected and over 20% less than the amount we
collected in 2008-09. Thirdly, customs duties will be R6 billion below
target, personal income tax R4 billion lower and secondary tax on companies
R3 billion less.

We will continue to face revenue challenges in 2010-11, as tax revenue
growth is likely to lag behind the recovery. Given the gap between spending
and revenue, alongside efforts to curb spending growth, government requires
more tax revenue. I imagine there are many of you who are going to offer us
more tax. The preferred method of achieving higher revenues is through base
broadening, closing loopholes and improving tax compliance. Additional
environmental taxes will be explored, both to raise more revenue and to
meet environmental objectives. [Applause.] Can more of you join Minister
Sonjica on this please? [Applause.]: Notwithstanding this, we may have to
raise taxes in future to fund our public spending commitments. Let me
repeat this. Notwithstanding this, we may have to raise taxes in future to
fund our public spending commitments.

However, the state of the economy and the financial stress of households
must be taken into account. We do not propose to raise the overall tax
burden this year. [Applause.] We are instead proposing moderate tax relief
for households, to assist in sustaining the economic recovery. Income tax
relief for individuals will amount to R6,5 billion, which largely
compensates for the effects of inflation. Most of the relief is provided to
taxpayers in lower-income brackets. [Applause.]

To support further broadening of access to medical scheme membership, the
monthly monetary caps for deductible medical scheme contributions are also
increased. Taking into account the effect of the tax system on savings, the
annual tax-free interest income will be increased from R21 000 to R22 300
for individuals below 65 years of age and from R30 000 to R32 000 for
individuals 65 years and over.

As an ongoing part of the process of simplifying our tax system, government
proposes further measures to reduce red tape and enhance our attractiveness
as a viable and effective location from which businesses can extend their
African and other worldwide operations. We will also review the tax
treatment of financial instruments to ensure appropriate accommodation of
Islamic-compliant finance.

The 2009 Budget announced an ad valorem carbon emissions tax on new
passenger cars. Based on subsequent consultations, it is recommended that
the original tax proposal be converted into a flat rate emissions tax
effective from 1 September 2010. The more fuel efficient your car, the less
tax you will pay. [Applause.] [Interjections.] We don’t require any
declarations right now. Furthermore, it is proposed that taxes on fuel be
increased by 25,5 cents a litre. This includes a 7,5 cents a litre increase
to contribute to the funding of a new multiproduct petroleum pipeline
between Durban and Gauteng, and an increase of 8 cents a litre in the Road
Accident Fund levy.

While excise duties on tobacco and alcoholic products will be increased in
accordance with the present policy stance, we wish to signal a stronger
stance in our efforts to combat the abuse of alcohol. [Applause.] The tax
burden benchmarks for alcoholic beverages will be reviewed in the course of
the next year.

Gambling is subject to various forms of taxation at both provincial and
national level. These arrangements will be reviewed to ensure efficient tax
collection. I propose to review the current treatment of winnings in the
hands of gamblers as exempt from personal income tax. Measures will be
considered to limit opportunities for money-laundering, unlicensed online
gambling and other abuses that we see in this industry.

Mr Speaker, the House will join me, I know, in paying tribute to the
millions of South Africans who pay their taxes on time, who declare their
income fully and to the many who have contributed to a more efficient tax
system by using the e-filing arrangements. [Applause.] Sars will continue
to offer a prompt service to those whose affairs are in order. The
3,2 million individuals who submitted their returns on time and received
their assessments within 24 hours in the recent tax season will testify to
this.

But there are those who evade their responsibility, and further steps are
under way to tackle this tendency. Getting everyone to pay their fair share
is a critical means of keeping the overall level of tax rates moderate. We
can’t escape paying tax and still ask for reductions in tax. That is not
how it works in life. Government will take further steps to reduce tax
avoidance and tax structuring by tightening company car and other fringe
benefit rules, and through measures to ensure that employer deductions are
fully reflected in the gross income of employees. Steps will be taken
against several sophisticated tax avoidance arrangements such as the use of
transfer pricing and cross-border mismatches.

Using third-party information and targeted lifestyle audits, Sars will take
a much tougher approach towards cash-based businesses that avoid VAT. Tough
action on firms that do not pay over PAYE and other taxes, even though
these have been deducted from employees will be taken. The taxpayers of
South Africa are not lenders of last resort and Sars is not a bank!
[Applause.]

Sars has always shown leniency and understanding for those who come forward
voluntarily to disclose prior noncompliance. In line with international
practice, this will be formalised in a voluntary disclosure programme which
will exist for 12 months from November this year. Noncompliant taxpayers
may use this window of opportunity to disclose and pay undeclared tax
liabilities at a reduced interest charge and without penalties.
Consideration will also be given to align exchange control violation
penalties with this voluntary disclosure opportunity.

What we are saying here is that there are still a significant number of
South African taxpayers who don’t fully disclose their income, who benefit
from all sorts of things, including government tenders, and then don’t pay
tax on top of that. This is an opportunity to come clean. If a Sars auditor
finds you, you will pay 200% penalties and you won’t get any breaks. So, I
hope all of South Africa will support Sars in this endeavour. [Applause.]

Mr Speaker, our moral contract with the taxpayer is that we will take every
measure possible to allocate public spending towards the priorities that
they support and that spending will be as efficient as possible. This
year’s Budget is the first to be shaped by the government’s new framework
of outcomes and associated targets. These were anticipated in last year’s
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, which set out the key spending
priorities as: improving the quality of basic education, enhancing the
health of our people, making our communities safer, fostering rural
development, creating jobs, and investing in local government and human
settlements.

Mr Speaker, the consolidated Budget of government for next year is
R907 billion and over the next three years, we will be spending
R2,9 trillion. The fiscal framework makes provision for an increase in
spending over the MTEF period amounting to R87 billion. In addition, about
R25,6 billion has been identified through savings. Thanks to all of the
Ministers for their generosity. [Applause.] So, in total, we are able to
add R112 billion to the baselines of departmental budgets.

Of these amounts, over half go to provinces and municipalities for
education, health, municipal infrastructure and human settlements,
reflecting our commitment to sustaining growth in spending on our key
priorities. To achieve the outcomes we have set ourselves in education and
health, we need better co-ordination and alignment between national policy
imperatives and provincial budgets. A breakdown in this regard is a recipe
for failure. We have to find a mechanism that balances the constitutional
responsibility of provinces to determine their budgets with the
constitutional entitlement of citizens to education and health services.

Real growth in public spending over the next three years is about 2% per
year. This is lower than the rapid growth in public spending over the
previous three years, but it still provides for substantial increases in
our key spending programmes.

In October the government announced an additional R5,4 billion for spending
on our HIV and Aids programmes to be able to take on more people and
improve the effectiveness of our treatment programmes. Minister Motsoaledi
has told me that he is very happy with that. Taking into account further
policy measures to broaden access to those coinfected with TB and women and
children with CD4 counts lower than 350, a further R3 billion is allocated
in this Budget. Presently, about 920 000 people are on antiretroviral
treatment in South Africa. The Budget provides for the number to rise to
2,1 million in 2012-13.

In addition, we will continue to broaden the use of public-private
partnerships in the health sector, in particular to improve our hospital
system. The flagship public-private partnership hospital project will be
Chris Hani Baragwanath, for which a feasibility study is now complete –
Minister Motsoaledi has bought me a nice bottle of mineral water to say
this. [Laughter.] In addition, the new George Mkhari Hospital and the
Polokwane academic health complexes are being fast-tracked. Alongside
longer-term reforms to the financing of health care, a closer partnership
between the public and private health care systems is a prerequisite for
the introduction of a national health insurance system. Our total national
and provincial health spending is projected to be R105 billion next year.

Education spending remains our largest item of spending, giving meaning to
our commitment that it is our number one priority. The total budget for
education next year is R165 billion. Ministers Motshekga and Nzimande have
not bought me mineral water yet. To roll out workbooks in all 11 official
languages to help raise our literacy and numeracy levels and to test all
learners in grades 3, 6 and 9, a further R2,7 billion is allocated to the
Department of Basic Education.

Expanding and improving capacity at our FET colleges is a vital part of our
growth strategy. We have set ourselves ambitious targets to expand the
number of young people studying vocational subjects. The budget for FET
colleges of R12 billion over three years has been shifted from provinces to
the national department. No wonder Minister Nzimande is looking so cheerful
today. [Applause.] A further R1,3 billion is allocated to improve the
salaries of FET college educators.
Parliament, in its report on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement,
correctly identified the need for more spending and better co-ordination in
the important area of rural development. In addition to the funds allocated
to the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform for the
Comprehensive Rural Development Strategy, we are setting up a new grant to
support on-site water and sanitation infrastructure as part of the rural
housing programme. An initial R1,2 billion over three years is provided to
Ministers Nkwinti and Sonjica to spend. [Applause.]

Minister Sexwale will be happy to hear that the human settlements grant is
one of the fastest-growing items in the Budget. Supported by rising
spending on water and sanitation, these investments are critical to
reshaping our townships, cities, informal settlements and rural areas. The
state of the nation address correctly identified a key gap in the housing
market where middle-income people cannot access sufficient finance to
afford homes. Government and the banks will work together to find
appropriate financing support measures so that more people can access home
loans. [Applause.] Of course, Minister Sexwale is going to add a billion of
his own money there. [Laughter.]

An additional R3,6 billion is allocated to the Department of Trade and
Industry for Minister Davies to take forward the industrial policy
interventions consistent with government’s new Industrial Policy Action
Plan. In particular, these funds go to support investment and production in
the automotive components and clothing and textile industries. Minister
Patel will be quite happy with that as well.

The local government equitable share receives a further R6,7 billion to
support municipalities to cushion poor households for the rising cost of
electricity and water. [Applause.] An additional R2,5 billion goes to the
municipal infrastructure grant. Total allocations to municipalities rise
from R55 billion in 2009-10 to R78 billion in 2012-13. Minister, are you
happy? [Interjections.] Okay. [Laughter.] We are mindful of the fact that
even though transfers to municipalities have increased strongly over the
past five years, service delivery problems still persist. We are working
with the Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs,
Minister Shiceka, to resolve these problems, to improve financial
management and to ensure that higher spending allocations translate into
real improvements in people’s lives. [Applause.]

Over the 2009-14 period, the second phase of the Expanded Public Works
Programme aims to create 4,5 million short-term job opportunities. I hope
you got the opportunities right, ladies and gentlemen. An estimated total
of R52 billion is available for various expanded public works projects over
the next three years. The MTEF allocations include an additional
R2,5 billion that will support labour-intensive projects in the social,
nonstate and environmental sectors, largely targeted at rural areas.
Ministers Nkwinti, Patel and Joemat-Pettersson will be giving effect to
those programmes.

In 2010-11, R89 billion will be spent on social grants. Provision has been
made for the phased extension of the child support grant up to a child’s
18th birthday. The state old age pension and the disability grant rise by
R70 to R1 080 a month. [Applause.] The child support grant increases by R10
to R250 a month. We recognise that the increase in the child support grant
is slightly below the inflation rate, but the social benefit and the cost
of bringing two million more children into the net implies that we have to
adjust this grant more moderately. Ministers Molewa and Mayende-Sibiya will
be quite happy to implement those programmes on our behalf.

The savings exercise that we have undertaken must be seen as a first step
to getting better value for money. Too often the culture in the Public
Service and in state-owned enterprises is to ratchet up salaries, spend on
frills, travel in luxury and spend more on marketing the agency than on
fixing the service. Jointly with Minister Chabane’s new department, we will
be conducting comprehensive evaluations of several key spending areas this
year with a view to eliminating ineffective programmes and generally
improving value for money. [Applause.] We have released a draft terms of
reference of the comprehensive expenditure review today as well.
Furthermore, we will investigate the possibility of rationalising some of
our entities and agencies to see if we can deliver the same service at a
lower cost. The resources that we have at our disposal belong to the people
out there. If we do not use these wisely and sensibly, our contract with
the people is seriously eroded.

Public sector investment is a crucial component of development as it
provides the infrastructure through which we transport goods, power the
economy and connect households and businesses to services and markets. Over
the next three years the public sector aims to spend R846 billion on its
infrastructure programme. Extensive planning and consultation is in
progress on infrastructure programmes for the next 10 to 20 years, in
recognition of our long-term development challenges. I’m sure Minister
Manuel will give us the recipe, together with Minister Hogan, soon.

A significant proportion of the public sector infrastructure investment
programme will be undertaken by state-owned enterprises and is not directly
financed from the fiscus itself. Eskom’s construction of power plants makes
up about a third of the total. Upgrading our transport infrastructure and
water supply capacity makes up much of the balance. The costs of these
investments are largely met by users and will in several cases require
higher tariffs to be phased in over the period ahead. Ministers Peters,
Sonjica and others, I am sure, will be looking at these issues.

We have taken steps to recapitalise our development finance institutions to
allow them to step up their lending to municipalities, land reform
programmes and businesses in distress due to the economic crisis. Including
provisions in this Budget, we have made allowance for the recapitalisation
of the Land Bank to the value of R2,5 billion. A guarantee of R15,2 billion
has been approved for the Development Bank of Southern Africa, enabling it
to extend capital to poorer municipalities for infrastructure projects. The
Industrial Development Corporation is well capitalised and will continue to
play a key role in implementing government’s Industrial Policy Action Plan.

The 2009 round of salary increases in the Public Service has placed immense
pressure on the Budget. Including the very necessary adjustment to the
salaries of professionals, the wage bill has almost doubled in five years.
Now that a major revision in Public Service remuneration is behind us, it
will be necessary to moderate salary increases going forward. This is
required to ensure that funds are also available for growth in Public
Service employment and so that spending on school books, hospital building
and maintenance of infrastructure is not compromised in any way, and we
leave this in the capable hands of Minister Baloyi.

Last year Parliament passed the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009. This new legislation sets out a procedure for
Parliament to amend money Bills such as the Budget, as well as tax
proposals. It also obliges Parliament to consider the broader implications
of any change on the economy and on the delivery of public services, so as
to balance the power to change the Budget with the need for policy
certainty and continuity.

The 2010 Appropriation Bill will be the first Budget legislation to be
processed in terms of the new Act. It will require close co-operation
between the executive and the legislature and we look forward to both
learning during the implementation process and to working with the
responsible committees to meet this important new legislative mandate.

What about fraud and corruption? A major site of both wastage and
inefficiency is in our procurement system. Through a combination of corrupt
practices, inefficient procurement, poor planning and, in some instances,
collusion by the private sector, we are not getting the kind of value from
our purchases that our people deserve. Even where there is absolutely no
corruption, we sometimes give contracts to people who cannot implement them
and so houses, as Minister Sexwale knows, are left without roofs, roads
crumble when it rains – there Minister Ndebele wants more money - water
schemes break down and school books fail to get delivered. [Applause.]

Corruption is an ever-present threat to our ambitions. All South Africans
must constantly and consciously work to root out this cancer. If we are to
address this scourge, we need improved management capability, governance,
enforcement and oversight in government and in the business sector. Poorly
managed tender processes are all too often open to such abuse. Greater
transparency and accountability in procurement systems will therefore be a
key focus of reform in the period ahead. Phantsi ngobusela, phantsi! [Down
with corruption!] [Applause.]

Additional funds have been allocated to bolster efforts to strengthen
supply-chain management, and the relevant government departments have
intensified efforts to bring perpetrators of tender fraud to book. Data
matching, the practice of comparing, for example, taxpayer data with social
grants registers or housing waiting lists, will become a regular feature of
a systematic approach to minimise abuse. We are starting to see the early
results of these efforts. Officials have been disciplined and others fired.
Five people linked to supply-chain fraud were arrested in KwaZulu-Natal
last week and more cases have been handed over to the National Prosecuting
Authority. We are expecting more arrests very soon.

An interministerial committee on corruption has been established, chaired
by Minister Chabane, to co-ordinate government’s efforts to stamp out
corruption. We look forward to working with Ministers Radebe, Cwele,
Mthethwa and others in order to root out this sector.

We are also doing additional work to look at the entire system of
procurement and to see where the fault lines are and how we can reduce
opportunities for fraud. I also got information earlier today that 1 200
public servants have already been targeted and found out for engaging in
either tender fraud or tax fraud arising from tender fraud and are under
investigation at the moment.

During the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement speech in October we
highlighted the immediate challenges facing us due to the global financial
crisis - those of maintaining financial stability and improving financial
regulation. South Africa is an active participant in discussions at the
International Monetary Fund, IMF; G20; the Financial Stability Board; and
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. International events have
clearly demonstrated the importance of a stable and well-regulated
financial sector.

South Africa was spared from the worst of the crisis. While some of the
largest global banks were forced to receive bailouts, our financial
institutions did not require such support. We should congratulate them on
that. [Applause.] I wish to commend the Reserve Bank for the vital role
played in supervising our banking sector. A special applause for the
Reserve Bank, please! [Applause.] I also want to acknowledge the governance
and risk management systems of our banks, which proved effective during the
global crisis.

Although our institutions have proved to be robust, we must not be
complacent. I want to highlight several new initiatives to improve our
regulatory system. Firstly, the framework for accountability, co-ordination
and performance of our financial regulators needs to be strengthened. A
formal council of regulators may be instituted to serve this purpose.
Secondly, we are reviewing our adherence to global regulatory standards in
banking, insurance and the security markets. Thirdly, various changes to
the Basel II framework will be effected once the impact assessment is
completed. Fourthly, we will be expanding the scope of regulation to
include hedge funds, private equity and credit ratings agencies. Fifthly,
we will improve our crisis contingency plans. And lastly, we will
strengthen enforcement mechanisms to counter any abuse.

I also intend to meet with the chief executives of the major banks in the
next few weeks to discuss firm deadlines to respond to the recommendations
of the Banking Enquiry Panel of the Competition Commission in respect to
bank charges. [Applause.] I have met with key stakeholders and bank CEOs to
revitalise the Financial Sector Charter, which commits the sector to
demanding access and empowerment targets. Unfortunately I can’t report that
we have concluded our discussions but I hope that we have sufficient good
will to be able to do so shortly.

Building on the 2009 exchange control announcements in the MTBPS, our broad
strategy on exchange control reform remains the prudential management of
foreign exposure risk. In line with this approach, government has now
finalised reporting measures for prudential foreign exposure limits on
banks, which will be introduced at 25% of their total liabilities. In
addition, National Treasury will shortly release a framework document to
facilitate consultations on reforming exchange control legislation. Our aim
is to modernise our policy on inward and outward investment and complete a
framework for prudential regulation of foreign exposure for institutional
investors.

We now come to the many tips that Trevor didn’t receive, but Pravin did
this time. [Laughter.] South Africans have come to know the “Tips for
Trevor” campaign that accompanied the Budget every year. Introduced by my
predecessor, Minister Manuel, the campaign allowed citizens to contribute
to the Budget process, and I have continued to draw on this advice and
sometimes even the humour. We have also used new forms of media such as
Facebook and hundreds of people have used that to communicate their ideas
to us. You see, we are modernising. [Applause.] I would like to thank all
those who took the time to send in tips, which give us many new and
creative solutions to consider.

Resolving the issue of unemployment clearly needs close co-operation
between all sectors of society. Nhlanhla Sophoza of Johannesburg sees the
country standing at an opportune moment. She says government should
allocate more money to skills development, “so that when the real economic
growth starts kicking in there will at least be a sizeable pool of much-
needed skills to draw from - let’s be ahead of the pack this time around!”
[Applause.]
A young Mr Mahomed from Gauteng asks whether it is possible for training
centres to be equipped and affiliated with companies to provide for and
train those who require hands-on experience. Mr Mahomed, I agree with you
and I have passed this tip on to Minister Nzimande.

Over and above the actions of government, labour and the private sector in
addressing the issue of youth unemployment, it is encouraging to see South
Africans taking strides in doing what they can to provide answers. Vuyisa
Qabaka, a young man from Cape Town, wrote in asking for a larger budget for
youth development, focusing on entrepreneurship and job creation. However,
Mr Qabaka himself is also in the process of developing his own organisation
aiming to support youth development through an online platform of social
media. I would like to commend his efforts and wish him every success in
launching Student Enterprises, as he calls his enterprise. [Applause.] I am
sure Minister Mdladlana would like to meet him.

For this year’s campaign we asked South Africans to send in tips on how
government can save money, and many responded with wonderfully practical
ideas. Siyabulela Mgwatyu from East London calls for close monitoring of
projects in municipalities and of travel costs to conferences that yield no
results. [Applause.] His views are echoed by Johan Uys, also from the
Western Cape – I suppose they don’t have too many conferences - who works
for government and so has first-hand experience of where money can be
saved. He advises that the system of travel allowances for government
officials be reviewed.

The review of the Ministerial Handbook will address the concerns of many
citizens, such as Thembinkosi Buthelezi from KwaZulu-Natal, who calls for
the benefits of Ministers, their deputies, premiers and MECs to be reduced.
[Applause.] You see, we are a democracy. We will invite anyone to send
their ideas to us. Sheila Hlakudi from Gugulethu, who is in the audience
today, wrote in to ask for a review of the child support grant processes to
prevent abuse of it. Ms Hlakudi, I am pleased to announce that government
is indeed reviewing the payment system to reduce fraud and corruption.
[Applause.] I am sure that Minister Molewa would like to meet you.

Advice was again sent through by traditional healer William Makhale of
Soweto. He had previously submitted a 97-page, handwritten tip for the 2009
Budget. [Laughter.] In 2008 it was 60 pages long and this year he has sent
a 40-page tip. Let’s congratulate him on his stamina anyway. [Applause.] He
rightly argues that more public participation in the Budget should be
encouraged, especially from community organisations and that community
leaders should be trained and skilled so that they can educate their
communities to build organisations that drive development. I’m sure we all
agree. [Applause.]

On the issue of tax, Mr Len Palmer of Johannesburg cautions that
underrecovery of revenue should be seen as the biggest threat to this
country’s stability. He says that this is hampered by the practices of
auditors who undertake what he politely calls “creative bookkeeping” for
industry. I am sure there are no creative bookkeepers in this House today.
[Laughter.] I want to emphasise the importance of paying taxes and
supporting the country’s development. Sars has put in place stringent
measures to tighten collections and ensure that nothing slips through the
net, but sometimes the net has many holes.

I have been given immense support and guidance by President Zuma and Deputy
President Motlanthe and I thank them for that. [Applause.] They have
literally held my hand as I took the first tentative steps as a Minister.
Our Cabinet system is one where we take collective responsibility for the
policies that our government approves and, similarly, we take collective
responsibility for our failings as well. I would like to thank my Cabinet
colleagues for their support and also for the lively engagement on critical
issues facing our country. This Budget is our collective statement.
[Applause.]

I am especially indebted to members of the Ministers’ Committee on the
Budget, the committee responsible for providing political oversight of the
Budget process. My colleagues have put in an immense amount of work over
and above their line responsibilities. We thank you for that.
As a newcomer to the executive and indeed to Parliament, my colleague
Deputy Minister Nene has had to show me the ropes. He brings a steady hand
in a very challenging environment. The MECs for finance have again been
generous in sharing their experience and insights in dealing with difficult
challenges this year – both in the provinces and nationally. I wish to
express a personal appreciation for their support and dedication to the
cause of sound public finance.

I wish to thank my predecessor and colleague Minister Manuel both for the
foundation he has laid in managing the fiscus and in the strength of the
team that he has left behind. [Applause.] He is taking one or two of them
but we will negotiate on that. Our collective thanks are due also to
Governor Gill Marcus, who has approached her task with new ideas and great
energy. She too has sought to change things, to build on foundations of
success and to do things differently to achieve more. We wish her well.
Commissioner Oupa Magashula says he’s not getting soft – together with the
staff of the South African Revenue Service who continue to deliver an
outstanding service to the public and our country. We hope they collect
more taxes. [Applause.]

We also thank the Financial and Fiscal Commission and its chairperson, Dr
Bethuel Setai, for their contributions to our deliberations. Our thanks
also to Nedlac and its managing director, Mr Herbert Mkhize, and
representatives of the business, labour and community constituencies on the
Public Finance and Monetary Chamber.

To the hon Thaba Mufamadi and Charel de Beer who chair the Standing and
Select Committees on Finance respectively, and to the two chairs of the
appropriations committees, the hon Elliot Sogoni and Teboho Chaane, thank
you very much for your contributions as well. The man who is wearing the
most colourful tie in the box behind me, Lesetja Kganyago, leads the
National Treasury team - a group of talented and committed professionals
who continue to define excellence in the Public Service and remain an
invaluable asset both to government and to South Africa. [Applause.]

Thank you to the staff in the Ministry who have made my shift to the
Treasury relatively smooth and thanks for tolerating all my nonsense as
well. I also thank my family and Deputy Minister Nene’s family for their
support and inspiration; they too are making a huge sacrifice on our
behalf. [Applause.] My sincere thanks to the many South Africans who stop
me - and I am sure many others in public places - to convey their good
wishes and encouragement.

Mr President, as you know, when you appointed me I wasn’t this fellow
called an economist, so I also had to learn economics as quickly as
possible. Many South Africans have learnt their economics from Prof Mohr
from Unisa. He and the National Treasury are making a new book available to
all the members so that we can take debates on this matter to our
constituencies and enable our people to engage on these issues. A copy of
this book will be available outside if you wish to take one as you leave.

As we conclude, let’s find some inspiration from the economist and
philosopher Amartya Sen, a Nobel laureate who recently wrote a book called
The Idea of Justice, from which I quote the following:

   The idea of justice calls for comparisons of actual lives and iniquities,
   rather than a remote quest for ideal institutions.

Our Budget today is an attempt to give meaning to this quest for justice.
Justice is not measured by the statistics or ratios. It is measured in our
ability to upgrade informal settlements, in our ability to improve literacy
and numeracy and in our ability to create jobs and opportunities for young
people. Our nation has been forged through negotiation and consensus
building. Our unique ability to put aside narrow self-interest and seek
solutions to serve the shared needs of all our people has seen us overcome
challenges which to others had appeared insurmountable.

Today, we need that spirit again. We need to come together, to draw on our
collective experience, put aside our differences and work together to chart
out a new path for an economy that benefits all of us. Government can and
must provide the policy frameworks and socioeconomic conditions to
accelerate job creation in the economic recovery period ahead. For its part
business must balance the pursuit of profit with social justice which will
ultimately create the conditions for sustained economic growth for all.

Similarly, organised labour must embrace and act on behalf of all our
country’s workers and those desperate for employment. Our people must be an
energetic part of this economic renewal and generate a new spirit of
entrepreneurialism so that they can also be masters of their own destiny
and not just depend on government. The future we choose today will
determine the kind of South Africa our children and their children will
live in. The prospect of prosperity for all is a struggle worth fighting
with all the will and determination that we can muster. We must give real
meaning to justice. For with jobs comes dignity; with dignity comes
participation; and from participation emerges prosperity for all!
[Applause.]

I hereby table the Budget Speech, the Budget Review, including the fiscal
framework; the revenue proposals, including the customs and excise duties;
estimates of national revenue; the Division of Revenue Bill, the
Appropriation Bill, and I also submit the Estimates of National
Expenditure. Ngiyabonga. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I’d like, on behalf of the hon members and the House at large,
to thank the Minister of Finance for his Budget presentation. Minister, a
collective thank you. We also want to thank you for the book and books you
want to give us. Hon members, the book might be a gift from the Minister of
Finance but you still have to declare it. [Laughter.]

            CONSIDERATION OF BUDGET SPEECH BY MINISTER OF FINANCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon President, hon
Deputy President, I move:

  That, notwithstanding the relevant provisions of the rules on money
  Bills, the fiscal framework and revenue proposals, as well as the
  Minister of Finance’s speech, be referred to the Standing Committee on
  Finance for consideration and report within 16 days after the tabling
  today of the national annual Budget.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

           PRECEDENCE GIVEN TO SECOND ORDER UNDER FURTHER BUSINESS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon President, hon
Deputy President, I move:

   That precedence be given to Order Number 2 under further business on
   today’s Order Paper.

Thank you.

Agreed to.

      DECISION OF QUESTION ON CONSIDERATION OF CANDIDATE NOMINATED FOR
          APPOINTMENT AS INSPECTOR GENERAL OF INTELLIGENCE SERVICES

There was no debate.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: Sir, we certainly do not
object, but we were led to believe that this vote took place in this
Chamber yesterday. Why are we voting on it again today?

The SPEAKER: Hon member, during the recording of the vote on nominations
for Inspector-General yesterday in the House, 11 members approached the
Table with the understanding that their voting devices were not working.
The normal practice is to add the names of these members to the vote. On a
quick check it was established that three of the 11 members had already
cast their votes.

In light of the above, the Table advised the Deputy Speaker that 269
members had voted in favour and 5 members had abstained, and had all
members voted, the required majority would have been obtained. On
reconciling the electronic voting results with the names submitted to the
Table, it was established that eight of the members’ names indeed appeared
on the electronic voting list as having already voted. Thus, only 265 voted
in favour and the required majority is 267.

It seemed that the electronic voting system did not indicate to members
that their votes had been recorded. Rule 92 reads:


   In the event of confusion or error concerning a division, another
   division shall take place, unless the numbers can be corrected otherwise.



It is evident that this Rule must now be applied. The question will,
therefore, have to be put to the House again.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, does that mean that the hon Koos van der Merwe’s
claim yesterday that the IFP saved the ANC was absolutely false?
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, today we won’t only get Mr Koos van der Merwe’s
vote but we will also get yours too. [Laughter.] Are there any objections?
Mr Z L MADASA: Speaker, unlike yesterday my gadget is working.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, in terms of Section 71 of the Intelligence
Services Oversight Act, Act 40 of 1994, the person nominated for
appointment as Inspector-General of Intelligence must be approved by a
supporting vote of a two-thirds majority of members of the Assembly.
Although a division has not been demanded, members are required to record
their support for the nomination.

Question put: That the nomination of Adv F D Radebe for appointment as
Inspector-General of Intelligence be approved.

    AYES - 351: Abram, S; Adams, L H; Adams, P E; Ainslie, A R; Alberts, A
    D; Baloyi , M R; Bapela, K O; Bhengu , N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C;
    Blaai, B C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Boinamo, G G; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S;
    Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Bosman , L L; Botha, T; Botha, Y R; Burgess,
    C V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I; Carter, D; Cebekhulu, R N; Chikunga, L
    S; Chiloane, T D; Chohan, F I; Coetzee, T W; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P;
    Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Dandala, H M; Davidson, I O; Davies, R H; De
    Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Dexter, P D; Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N;
    Dikgacwi, M M; Dlakudla , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo,
    A; Dlulane , B N; Doidge, G Q M; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Du Toit, N D;
    Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Duma, N M; Duncan, P C; Dunjwa, M L; Ebrahim,
    E I ; Ellis, M J; Farisani, T S; Farrow, S B; Figlan, A M; Fihla, N B;
    Fransman, M L; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gcume, N P;
    Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N; Godi, N T;
    Godongwana, E; Gololo , C L; Gona, M F; Goqwana, M B; Groenewald, P J;
    Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M; Gxowa, N B; Hanekom , D A; Hogan, B A;
    Holomisa, S P; Hoosen, M H; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; James, W G; Jeffery,
    J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kalyan, S V; Kekane, C D;
    Kenye, T E; Kganare, D A; Kganyago, N M; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E;
    Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Kilian, J D; Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Komphela,
    B M; Koornhof, G W; Koornhof, N J J v R; Kopane, S P; Kotsi, C M;
    Krumbock, G R; Kubayi, M T; Lamoela, H; Landers, L T; Lebenya-Ntanzi, S
    P; Lee, T D; Lekgetho , G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Lorimer, J R B;
    Lotriet, A; Lucas , E J; Luthuli, A N; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa,
    X; Mabudafhasi , T R; Mabuza, M C; MacKenzie, G D; Madasa, Z L; Madisha,
    W M; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau, K R;
    Magazi , M N; Magwanishe, G ; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makasi, X C;
    Makhuba, H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P;
    Malale, M I; Malgas, H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B;
    Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Mangena, M A; Mangena, M S; Manuel , T A;
    Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Martins, B A D;
    Masango, S J; Mashatile, P; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashishi, A C;
    Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathibela, N F; Matlanyane, H
    F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Mayende-Sibiya, N A;
    Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Maziya, A M; Mbalula , F A; Mbhele. P,
    Mbili, M E; Mc Gluwa, J J; Mda, A; Mdaka, M N; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana,
    M M S; Mentor, M P; Mfeketo, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Michael, N W A; Mjobo,
    L N; Mkhize, H B; Mkhize, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mmusi, S G;
    Mnguni, P B; Mnisi, N A; Mocumi, P A; Mohale, M C; Mokgalapa, S;
    Mokoena, A D; Molao, S P; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J
    C; More, E; Morgan, G R; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motau, S C; Motimele,
    M S; Motlanthe, K P; Motshekga, M S; Motsoaledi , P A; Msimang, C T;
    Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mubu, K S;
    Mufamadi , T A; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M
    E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni , S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Ndude, H
    N; Nelson, W J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D;
    Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C;
    Nhanha, M A; Nhlengethwa , D G; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkoana-
    Mashabane, M E; Nkwinti, G E; Nonkonyana, M; November, N T; Ntshiqela,
    P; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nxumalo, M D; Nyalungu, R E;
    Nyama, M M A; Nyanda, M F; Nyanda, S; Nyekemba, E; Nzimande, B E;
    Oliphant, G G; Oliphant, M N; Ollis, I M; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R
    L; Pandor, G N M; Peters, E D; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J;
    Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; P; Pretorius, P J C; Pule, D D;
    Rabotapi, M W; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlakane, L;
    Ramodibe, D M; Rantsolase, M A; Rasool, E; Robinson, D; Ross, D;
    Rwexana, S P; Schafer, DA; Sefularo, M; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
    Selfe, J; Sexwale, T M G; Shabangu, S; Shiceka, S; Shilowa, M S; Shinn,
    M R; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N ; Singh, N; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, S C
    N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Skosana, M B; Smiles, D C; Smith, P F;
    Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R;
    Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Steele, M H; Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Stofile, M
    A; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Swathe, M M;
    Terblanche, J F; Thabethe, E ; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B;
    Tlake, M F; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Trollip, RAP; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G
    K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B ;
    Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van Dalen, P; Van den Berg, N J; Van der Merwe, J
    H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Westhuizen, A P; Van Dyk , S M; van
    Rooyen, D D; Van Schalkwyk, H C; van Wyk, A; Vukuza-Linda, N Y; Waters,
    M; Wenger, M; Williams, A J; Xaba, P P; Xasa, T; Xingwana, L M; Yengeni,
    L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


    NOES - 1: Van der Linde, J J.


    ABSTAIN - 5: Ditshetelo, I C; Dudley, C; Gaehler, L B; Matladi, M N;
    Meshoe, K R J.

The two-thirds supporting vote required in terms of section 7(1) of the
Intelligence Services Oversight Act, 1994 (Act 40 of 1994),
obtained.

Adv F D Radebe accordingly recommended for appointment as
Inspector-General of Intelligence.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Yesterday, the Minister of Correctional Services
rose on a point of order and contended that the hon member Ms Dianne Kohler-
Barnard had used a certain expletive, to say the least. This is
unparliamentary, unbecoming and offensive in the extreme. Since the DA had
left the Chamber at that stage, there was no opportunity for the Chair to
express herself on the matter.

The hon member Ms Kohler-Barnard, has since admitted to the media and to
her party that she did indeed use the distasteful phrase. I’ve also
received a letter from the Chief Whip of the Opposition, the hon Mr Ian
Davidson, indicating that Ms Kohler-Barnard had owned up to her
transgression and he informs me in the letter that the DA has taken
punitive action against her.

For a while now, the standard of language in debates in the House has been
steadily deteriorating to slightly less than what one would desire and
regard as proper and appropriate for the highest debating forum in the
country. But even so, as Speaker, I have to say that I find it utterly
reprehensible that a Member of Parliament would use the phrase which hon
Kohler-Barnard has admitted to.

Given the seriousness of this matter, I have decided to invoke the
provisions of Rule 52 of the Rules of the National Assembly and suspend Ms
Kohler-Barnard for the maximum number of days allowed in terms of the Rules
namely, five parliamentary working days. The suspension takes effect
immediately. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, thank you for acknowledging my
letter to you.

I wish to inform the House that we had, prior to your decision, suspended
Ms Kohler-Barnard for five days because we believe that she impugned the
dignity of the House. We do hope that we have set a new standard in that
and all members of the House will, in fact, comply with the high standard
we believe ought to be applied in this House. She has expressed her
contriteness and she will apologise to the House when she comes back.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: As the ANC, we want to congratulate
you for taking the initiative and setting a good example.

The House adjourned at 15:34.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
      1) Division of Revenue Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance. Referred to the Standing Committee on Appropriations and
         the Select Committee on Appropriations.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Finance


           a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed
              sec 77).


          b) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 76).


             Introduction and referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
             for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

       a) The Speech of the Minister of Finance on the National Annual
          Budget – 17 February 2010 [RP 5-2010].
           b) The Budget Review 2010 [RP 4-2010], including –
         • the fiscal framework;
         • revenue proposals for 2010, inclusive of the customs and excise
           duties; and
         • the estimates of national revenue for 2010.

       c) Division of Revenue Bill [B4-2010], tabled in terms of section
          10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No
          97 of 1997).
           d) Appropriation Bill [B3-2010].

          The fiscal framework and revenue proposals, as well as the speech
          of the Minister of Finance, are referred to the Standing Committee
          on Finance for consideration and report.


