---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-05-27
---

THURSDAY, 27 MAY 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC:

   Successes and challenges in implementation of government’s programme of
                           action to improve lives

7.    Mrs M S Mangena (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What (a) successes have been achieved and (b) challenges have been
      identified by the government in the past 12 months in the
      implementation of its programme of action to improve the lives of all
      the people?                                              NO1734E
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, hon members, government has
scored a number of achievements in the past year and we are working hard to
ensure that we do even better. Informed by assessments of service delivery
and building on the sterling work of previous administrations, we set out
to improve government performance when we came into office as the fourth
administration. We decided to establish new government departments, to
split some and to refocus others. The process has been completed.

We undertook the reconfiguration of government in order to fast-track
service delivery. We then began the process of changing the culture of work
by introducing more measures to ensure accountability. That is why we have
a performance, monitoring and evaluation system in place to reorientate
senior public servants into the new way of doing things. We have had
several meetings with directors-general and their deputies, municipal
managers, school principals and others. We will meet other groups of public
servants later this year. We have also established the National Planning
Commission which has begun its work. Therefore our systems are now in
place.

Looking back, the work done so far reveals several achievements amongst
government departments. Owing to time constraints, I will mention just a
few. We are continuing with the campaign to improve the delivery of basic
education. As members are aware, we want teachers to spend at least six and
a half hours a day in school teaching classes. There are some areas of
education which we want to focus on more. A key example is sports
development, especially given the legacy of the Soccer World Cup. We want
each school to offer at least two or more sporting codes. There must be no
school that does not have sports facilities for soccer, rugby, netball,
hockey, tennis, athletics, cricket and swimming. [Applause.]

We are also working to eradicate the division between rural and urban
schools. The Departments of Basic Education, Rural Development and Land
Reform, Public Works, Water and Environmental Affairs, and Transport are
working together to improve conditions in rural schools. With regard to
higher education and skills development, during 2009 the sector education
and training authorities registered over 17 000 artisans for training. More
than 100 000 workers completed training in scarce and critical skills
through learnerships, apprenticeships and other learning programmes.

We have mentioned before the need to strengthen local government. In
December 2009 Cabinet approved the Local Government Turnaround Strategy, a
road map for municipalities. Every municipality in the country must now
develop its own specific turnaround strategies and implementation plans.
The Local Government Training Academy will be revived so that new
councillors who come in after the 2011 local government elections will be
better prepared to discharge their responsibilities effectively. The
academy will also assist in retraining municipal employees.
We are also reviewing legislation, which impacts on local government, as
part of revitalising this sphere. The affected legislation is the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Act, the Local Government: Municipal
Structures Act, the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act and the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act.

Still in this area of local governance, we have established a department of
traditional affairs. We have identified a need to harmonise working
relations between traditional authorities and local government structures.
In this regard, we have directed the Department of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs to arrange a summit between traditional leaders and
municipal structures.

We are successfully revitalising our health care system. The intention is
to immunise 15 million children between the ages of 6 months and 15 years
against measles, and to vaccinate 5 million children under 5 years of age
against polio. We have developed clear strategies in each province to
strengthen the country’s anti-tuberculosis programme.

Last month we also began the implementation of the new HIV and Aids
treatment and prevention guidelines. This includes, among other things, the
provision of antiretroviral treatment to pregnant women with a CD4 count of
350 or less, and to people co-infected with tuberculosis and HIV with a CD4
count of 350 or less. HIV-positive pregnant women are now receiving dual
therapy from 14 weeks of pregnancy and not 24 weeks, as was previously the
case.

The treatment of HIV and Aids and TB is being integrated and these diseases
will be treated under one roof. We have initiated the largest HIV
counselling and testing campaign ever undertaken. All 17 sectors
represented on the SA National Aids Council have thrown their weight behind
this campaign. Several private sector service providers have also come on
board to support us. We are pleased to be making an impact in implementing
these measures which we announced on World Aids Day last year.

We are making visible progress in improving our Home Affairs systems. Some
of the new measures will greatly enhance the entry of passengers during the
2010 Soccer World Cup tournament. Among these, we have introduced an
advanced passenger-processing system for airlines flying into South Africa.
This enables the screening of passengers before they depart for South
Africa. We are also pleased that the passport backlog has been eliminated.
[Applause.]

In another development, refugee reception centres now issue asylum seekers
permits within a day. [Applause.] Previously, it took a week to issue the
permit. Most importantly, we have implemented a successful programme to
connect 142 hospitals to the Department of Home Affairs’ systems to enable
new births to be registered before babies leave the hospitals. [Applause.]

With regard to economic development, as you are aware, we launched the
Industrial Policy Action Plan in February 2010. The plan was adopted by
Cabinet following widespread consultation with business, labour and civil
society. The plan should help us to significantly expand our industrial
capacity and promote job creation. To enhance the creation of decent jobs
further, we are making progress in recruiting foreign direct investment in
a targeted manner. Targeted countries include China, India, Russia, Brazil,
Japan, the United States of America and countries in Europe and the Middle
East.

The work programme should translate into an investment of R115 billion
worth of projects over the next three years. As part of the critical effort
to overcome the economic marginalisation of South Africa’s majority, we
have established the Black Economic Empowerment Advisory Council. This was
long overdue.

We are pleased to report that since its inaugural meeting in February, the
council has begun its work in earnest. At its meeting last week, members of
the council emphasised the need to ensure that economic empowerment is
indeed broad-based. It agreed that this consideration should be at the
centre of the interventions that it will propose to government.

The meeting adopted the council’s constitution which outlines, among other
things, the powers, functions and administration of the council. The
council has established four subcommittees, and these are: ownership and
structuring of broad-based black economic empowerment deals; enterprise
development, access to finance and procurement; human resource development;
and legislation, charters, compliance and enforcement.

As the chair of the council, I am determined that it should make a tangible
contribution to broadening economic opportunities for all our people. The
second phase of the Expanded Public Works Programme has made an important
contribution to efforts to alleviate the effects of poverty on the
unemployed. Over 604 000 work opportunities have been created through this
programme. This has contributed to the construction and maintenance of
infrastructure and the provision of valuable social services.

A significant achievement over the past 12 months has been the finalisation
of plans for the country to successfully host the 2010 Fifa World Cup. With
only two weeks to go before kickoff, we can confidently say that we are
ready, as outlined in the Presidency Budget Vote speech and other recent
departmental inputs.

Transport, stadiums, airports and other infrastructure projects are
finished. Investment in additional resources for the police, disaster
management, health and the immigration system will have a lasting impact on
the effectiveness and efficiency of government to deliver services to the
people.

Our greatest challenge in this country, hon members, is the persistence of
high levels of poverty, unemployment and inequality. We are strengthening
partnerships with various sectors such as business, labour, community and
nongovernmental organisations because by working together we will achieve
more. We also need to work with you, hon members, and all South Africans to
improve citizen care in government and get our public servants to put
people first. The Presidential Hotline has been developed to contribute in
that regard.

Working together, we will succeed in introducing a new culture of a caring
and efficient public service. I thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I thank the hon President.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: I refer
you to Rule 113(3) of this House. Those Rules state that a reply to a
question is limited to three minutes and, with the consent of the presiding
officer, further time is allotted. I’m aware of the fact that in the Chief
Whips’ Forum, we have had a debate in respect of extending the time for the
President; after all, he is the President.
But, sir, I draw your attention to the fact that the answer to the very
first question has taken 25 minutes or close thereto. Clearly, that cannot
be acceptable in terms of the function of this House. With respect, sir, I
do ask you to request the President to limit his reply to a reasonable
period. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, according to the Rule book that I have, the
President’s reply to questions is not limited. It’s not timed.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, could you inform us — because we don’t have it in
our Rule book — what Rule you are referring to? [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: This was a decision taken during the Third Parliament by the
Chief Whips. It was agreed at the time and it continues until it is
changed. We now come to the second question to the President. Question
number 8 has been asked by the hon Rev K R J Meshoe.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: You have
yet to have follow-up questions.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I have ruled on the matter.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, there are follow-ups, and you
are ...

The SPEAKER: Follow-ups, hon member, yes.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Well, there are follow-ups. I would
assume there are follow-ups to the question, but you’ve just gone on to the
next question.

The SPEAKER: I agree. I apologise for that, hon member. The hon A Louw will
ask a follow-up question.

Mr A LOUW: Mr President, the question refers to improving ...

The SPEAKER: According to the screen, it is A Louw. [Inaudible.] Okay.
That’s not a follow-up question. It is a question. Go ahead, hon member.

Mr A LOUW: Thank you. Mr President, the question refers to improving the
lives of all the people.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: The
order is that the person who asked the question has the first follow-up.

The SPEAKER: Yes, I accept that. That is why he is on the floor.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: No, but he is not the person who asked
the question. It’s Mrs Mangena who asked the question.
The SPEAKER: Oh, Mrs Mangena. You are right, hon member. Mrs Mangena has a
follow-up question. [Interjections.] Order!

Mrs M S MANGENA: Thank you, hon Speaker.

Muphuresidennde vha vhona vha tshi ḓo shumisana hani na Muhasho ... [Hon
President, how are you going to work with the Department ...]
The SPEAKER: Hon member, hold on while the President puts on his
translation equipment. You may proceed, hon member.

Mrs M S MANGENA: Muphuresidennde vhone vha vhona vha tshi ḓo shumisana hani
na Muhasho wa ... [Hon President, how are you going to work with the
Department of ...]

... Performance Monitoring, Evaluation and Administration, in your office
...

... na dzikomiti dza Phalamennde dzo fhiwaho mushumo wa u lavhelesa. Ndi a
livhuwa. [... and the parliamentary committees that are tasked with the
oversight role? I thank you.]

The SPEAKER: Hon President, do you want me to translate? [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Please do so, Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Hon President, are you ready to respond?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I’m not sure I got the entire question.
Could you translate it?

The SPEAKER: Hon member, could you please repeat the question and do so
slowly? Hon President, are you ready with the translation equipment?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: There was a cut-off ...

Mrs M S MANGENA: Hon Speaker, does the President want me to ask it in
English? [Interjections.] Remember, this is my official language.

The SPEAKER: Yes, we are not changing the channel, hon member.

Mrs M S MANGENA: How does the President envision the working relationship
between the Department of Performance Monitoring, Evaluation and
Administration in the Presidency and the various parliamentary committees
tasked with oversight, particularly those in the governance and monitoring
cluster? Thank you very much.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, I’ve got the question now. The
monitoring that we are doing is overall monitoring in terms of government.
Of course, that will assist — I’m sure — the oversight that is done by
Parliament. Parliament will take what comes as a result of the monitoring
and utilise it in doing its oversight.

I think that’s what we are looking at. We are monitoring government in
general, to know what is happening, where the people have achieved, and
what they want to do. That must help the committees to get the information
so that they can do better oversight.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I just want to raise a
serious concern, that Parliament gears itself up when it comes to
interpretation. It is not right that members have to divert from their
language and use another language. Therefore I think indigenous languages
are very critical for members to use. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: That’s noted.

Mr A LOUW: Thank you, Speaker. Mr President, the question refers to
improving the lives of all the people. Yet, despite your action plan to
address the impact of the recession, our unemployment rate continues to
escalate.

In his Budget Speech Minister Pravin Gordhan states: “Bargaining
arrangements push up entry level wages, pricing out inexperienced
workseekers.” He proposed to “support these reforms through a subsidy to
employers that will lower the cost of hiring young people without work”.
These proposals are aligned with DA policies.

Mr President, where is the plan? Where is the wage subsidy? When will the
Minister of Finance’s proposals be implemented? [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, the issue of the subsidy,
particularly for young graduates coming out of university, has been raised
in this House very recently. It has been raised as one aspect that we
thought was important for us to deal with, as one sees the increase in the
number of the unemployed; particularly people who come out of the tertiary
institutions with skills.

These people are locked out because they don’t have experience. This is
because the minimum wage is very high and the companies want experienced
people. We have suggested that we consider the issue and see what we can do
to address the issue. I’m sure the Minister was raising that within that
context.

This is, of course, a matter that we need everyone to agree on in order to
debate. For example, as you know, unions have raised issues regarding that
matter. I think we need an opportunity to discuss and see whether we are
agreed on those matters or not.

I’m sure if government just moved on with the plan, there would be people
who would complain about dictatorship. You would be questioning government
for enforcing things while other people are raising issues. So, the matters
are being considered. Once it is agreed, I’m sure we will be able to work
on the plan. This is the plan and this is how it must be implemented. Thank
you.

The SPEAKER: I thank the hon President. The second supplementary question
will be asked by hon Tsotetsi.

Mrs M S MANGENA: Hon Speaker, I made a mistake. I pressed her button. I’m
sorry.

The SPEAKER: Okay, hon member. Please don’t press the button of your
neighbour. [Laughter.] Order! Order, hon members!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr President, I hear your response, but a
question does arise. I would assume, prior to the introduction of the
Budget when this concept of a wage subsidy was introduced, that it had been
workshopped through the ANC because it was part of the Budget. Therefore I
would assume that there would have been party policy on behalf of your
party coming to this House.

So, I am a little surprised that you come now and say you put something on
the table, but we still have to debate it. I would have thought that this
is a policy of the ANC – a policy of your government. What we are asking
for now is for you to implement that policy. [Laughter.]
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, all I’m saying is that we presented
the matter and there have been people who say they don’t agree with it. I
don’t think one can then stand up, present the policy and implement it. I’m
saying we have to deal with those who disagree, and discuss and exhaust the
matter. Then you come with your plan.

Even if we have a plan, we can’t say — whilst there are people who say that
they don’t agree — that we don’t care and are now implementing the plan
because I’ve raised the issue of the plan. I’m sure that you would be the
first to object, from the opposition.  Absolutely. [Interjections.] I’m
saying if we did not agree ...[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Order, hon members!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: You don’t always support everything. On the
occasion that you would not support it, you would ask: What are you doing?
You would be the first to object, not only on this matter but on matters in
general. [Applause.]

   Position of African leaders regarding foreign aid as compared to direct
                             foreign investment

8.    Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether African leaders agreed to stop depending on foreign aid
            at the World Economic Forum that was held in Dar es Salaam
            recently; if so, what are the relevant details; if not,


      (2)   whether African leaders expressed any position on foreign aid as
            compared to direct foreign investment; if not, what is the
            position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                              NO1674E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, the World ... [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon Ellis!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, when members ask questions,
they need information to be given to them. Why then are they refusing the
information? Somebody is pleading, “Be shorter, please!” We want to give
information to help answer the questions that members want to ask.

The World Economic Forum describes itself as an independent international
organisation, committed to improving the state of the world by engaging
leaders in partnership to shape global, regional and industry agendas.

More than 1 200 global leaders from governments and the private sector
gathered in Dar es Salaam from 5 May to 7 May for the World Economic Forum
on Africa. The theme of this year’s meeting – “Rethinking Africa’s growth
strategy” – allowed our government to share a set of key messages with
other participants in 25 of the 50 working sessions.

The sessions were integrated into four themes, namely: building effective
institutions and governance structures, fostering sustainable growth and
development, managing risks as opportunities, and fostering an empowerment
mindset.

The meeting in Tanzania was not meant to be a representative meeting of
African heads of state or government. No decisions are taken at the World
Economic Forum. It is meant to encourage discussion and networking and for
leaders in various fields to share information and promote their views,
programmes and strategies on tackling the continent’s challenges.

South Africa used the opportunity to argue that the continent should focus
on diversifying secondary production, increasing intra-Africa trade,
expanding regional co-operation and fostering further private-sector
partnerships. We argued that Africa would need to overcome its
infrastructure deficit and invest in transport, energy, water and
telecommunications to further improve its global competitiveness.

Africa has to extend preferential markets across southern and eastern
Africa through the Tripartite Free Trade Area. This will draw together the
Southern African Development Community, the East African Community and the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa to promote intra-African
trade and foreign direct investment.

Therefore, economic integration is a critical route towards economic
development and less dependence on aid. I thank you, hon Speaker.
[Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Mr Speaker, owing to unforeseen circumstances Rev Meshoe was
unable to be here. I apologise for that and will endeavour to ask the
follow-up question for him.

I would like to ask the hon President whether any plan to wean African
states off foreign aid was presented during these discussions. What would
the details around such a plan be? Would there be domestic reforms that
would be necessary in terms of your discussions, rather than agreements?
What role was envisaged for the private sector? Would the cessation of
dependence on foreign aid mean nationalisation of African resources in any
way? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, we discussed how Africa should
intervene and position itself. We did not necessarily go into a discussion
on the question of aid. That issue has been discussed at various other
forums. At these forums Africa has said that it needed to look at the
question of aid differently. Africa needs to move away from aid and get
into investment.

I think there were those who said things closer to that point, but that was
not the issue that was being discussed. The issue under discussion was how
we should rethink Africa’s positioning of itself in light of the global
economic situation and activities. We are contributing in that direction.
Thank you.

Dr D T GEORGE: Speaker, a World Economic Forum report states that —

   ... large-scale human rights abuses and extreme poverty have marred 20th
   century Africa. The tradition of African silence has become more a
   liability than an asset.

Mr President, you said at the forum that, “... the benefits of democracy
must lead to economic development and ... improve the quality of life of
ordinary people.”

In Africa, detention without trial continues unabated and gay people are
being persecuted and imprisoned on the basis of their sexual orientation.
This crime against humanity prevents economic development, breaches
international agreements, deters direct foreign investment and is a
violation of our own Constitution. This is an African challenge to which
you refer.

Mr President, why are you and your government completely silent on this
despicable, homophobic assault on the human rights and dignity of our
brothers and sisters across Africa? Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, there are many things that
happen in Africa. There have been many. I think we have been involved in a
broader struggle on the continent: The struggle to try to right the wrongs;
to try to deal with matters on the continent.

Our approach has been that we needed to persuade, we needed to make people
understand, we needed to move with them. We have never adopted a
confrontational stance on matters. We have been raising matters when
matters have arisen, when things have happened, even on the issue that took
place in Malawi.

We have commented already. Maybe the hon member missed those comments.
[Interjections.] We have condemned the action taken to arrest people in
terms of our Constitution, because it was contrary to our Constitution. We
stated the views of this country, as contained in the Constitution.

The manner in which you address the matters on the continent could create
conditions that are not conducive for you to engage and lead. But, you
could adopt a stance in which you address matters in a manner that makes
people receptive to what you say. And you might not adopt the same stance.

We have never kept quiet on the continent. We have raised our issues on
elections that have not gone right. I don’t think we have kept quiet. So,
we are with you on this issue of representing the country and the
continent. We are working hard to change Africa, and we will continue to do
so. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms T B SUNDUZA: Speaker, my follow-up question is based on our colonial
history. As you know, Africa was colonised, the colonists benefited from
Africa, and now Africa has become economically dependent on colonial
support. This weakens our democracy and independence.

I want to understand what the summit’s view on Africa’s debt was. Africa
cannot grow because of the debts that it owes. Such debt causes a reversal
even in our economy; we can’t even develop and be independent. So, I would
like the hon President to inform us of the summit’s view on the debt,
because ...

... sihlala sityala Mongameli ngeli thuba aba bantu besitya. Siyatyala,
asiyi phambili. Ngoko ke, niyithini le nto? Ndiyabulela. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... we are always in debt, President, while these people are benefiting.
We are not progressing, we are in debt. Therefore, what are you doing about
that? Thank you.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, you know, in the sessions in which
I participated we did not discuss African debt. It could have been
discussed in other sessions; I can’t remember. Of course, that is an issue
that remains with countries, because debt in Africa is not owned
collectively. Individual countries have their debts and they have been
trying very hard – and I think they have done a lot of work – to address
the question of the debt. But it was not an issue that we specifically
focused on there in order to find a solution. Thank you.

 Effect of visit of political organisation on President’s mediation role in
                                  Zimbabwe

9.    Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether his mediation role in Zimbabwe has been hampered by the
           visit of a certain political organisation (name furnished) and
           its leader’s statements; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so,


      (2)   whether he has taken any position in this regard; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?   NO1676E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, South Africa remains an impartial
mediator and facilitator to dialogue between Zimbabwe’s political parties.
Its position in this regard is widely recognised, and all parties have
indicated their confidence in South Africa’s ability to discharge its
mandate dispassionately. Neither the visit nor the statements to which the
hon member refers have impaired South Africa in the performance of this
responsibility. We are not hampered at all. I thank you, Speaker.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Somlomo, mhlonishwa Mongameli, kanye
nabahlonishwa bonke. Engicela ukukubuza mhlonishwa Mongameli ukuthi:
uthunywe lapha i-SADC ukuthi uyolamula ukuze uhulumeni wakwaBulawayo
usebenze ngokubambisana kwizinhlangano zontathu.

Uma ke kuqhamuka umuntu ongaphansi kwakho, oyingane yakho esho okunye
okubheke eceleni kunalokho okwenzayo. Okokuqala, kuyaye kufanele wenze
njani njengomuntu omdala? Okwesibili, kufanele uthini kulaba abakuthumile
futhi ubachazela uthini ngale nkinga ohlangabezana nayo yengane ephikisana
nawe umdala uzama ukulamula abantu ekhaya na? [Uhleko.]
UMOMGAMELI WERIPHABHULIKHI: Ngiyabonga kakhulu Somlomo, nelungu
elihloniphekile lePhalamende ubab’uGatsheni, uBoya Benyathi, eqinisweni
noma yinini uma ingane yakho kukhona ekwenzayo okuphuma eceleni,
uyayikhuza.

Ingane ngiyikhuzile, ukuphendula ubuzo wokuqala.[Ihlombe.] Okwesibili
akulona udaba lolu okulindelwe ukuthi luze lubikwe kwi-SADC. Baningi kabi
abantu abakhulumayo ngodaba lwaseZimbabwe. Ukuba ngingaqoqa izinto
ezishiwoyo eceleni ngithi ngiyozibeka lapha, ngiyethemba umbiko wami ungaba
umqingo omkhulu kabi ngoba baningi abantu abakhulumayo ngodaba
lwaseZimbabwe.

Okubabalukekile ukuthi ngiyokwethula umbiko kwi-SADC lowo oqondene ngqo
nomsebenzi engiwenzayo. Asikafiki isikhathi sokuthi siyobika, sizobika bude
budala njengoba sisebenza nje. Sibike ku-SADC ukuthi kuhamba kanjani.
Umsebenzi uhamba kahle kakhulu kanti noma ingane ikhuziwe lokho akuzange
kuphazamisane nomsebenzi esiwenzayo laphaya. Siyawuqhuba nje kahle,
akunankinga nencane. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you Speaker, hon President, and all hon members. What
I would like to say to and ask the hon President is this: You are sent by
SADC to go and mediate in order for the three parties in the Zimbabwean
government to work together. What are you going to do if your subordinate
undermines your authority by doing the opposite of what you are doing?
Firstly, what should you do as a person in a position of power? Secondly,
what should you say to those who have sent you, and what explanation are
you going to give them regarding this problem that you have encountered
with this subordinate who undermines your authority? [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much Speaker, and to the hon
Member of Parliament, Gatsheni, Boya benyathi, in reality, whenever your
child does something that is way out of line, you admonish him or her.

To answer the first question, I have admonished the child. [Applause.]
Secondly, this is not a matter that should be reported to SADC. Many people
are talking about the Zimbabwe matter. If I were to collect all the things
that are being said, put them aside and bring them here, I believe my
report would be very big, because many people are talking about it.

What is important is that I will present to SADC a report that is exactly
in line with the work that I’m doing. The report is not due yet, so we will
report at a later stage because we are still working. We will report to
SADC how things are going. The work is going on very well. Even though the
child was admonished, that did not interfere with the work which we are
doing there. We are continuing with it. There is no problem at all.]

Mr J SELFE: Speaker, I would like to thank the President for that reply.
The person to whom this question refers, Mr Julius Malema, addressed the
Mineral Resources portfolio committee yesterday, and he reportedly said,
“The views of the ANC Youth League have always prevailed within the ANC.”
Now, when Mr Malema went to Zimbabwe in April, one of the statements
referred to in this question was that he said he was going to intensify his
campaign for the nationalisation of mines and land in South Africa.

In view of the ANC Youth League’s prevalence in determining ANC policy, we
want to know very directly from you, sir, whether you will give us the
unequivocal assurance that your government will not nationalise mines and
land. [Interjections.] We want that answer from you, sir, and not by way of
a debate with the President of the ANC Youth League.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I am sure we have answered this
question in this House before. [Interjections.] We have said that Mr
Malema, like any other South African, has a right to his views. His views
are his views. It could be the views of the ANC Youth League, as well, and
historically the ANC Youth League has had very strong views. It does not
mean that all the views were accepted as they were, but they always had
views, raised issues, and the matters would be discussed. Then resolutions
were taken.

I think that what Mr Malema was articulating is not new, that he is
articulating certain things. The ANC Youth League has always done so. He
was simply making that point and that they would debate the issues and try
to win the debate.

In the ANC, we are a democratic organisation, and even individuals, not
only the youth, do so. They do raise their issues which are then debated. I
can tell you, in the ANC we are used to debates.

On this matter, the ANC has a policy. It doesn’t depend on the views of an
individual. We don’t work like that. We work on the ANC policy that emerges
out of vigorous discussions. The aim of the policy is clear, and that is
why I said that I have answered the question here before, in that we don’t
have a nationalisation policy as the ANC.

That question has been answered. You know it. I have even invited you, if
this issue creates excitement, to debate the matter with Malema.
[Interjections.] He is there. He is ready to debate the matter with you.
Absolutely! [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, Mr President. Does your mediation role include
plans for peacekeepers for the expected forthcoming election, as requested
by Prime Minister Tsvangirai? If not, why not? If so, what are the relevant
details then?
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Sorry, could you repeat the question? I
couldn’t hear you at the beginning.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Sorry, sir. In terms of your mediation role, does this
include plans for peacekeepers for the expected forthcoming election and
how will that pan out? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you. Our mediation does not include
peacekeepers. Peacekeepers go to places where there is a fight. In Zimbabwe
there is no fight. [Interjections.] What has happened in Zimbabwe has been
the request for people to come and monitor elections. That is how I’ve
heard Tsvangirai speaking, that in the coming election he will ask the
Southern African Development Community to monitor them.

You bring in peacekeepers where there is a fight, where you want to stop a
fight. I haven’t heard Tsvangirai talk about peacekeepers. I’ve heard him
talk about monitoring and observing the election.

That is not what we are debating at the moment. We are dealing with the
implementation of the plan. Probably, once the issue of the election
emerges as an issue on the agenda, that matter will arise, and I am sure it
will be attended to at that time. Thank you. [Applause.]

         Lessons learnt from involvement in peace processes in Sudan
10.   Dr G W Koornhof (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether the government has learnt any lessons from its involvement in
      the peace processes that culminated in elections in Sudan; if so, how
      will it assist the government in achieving its foreign policy
      objectives on the continent?            NO1735E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, South Africa’s involvement in Sudan
is informed by its strategic foreign policy priority, that peace, security
and stability are prerequisites for Africa’s socioeconomic development.
South Africa is of the view that the resolution of conflict and restoration
of peace in the largest country on the continent will not only impact
positively on the Horn of Africa, but on the African continent as a whole.

Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, CPA, in 2005 to end
the 21-year civil war, South Africa has been actively involved in
supporting Sudan in its democratic transformation. South Africa has
assisted the government of Southern Sudan to build capacity and develop
institutions for governance since 2005.

In addition, South Africa has engaged both the government of national unity
and the government of Southern Sudan to strengthen capacity in the police
service with a view to developing a culture of democratic policing.

With elections being one of the key elements in the democratic
transformation of Sudan, the South African government took a decision to
assist the National Elections Commission and to deploy an observer team
under the auspices of the African Union. These elections, notwithstanding
challenges, are viewed as a positive step towards the democratic transition
of Sudan, as envisaged in the CPA.

A critical lesson from international involvement in conflict resolution,
including South Africa’s role in the peace processes, is the need to foster
and maintain a common and united international approach regarding the
implementation of agreements.

It is also clear that no solutions are possible or sustainable without the
active involvement of all parties in the conflict. It is important to
emphasise inclusivity and consensus-seeking and to discourage any forms of
unilateral action. In January 2011, Sudan will be conducting a historic
referendum on the future of the country.

In light of the importance and the sensitivity of the process, it is
incumbent on the African Union and the broader international community to
work with the parties to reach agreement on the final aspects of the CPA
and the post-referendum causes and issues. Failure to agree on these
critical issues could set the peace process back and give rise to political
tension and instability. In this regard, South Africa will continue to
provide support to the AU high-level implementation panel on Darfur under
the auspices of former President Thabo Mbeki.

In addition, South Africa will render assistance to the United Nations, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other interested parties
towards a peaceful resolution to the Darfur conflict. South Africa will
also continue its facilitating role as Chair of the Committee on Post-
Conflict Reconstruction and Development in the Sudan, as mandated by the
African Union. I thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr President, thank you for the
comprehensive reply to this question. I am glad that you have referred to
the upcoming referendum early in 2011. I would appreciate it if you could
elaborate on this. The referendum regarding, as you say, the question of a
united Sudan, the north and the south, is scheduled for early 2011. Could
you elaborate on what the view of our government is regarding this upcoming
referendum? And, how important is the role that the AU should play in the
run-up to this important event? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, our view is that Sudan should
remain one country. The referendum should achieve that purpose. That is why
we have participated in many respects, as I have just indicated, to help
the south and the north to work towards an understanding, so that they are
ready when they have the referendum to agree that Sudan is one country.
That is the view of the AU as well and of many countries on the continent.
That is also the view of the international community.

That is why all of us are doing everything we can to ensure that that
becomes an outcome at the end. We are very happy that at least the
elections took place and produced results that have been accepted by the
world. We believe that that, in a sense, creates ground for us to work
harder to ensure that by the time of the referendum there is a better
understanding among the Sudanese, particularly the north and the south, as
well as Darfur and other areas of Sudan. That is our view and that is what
we will be working towards in terms of assisting Sudan. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Speaker, and thank you, Mr President. After the
Sudan elections, do you think that we should call back our people who have
been deployed in Sudan, who are assisting the police or the army, or should
we carry on until the referendum has been held? What is SADC’s position on
the implementation and the cost thereof of those people who are deployed in
Sudan? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. The situation
determines how long people stay. Sudan does not have problems in one area
only. Apart from the differences and difficulties between the south and the
north, you also have Darfur. Darfur is a major problem and that is where
the main concentration is of those who are helping. As you heard recently,
some South Africans were kidnapped there. It was in that area.

I am not certain whether it will be easy to do so after the elections. I
cannot speculate. The reality is that Darfur is still a problem. Much as we
have held elections, there is no evidence that the elections resulted in
the disappearance of the problems in Darfur, or that it impacted positively
so that we can see what happens.

Certainly, once the situation is better and there is no need for foreign
forces to help, we will be able to call people back. That is also the view
of SADC, the African Union and the United Nations. It will be determined by
how the efforts on the ground, to bring about peace and stability, progress
in terms of what we think should happen.

On the question of cost, I have a similar kind of answer. As long as there
is conflict, one can’t say that we have paid enough now, that we are
leaving you, and you can go on killing one another. We will continue to
ensure that we try to bring about peace.

Certainly, it is always costly. It has always been costly. But, of course,
people will argue that one cannot put a price on the lives of people.
Therefore, we want peace in this continent and we will do whatever is in
our capacity, as will the AU and other countries.
There is also IGAD – the Intergovernmental Authority on Development – which
is closer to the situation and which is working with everyone. There is
also the involvement of the international community. So all of them, I’m
sure, will come together to decide whether the situation has changed enough
to recall our people or not. It will depend on conditions, as well as
consultation. Thank you.

 Reconciliation of President’s comments about faster land reform while being
                         within the ambit of the law

11.   The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
      Republic:

      How does he reconcile his recent comments at the Black Management
      Forum on 29 April 2010 about the government’s faster and more
      pragmatic approach to land reform with his comments that such a policy
      would be carried out within the ambit of the law?
                                        NO1671E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, hon member, there is no
contradiction between faster ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker?

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon member?
Mr M J ELLIS: I beg your pardon, Mr President. Mr Speaker, you allowed only
two supplementary questions on that last question, namely question 10.

The SPEAKER: There is only one on my list. I do not have any other
questions.

Mr M J ELLIS: There obviously is an error in the system, sir, because the
hon Mubu did indicate that he wished to ask a question.

The SPEAKER: Well, there probably is something wrong with the ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I have no doubt that the hon President would love
to answer a question from the DA.

The SPEAKER: No, I’m sure he loves answering all the questions, and I know
you like to listen to all the answers. But I’m just talking about the
machine this time around, that there is a problem here. Hon member ...

Mr K S MUBU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, Mr President. I would
like to find out how you reconcile the South African government’s support
for the Sudanese government with the fact that President al-Bashir has a
warrant of arrest for human rights abuses from the International Criminal
Court in The Hague hanging over his head.
Secondly, I believe that you have invited all heads of state in Africa to
the Fifa World Cup next month. I want to know, Mr President, if President
al-Bashir comes here, is he going to be arrested in view of the fact there
is this warrant of arrest and that South Africa is a signatory to the
International Criminal Court in The Hague? [Interjections.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, South Africa respects
international law and we certainly are signatories, and we abide by the
law. Secondly, we reconcile our participation in the process – whilst the
leader of that country has the warrant of arrest issued against him – on
the basis of the African Union’s decision.

The AU took a very deliberate decision and requested the International
Criminal Court to postpone the action against al-Bashir, given the fact
that we were dealing with a situation of violence, and that, if it acted
immediately, we could reverse the situation in Sudan. That was done
collectively by the African leaders, and the message was sent, and it was
correct to do so, because our view was that, if we did that, that situation
could have become worse.

That is what the AU said. It did not say we must not arrest al-Bashir. It
looked at the situation and felt that it was necessary to move cautiously
on this matter. That is what we have done, and that is why we are
reconciling the two points. Thank you. [Applause.]
The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon President. Hon members, it looks like the
system I have been relying on is a bit faulty. Are there any other
supplementary questions that I did not recognise? The last supplementary
question will go to you, sir.

Mr K S MUBU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr President, I just want to follow up
on the second part of my question. You have invited all presidents on the
continent to the Fifa World Cup. If al-Bashir comes to South Africa, will
you arrest him or not? [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order! Order! Hon members, please allow the
President to be heard. Hon members, including hon Ellis, please. Order!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, in my response, that is the
first thing that I answered. I answered very clearly that South Africa
respects the international law, and that answers the question.

The SPEAKER: Order! The President will now respond to question 11.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon member, there is
no contradiction between faster land reform and the consistent application
of the law. Government has recognised that the land reform programmes
implemented to date have not been entirely sustainable. They have not
provided the anticipated socioeconomic benefits to all the recipients of
the programmes.

Among other things, this is the result of institutional weaknesses in
overall land management policy and legislation. As a result, the Department
of Rural Development and Land Reform embarked on the development of a Green
Paper on agrarian transformation, rural development and land reform, which
is currently being finalised for submission to Cabinet.

The Green Paper is intended to culminate in a new land policy framework and
an omnibus of legislation which should be a consolidation of all land-
related laws. While we are in the process of developing legislation linked
to the Green Paper process, it is imperative that we find immediate
mechanisms to respond to the plight of farmworkers and farm dwellers.

We will soon introduce a land tenure Bill which will repeal the Extension
of Security of Tenure Act and the Land Reform (Labour Tenants) Act. This
Bill will be informed by the following objectives: to protect the relative
rights of farmworkers, farm dwellers and landowners; to strengthen the
rights of farm dwellers; and to enhance food security through sustained
production discipline.

Any new legislation will be developed in line with the Constitution, and
will follow the normal Cabinet and parliamentary processes. I reiterate
that the pursuit of a sustainable and accelerated approach to land reform
will be carried out within the ambit of the law, and we should still be
able to do it faster. I thank you, hon Speaker.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, hon President, in a recent court
ruling on a case brought to the Land Claims Court by FCL Farming, it was
stated, and I quote:

  There is a disturbing, if not alarming, number of applications being
  brought to the Land Claims Court against the Minister of Agriculture and
  Land Affairs, the Chief Land Claims Commissioner and the regional land
  claims commissioners as respondents. These applications follow an all too
  familiar and unfortunate pattern. They are prompted because of the
  failure on the part of the commission and regional land claims
  commissioners to comply with orders of the court, with agreements entered
  into with landowners, and with orders for contempt of court.

This is clearly not within the ambit of the law. What will you do about
these institutional failings that are holding land reform and reclamation
back?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. I’m certain that
what I said does take that into account. That is why I said that the
Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform was working on these matters.
I’m sure that those kinds of court appearances and decisions must say to
the Minister that there is something that needs to be put right here. That
is why he is working on the matter. I’m certain that that will happen.

There are a lot of problems with this matter. It is not just a one-sided
problem. Commissioners in different places have been taking decisions. Some
people heard very late that they needed to apply, etc. So there are many,
many other things regarding this matter.

I’m saying that the Minister is working to look at everything so that we
can have an approach that will be less difficult to deal with, in order to
correct things that have not necessarily gone very well on this matter.
That is why we said that the Minister was working on this and he is going
to put it through the proper channels, as a conclusion of the Green Paper
that has been put forward with regard to these matters. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: I thank the hon President. Hon members, the system is a bit
faulty, but I will ask the table staff to help me identify two more
supplementary questions.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, hon Speaker, and thank you, hon
President. Land is a finite resource and is escalating in value all over
the world. There is, incidentally, no such thing as an inflated market
value; market value is market value.

The landless issue can only properly be addressed by budgeting adequately
and ensuring that land beneficiaries are using the land productively with
the necessary post-settlement and extension services, not by nationalising
land or imploding the value of the land.

Will your government protect the right to own property, and what steps will
you take to ensure that the land transformation agenda will ensure
increased productivity and combat institutional weaknesses that result in
wasted money on court cases?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, there has been no attempt to
undermine the rights of those who own property; I don’t remember any. I
think that there were measures that were taken into account. Indeed, since
1994, these processes have been moving. Gaps have been found; weaknesses
have been found. This is what we are trying to correct. I don’t think there
is an attempt to undermine the rights of those who own land.

What we have been trying to do is determine how we deal with the land so
that citizens of this country are all able to benefit from the land – all
of them ... [Applause.] ... in a manner which is within the context of the
law. We have emphasised this. The process that I talked about, that the
Minister is working on, is not attempting to undermine the rights. It is
actually attempting to streamline the manner in which we deal with this
question. I don’t think anything has gone wrong. Thank you.

Mrs P C NGWENYA-MABILA: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon President, thank you
for the response you have given to the House. I believe that information is
power.

Hon President, with regard to the envisaged legislative reform, including
the Green Paper to be tabled by the Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform in due course pertaining to rural development, what is the
government doing to assist farm dwellers, especially victims of evictions,
landowners who are unable to produce from their land, and the beneficiaries
of the land reform and restitution programme? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, those matters are addressed by
the process that the Minister is involved in. I’m sure that at the end of
that process, those aspects will be answered. The Minister is specifically
dealing with those issues, including land that has been given back to the
rightful owners — land that was productive before it was handed over, but
became unproductive after it was handed over. Those are matters that the
Minister is addressing. I’m sure we will have lasting solutions to these
matters. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mrs A STEYN: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon President, regarding the Green
Paper, we all understand it and are waiting in anticipation, and we are
happy about it.

As regards the court cases, there are 19 cases already against the
department because they have not paid the landowners. There are 21 cases
pending in court at the moment with the same problem. We are not asking
about the Green Paper, but about the process in court at the moment in
which the department does not adhere to court cases. What are you going to
do about that?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Does the department not respond to those
cases?

Mrs A STEYN: Speaker, yes. Mr President, they don’t adhere to the rulings
of the court cases.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Oh, they don’t adhere to the rulings of the
court cases? [Interjections.]

Well, I don’t know the facts. I’m sure one would check that as to what the
issue is. I don’t know the facts about the respondent to the issues. As far
as I remember, court matters take time. But I will check as to whether the
department is not responding to those specific issues. I think that the
issue that you were referring to is where courts have given judgment
against the department. Is that what you are referring to?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: We will check on that. Thank you very much.

The SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon President. The President will check,
and there will be a written response. Hon members, the last question which
was asked by the hon Ramatlakane has been withdrawn.

Mr M J ELLIS: Why?

The SPEAKER: You better ask him why. We know why, but you had better ask
him yourself. [Laughter.] Hon members, that concludes Questions to the
President and I wish to thank the hon President. [Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G G BOINAMO: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the possibility of outsourcing the whole process
   relating to senior certificate examinations.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Does any other member wish to give  notice
of a motion? Please move closer to the microphones, hon member.

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House –

   (1)      debates the state of disrepair of courts across the country,
         including the working conditions of court staff; and

      2) comes up with possible solutions to these problems.


Mr M MNQASELA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House –

      1) debates the clear swing in voter support towards the DA,
         demonstrated in the recent by-election wins of the DA; and


      2) notes, in particular, the extraordinary results obtained by the DA
         in two former ANC strongholds in the Western Cape yesterday, 26 May
         2010.

Dr D T GEORGE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the implementation of a wage subsidy to encourage
   the employment of first-time job seekers, as proposed by the Minister of
   Finance in February 2010.

Ms E MORE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the following
motion on behalf of the DA:


   That the House –

   (1)      debates the adherence to the required minimum standards set for
       public hospitals, including the continuous inspection of these
       standards; and

    2) comes up with possible solutions to the current state of public
       hospitals.

Dr W G JAMES: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the following
motion on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates how government could better support our 23
  universities and 53 colleges in finding and financially supporting
  talented students, especially those from poor urban and rural
  backgrounds.

                       DEATH OF TENOR SIPHIWO NTSHEBE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes with deep sadness the death of tenor Siphiwo Ntshebe, at the
        age of 34, from bacterial meningitis when he was due to perform his
        signature song Hope at the opening ceremony of the Soccer World
        Cup;


     2) further notes that Siphiwo’s talent was also recognised by former
        President Nelson Mandela, who viewed Siphiwo “... as a young South
        African with so much talent, who has, despite challenges of the
        past, chosen to work hard for a better future and has made us all
        proud with his performance...”;


     3) recognises that Siphiwo had a truly wondrous voice and his music
        was unique in its melodies and he was, as a result,  awarded
        scholarships to further his career in music at the University of
        Cape Town, followed by another offer from Brisbane, Australia, and
        that, in 2004, he was also offered a postgraduate scholarship to
        study at the Royal College of Music in London, which he completed
        in 2007;


     4) hopes that Siphiwo’s song Hope, which was recorded with former
        President Nelson Mandela’s message on it, will be played at the
        opening ceremony as planned in respect and tribute to Siphiwo; and


     5) conveys its condolences to the Ntshebe family, friends and the
        music fraternity and says: May Siphiwo’s soul rest in peace and his
        spirit of hope centre us all during the World Cup and beyond and
        may his life and achievements be an inspiration to our youth.

Agreed to.

   SOUTH AFRICA SELECTED BY INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMICAL UNION TO HOST THEIR
                      OFFICE FOR ASTRONOMY DEVELOPMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that the International Astronomical Union has selected South
         Africa to host their Office for Astronomy Development;

      2) congratulates the prestigious South African Astronomical
         Observatory in Cape Town on being chosen to host the Office for
         Astronomy Development;

      3) congratulates the Department of Science and Technology for
         demonstrating its commitment to scientific research development;
      4) further notes that the location of the Office for Astronomy
         Development in Cape Town is a major boost for our bid, to be
         decided in 2012, to host the Square Kilometre Array, as it
         positions South Africa as a leader in astronomy development and
         makes South Africa a natural location for major astronomical
         investment;

      5) believes that this is a significant achievement not only for South
         Africa but also for all of Africa; and

      6) endorses the comment made by Kevin Govender, Chairperson of the SA
         Astronomical Observatory’s “Developing Astronomy Globally” project,
         when he said, “As one of the few developing countries with an
         internationally recognised and strong astronomy community, we felt
         that it was South Africa’s responsibility to look at ways of
         bringing astronomy to less developed parts of the world, with a
         focus on Africa. Through the invaluable support of the
         International Astronomical Union we have been able to stimulate
         astronomy activities across the world, from Gabon to Tajikistan.
         Hosting this prestigious office will enable South Africa to expand
         this developmental role and realise the common vision with the
         International Astronomical Union of astronomy in every part of the
         world.”

Agreed to.

     CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF CANDIDATES RECOMMENDED FOR
   APPOINTMENT TO COUNCIL OF INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH
                                AFRICA, ICASA

Mr I VADI: Chairperson, it is my pleasure to present a consensus report
which enjoys the support of all the political parties in the Portfolio
Committee on Communications.

Later this year, the terms of office of four councillors of the Independent
Communications Authority of SA, Icasa, will be coming to an end. In terms
of the Icasa Act, the committee has to process public nominations to fill
these vacancies. The committee received a total of 91 nominations from the
public, based on an advert that was placed in the newspapers. It eventually
decided on interviewing 20 candidates. Unfortunately, two candidates
withdrew at the eleventh hour.

Having conducted the interviews over the past few weeks, the committee
reports unanimously that the following candidates should be recommended to
the Minister of Communications for appointment to the Council of Icasa.
They are — and this is not necessarily in order of importance — Mr John
Matisonn, Ms Ntombizodwa Ndhlovu, Mr Joseph Lebooa, Ms Mankakane Violet
Magagane, Mr William Currie, Adv Luthando Mkumatela and Dr Stephen Mncube.

Of course, the Minister will have to decide on four of the candidates and
their respective commencement dates, as vacancies are staggered, and refer
the matter back to the House for its final decision.

These candidates possess skills relevant to the ICT regulatory environment;
more specifically they demonstrate expertise in broadcasting, electronic
communications and postal policy, electronic engineering, law and
journalism. The abridged CVs of these candidates have been loaded onto the
parliamentary website, for members who may want to take a peek at that.

Candidates must also be committed to fairness, freedom of expression,
openness and accountability, and must be representative of a broad cross-
section of the population.

Chairperson, in considering this report, the committee wishes to bring two
issues to the attention of the House: The first question is of
disqualification of Icasa councillors and possible conflicts of interest as
councillors perform their functions in the council.

Section 6(1)(f) and (g) of the Icasa Act states that a person may not be
appointed as a councillor if he or she or his or her family member or
business partner has a direct or indirect financial interest in the
telecommunications or broadcasting industry.

Section 6(2) specifically states:

   A person who is subject to a disqualification ... may be nominated for
   appointment as a councillor, but may only be appointed if at the time of
   such appointment, he or she is no longer subject to that
   disqualification.

Recently, our committee become aware that a currently serving councillor
who was appointed late last year did not meet the provisions of section
6(2). Legal opinion, both from the Parliamentary Legal Services and an
independent senior councillor from the Cape Bar, suggests that the
appointment of the said councillor is invalid or of no force or effect.

The committee has called upon the Minister to institute appropriate
remedial action as soon as possible, so as to rectify what is in effect an
unlawful appointment.

In order to prevent a recurrence of such an irregular appointment this
time, the committee explicitly questioned the candidates on their personal
and their immediate families’ financial interests. It also called upon them
to declare any possible grounds for disqualification.

The formal written response from each candidate on his or her financial
interest was published in yesterday’s Announcements, Tablings and Committee
Reports. The committee wishes to draw the attention of the Minister to this
information before any final appointment is gazetted. Otherwise, we are
going to be faced with a similar problem.

Secondly, Chairperson, in my previous report to the House, I indicated that
the committee was not satisfied with the overall performance of the Icasa
Council. I said then that we were continually receiving negative feedback
on administrative inefficiencies, failure to process regulatory decisions
on the basis of proper and legally defensible procedures, and the absence
of organisational cohesion between the council and the senior executive
management of Icasa.

The committee therefore called upon the Minister and the department to
finalise the performance management system so as to monitor and evaluate
the performance of the Icasa councillors and the chairperson, as this is a
requirement of section 9 of the Icasa Act.

The committee can report that it received a draft framework on the
performance management system for Icasa from the Department of
Communications. It was not entirely satisfied with the proposals and
referred the matter back to the department for review. We hope that this
matter will be concluded shortly, so that each councillor can be held
publicly accountable for his or her performance.

In conclusion, the committee therefore recommends that the report be
approved by this House, and the names of Mr Matisonn, Ms Ndhlovu, Mr
Lebooa, Ms Magagane, Mr Currie, Adv Mkumatela and Dr Stephen Mncube be
referred to the Minister for his consideration. I thank you very much.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

Question put: That the House approves the following list of candidates to
fill four vacancies on the Council of the Independent Communications
Authority of SA:

Mr John Matisonn;
Ms Ntombizodwa (Miki) Ndhlovu;
Mr Joseph Morakile Lebooa;
Ms Mankakane Violet Magagane;
Mr William Hamilton Currie;
Adv Luthando Simphiwe Mkumatela; and
Dr Stephen Sipho Mncube.

Question agreed to.

The House adjourned at 15:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
   (1)      Constitution Amendment Bill, 2010, and Superior Courts Amendment
         Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
         Development.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Development.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs


   (a)      Government Notice No 393 published in Government Gazette No
       33184 dated 14 May 2010: Invitation for written representations or
       comments on the Draft National Strategy on Sustainable Development
       and Action Plan 2010-2014.
   (b)      Government Notice No 400 published in Government Gazette No
       33186 dated 14 May 2010: Delegation of powers under regulation 3 (3)
       of the CITES Regulation, 2010, in terms of the National
       Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
       2004).


2.    The Minister of Police


   (a)      Draft Regulations made under section 9(2) of the 2010 FIFA World
       Cup South Africa Special Measures Act, 2006 (Act No 11 of 2006).

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

1.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the provisional suspension from office  of  Magistrate  MT
   Masinga, dated 26 May 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the  provisional  suspension  of  Magistrate  MT
   Masinga, an Additional Magistrate at Emlazi, pending the  outcome  of  an
   investigation into his fitness to hold office as a magistrate, reports as
   follows:

   1) Mr Masinga appeared in the Durban Magistrates Court on 19  March  2009
      on a charge of contravening section 17(a) read with section 7  of  the
      Domestic Violence Act 116 of 1998. It is alleged that he assaulted his
      wife with a blunt  axe,  kicked  and  hit  her  with  open  hands  and
      threatened to kill her. He also assaulted his daughter.  The  criminal
      proceedings were postponed to 14 April 2009 and  then  transferred  to
      the Regional  Magistrate’s  Court  where  he  appeared  on  additional
      charges of attempted murder and two counts of assault.

   2) On 14 July 2009, the Magistrate’s Commission informed Mr Masinga  that
      it was considering recommending that  he  be  provisionally  suspended
      from office pending the outcome of an investigation into  his  fitness
      to hold office.

   3) On 26 November 2009, after considering his  response,  the  Commission
      recommended that the Minister provisionally suspend  Mr  Masinga  from
      office.

   4) The Commission  is  of  the  view  that  there  is  reliable  evidence
      indicating that the  allegation  against  Mr  Masinga  is  of  such  a
      serious nature that:


      • It would be inappropriate for him to perform  the  functions  of  a
        Magistrate while the allegations are being investigated.
      • It would be  inappropriate  for  him  to  be  on  the  Bench  while
        appearing in court to face charges of attempted murder and assault.


      • Without anticipating the outcome  of  the  investigation  into  his
        fitness to hold office, the evidence against Mr Masinga is of  such
        a serious nature that it would justify his removal from  office  if
        he is found guilty of the misconduct charges brought against him.

   5) On the 3 February 2010, the Minister  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development, on the advice of the Magistrates Commission provisionally
      suspended Mr Masinga from office.

   6) In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993,  Parliament
      must  pass  a  resolution  on  whether  to  confirm  the   provisional
      suspension of a magistrate.

   7) Recommendation

       1. The Committee notes that almost a year passed from  the  time  Mr
          Masinga first appeared in court to  his  provisional  suspension.
          Although the Committee  acknowledges  that  the  Commission  must
          ensure that due process takes place,  it  is  incorrect  that  it
          would be  possible  for  a  Magistrate  to  continue  to  perform
          judicial functions while facing such serious charges.

       2. Having considered the  Commission’s  report  on  the  provisional
          suspension of Mr MT Masinga, the Committee  recommends  that  the
          National Assembly confirms the  provisional  suspension,  pending
          the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to hold office.

      Report to be considered.

2.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the provisional suspension from office of  Magistrate  WJM
   Prinsloo, dated 26 May 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having  considered  the  report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate WJM Prinsloo, an Additional Magistrate at  Ermelo,  pending
      the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to hold office  as  a
      magistrate, reports as follows:

   1) An investigation by  the  Magistrates  Commission  confirmed  that  10
      complaints by a female clerk (the complainant) employed at the  Ermelo
      Magistrate’s Office were filed against Mr Prinsloo. It is alleged that
      during the period 18 April 2008 to 5 May 2008, he had on 10  occasions
      conducted himself in an unbecoming manner by phoning  the  complainant
      and leaving lewd and suggestive messages for her.

   2) On 14 July 2009, the Commission requested Mr Prinsloo  to  show  cause
      why a decision to provisionally suspend  him  from  duty  pending  the
      outcome of an investigation into his fitness to hold office should not
      be taken. In his response, Mr Prinsloo requested the Commission not to
      suspend him and stated the following:
               a) The incidents happened more that a year ago.  No  similar
                  incidents had occurred since then.
      b) The incidents happened during a  difficult  time  in  his  personal
         life.
      c) The criminal case has already been withdrawn against him.
      d) The dispute between  him  and  the  complainant  has  already  been
         resolved through mediation.
      e) One of the resolutions made during the mediation process  was  that
         the complainant would request  that  all  criminal  and  misconduct
         steps against him be withdrawn. Once all  criminal  and  misconduct
         steps have been withdrawn, Mr Prinsloo would apply for  a  transfer
         as soon as posts are advertised.


   3. The complainant confirmed  in  writing  that  a  successful  mediation
      process has taken place.

   4. On 26 November 2009, the Commission after  considering  Mr  Prinsloo’s
      response  and  the  complainant’s   letter,   as   well   as   further
      representations,  resolved  to   recommend   that   Mr   Prinsloo   be
      provisionally suspended from office. The following  weighed  with  the
      Commission:

      • The allegations are of such a  serious  nature  that  it  would  be
        inappropriate for Mr Prinsloo to perform his functions  while  they
        are being investigated, and should they prove to be true, he  would
        be liable to be removed from office.
      • Given public opinion on the abuse of women by  men,  Mr  Prinsloo’s
        continued service would damage the image of the judiciary, and  may
        be considered to indicate insensitivity.
      •  Judicial  officers  are  expected  to  be  exemplary  to   inspire
        confidence  in  the  administration  of   justice.   Although   the
        allegations have still to be proved, their moral depravity is  such
        that Mr Prinsloo should be suspended from office in  the  meantime.
        The matter has also received media attention.
   5. On the  3  February  2010  the  Minister  provisionally  suspended  Mr
      Prinsloo. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates  Act,  1993,
      Parliament must, as soon as is reasonably possible, pass a  resolution
      as to whether or not the provisional suspension  of  a  magistrate  is
      confirmed.

   6. Recommendation

      Having  considered  the  Report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate  Prinsloo,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  National
      Assembly confirms the provisional suspension, pending the  outcome  of
      an investigation into his fitness to hold office.
      Report to be considered.

   3. Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate MK
      Chauke, dated 26 May 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having  considered  the  report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate MK Chauke, an Additional Magistrate  at  Pretoria,  pending
      the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to hold office  as  a
      magistrate, reports as follows:

      1) Mr Chauke appeared before the Specialised Commercial Crime Court on
         a  charge  of  theft  of  a  number  of  containers  from  Vitamine
         Laboratories on 18 September 2004. The matter was postponed several
         times to allow him to secure the services of an attorney.

      2) At a meeting held on 25 August 2005,  the  Commission  resolved  to
         recommend to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
         that Mr Chauke be provisionally suspended from  office  pending  an
         inquiry into his fitness to hold office.

      3) On 7 November 2005, the Commission charged him with misconduct  and
         caused a written notice in terms of section 13(3) to be  served  on
         him. Acting on the advice of  the  Commission,  the  then  Minister
         provisionally suspended Mr Chauke from office with effect  from  13
         December 2005.

      4) On 8 November 2007, Mr Chauke, his wife and son were  convicted  of
         contravening section 37 of the General Laws  Amendment  Act  62  of
         1955. They were all sentenced to 12 months imprisonment,  suspended
         for a period of 5 years  on  condition  that  they  are  not  again
         convicted of contravening section 37 of the Act during  the  period
         of suspension.

      5) Following his conviction, Mr Chauke was invited to furnish  reasons
         why his remuneration should not be withheld. After considering  the
         matter, the Commission further resolved to  determine  to  withhold
         his remuneration in terms of section 13(4A)(a) of  the  Magistrates
         Act on 22 November 2007. Parliament confirmed both the  provisional
         suspension and the withholding of remuneration.

      6) On 20 November 2007, Mr Chauke’s attorneys advised  the  Commission
         that  they  were  instructed  to  appeal   against   his   criminal
         conviction. The Commission did  not  proceed  with  the  misconduct
         inquiry against him pending the outcome of the  matter  on  appeal.
         The appeal was heard on 8 March 2010 and the Commission is awaiting
         judgement.

      7) Mr  Chauke  instituted  legal  proceeding  in  the  then  Transvaal
         Provincial Division of the High Court. On 7 March 2008,  the  Court
         declared that his provisional suspension had lapsed and  set  aside
         the Commission’s determination to withhold his remuneration.

      8)  Section  13(3)(e)  Of  the  Magistrate’s  Act  provides  that  the
         provisional suspension of a magistrate in terms  of  paragraph  (a)
         lapses after 60 days from the date of the  suspension,  unless  the
         Commission, within that period,  commences  its  inquiry  into  the
         allegation in question by causing a written notice  containing  the
         allegation concerned to be served on the magistrate. The Commission
         was of the view that it had complied with this section  by  serving
         Mr Chauke with the notice to charge him with misconduct.

      9) A letter, dated 7 September 2009,  setting  out  three  charges  of
         misconduct, was sent to  Mr  Chauke.  He  acknowledged  receipt  in
         writing on 10 September 2009. By the direction of the  Commission’s
         Executive Committee, Mr Chauke was charged afresh with  misconduct.
         The new  charge  sheet  was  also  served  on  him  personally.  No
         representations have been received from him regarding the  charges.
         The Commission intends  to  proceed  with  the  misconduct  inquiry
         shortly.

     10) On the 5 February 2010  the  Minister  provisionally  suspended  Mr
         Chauke. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act,  1993,
         Parliament  must,  as  soon  as  is  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
         resolution as to whether or not the  provisional  suspension  of  a
         magistrate is confirmed.

      Recommendation

      Having  considered  the  Report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate MK Chauke,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  National
      Assembly confirms the provisional suspension, pending the  outcome  of
      an investigation into his fitness to hold office as required in  terms
      of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

      Report to be considered.

   4. Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate  D
      Jacobs, dated 26 May 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having  considered  the  report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate D Jacobs, a Magistrate at Clocolan, pending the outcome  of
      an investigation into his fitness to  hold  office  as  a  magistrate,
      reports as follows:

   1) An investigation instituted by the Ethics Division of  the  Commission
      confirmed that Mr Jacobs suffers from  severe  alcohol  dependency  to
      such an extent that he is unable to  perform  his  judicial  functions
      effectively and efficiently.

   2) The Committee was told that ‘no stone was left unturned’ in trying  to
      assist Mr Jacobs:  He had been admitted to rehabilitation  centres  on
      at least two occasions. The first occasion had shown good results, but
      Mr Jacobs defaulted when admitted for the second time.

   3) 0n 13 January 2010, the Commission invited Mr Jacobs to show cause why
      a decision to provisionally suspend him from duty pending the  outcome
      of an investigation into his fitness to  hold  office  should  not  be
      taken.

   4) Having considered the  allegations  and  his  representations,  on  25
      February 2010 the Commission  resolved  to  provisionally  suspend  Mr
      Jacobs from office on the following grounds:
       • Existing evidence against him is of such a  serious  nature  as  to
         make it inappropriate  for  him  to  perform  the  functions  of  a
         magistrate while the allegations are being investigated
       • He has been admitted for rehabilitation at least twice. In the past
         3 to 5  years,  his  colleagues  had  advised  Mr  Jacobs  on  many
         occasions to seek professional help. Discussions held with  him  as
         recently as January 2010 appeared not to have yielded any results.
       • In  disciplinary  matters  of  a  similar  nature,  the  Commission
         resolved  to  recommend  that  the  magistrate   be   provisionally
         suspended from office.
       • The existing evidence against Mr Jacobs is of such a serious nature
         that it would justify his removal from office should  he  be  found
         guilty of the misconduct charges preferred against him.  He  is  at
         present an embarrassment to the judiciary, and temporary  placement
         or use at another office would not address the problem either.

   5) On 30 March 2010 the Minister provisionally suspended  Mr  Jacobs.  In
      terms of section 13(3)(c) of the  Magistrates  Act,  1993,  Parliament
      must, as soon as is reasonably  possible,  pass  a  resolution  as  to
      whether  or  not  the  provisional  suspension  of  a  magistrate   is
      confirmed.

   6) Recommendation
      Having  considered  the  Report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate D  Jacobs,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  National
      Assembly confirms the provisional suspension, pending the  outcome  of
      an investigation into his fitness to hold office.


      Report to be considered.

   5. Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate  L
      B Maruwa, dated 26 May 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having  considered  the  report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate LB Maruwa, an Additional Magistrate at Davyton, pending the
      outcome of an investigation into his  fitness  to  hold  office  as  a
      magistrate, reports as follows:

        1) Mr Maruwa appeared before  the  Springs  Regional  Court  on  11
           counts of fraud on 24  August  2007.  On  14  November  2008  he
           pleaded not guilty to all charges.  The  case  was  remanded  on
           several occasions. He was charged in that he wrongfully, falsely
           and with the intent to defraud gave out and pretended that:


        • The court in which he presided was properly  constituted  in  that
          the prosecutor in his capacity as a prosecutor was present.
        • The prosecutor put  charges  to  the  accused  who  committed  the
          traffic offence.
        • The prosecutor had no address on the merits.
        • The prosecutor proved no previous convictions.
        • The prosecutor had the opportunity to take part in the  subsequent
          enquiries in terms of section 170(1) of Act 51  of  1977  for  the
          failure of the accused to appear in court in  the  listed  traffic
          offences reflected in the charge sheet.


       2) On 29 September 2009, Mr Maruwa was convicted of fraud on all  11
          counts. He was sentenced to a  fine  of  R5000.00  or  12  months
          imprisonment. Mr Maruwa paid the fine.

       3) On 6 October 2009, the  Commission  invited  Mr  Maruwa  to  show
          reason why a decision to  provisionally  suspend  him  from  duty
          pending the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to  hold
          office should not be taken.
       4) Having considered the allegations and  his  representations,  the
          Commission at its meeting held on 26 November  2009  resolved  to
          provisionally suspend Mr Maruwa  from  office  on  the  following
          grounds:
       • The allegations against him are of such a serious  nature  that  it
         would justify his removal from office, should he be found guilty of
         the misconduct charges against him.
       • The conviction of fraud on eleven counts by a court of law  are  of
         such a serious nature as  to  make  it  inappropriate  for  him  to
         perform the functions of a  magistrate  while  the  outcome  of  an
         investigation into his fitness to hold office is investigated.
       • It is inappropriate for a judicial officer, convicted of fraud,  to
         sit on the Bench. This undermines the  dignity  and  image  of  the
         Bench.


      5) On 10  February  2010,  the  Minister  provisionally  suspended  Mr
         Maruwa. In terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act,  1993,
         Parliament  must,  as  soon  as  is  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
         resolution as to whether or not the  provisional  suspension  of  a
         magistrate is confirmed.
   6. Recommendation

      Having  considered  the  Report  on  the  provisional  suspension   of
      Magistrate LB Maruwa,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  National
      Assembly confirms the provisional suspension, pending the  outcome  of
      an investigation into his fitness to hold office.


      Report to be considered.


