---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 06 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-06
---

THURSDAY, 6 MAY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

              NO NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I have been informed that the
Whippery have agreed that there will not be any motions today. Therefore I
request the Secretary to read the First and Second Orders of the day.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 6 - Public Works:

Vote No 30 - Human Settlements:

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson of the NCOP, I’m very happy
to speak in front of hon Doidge. There are a few MECs from different parts
of the country; I recognise them. We are assured by Public Works that
whatever shortage we have in respect of our budget, they will give us the
lump sum. [Laughter.]

The presentation of the first-ever Department of Human Settlements Budget
Vote, Vote 30, in this House is a significant milestone in the journey from
housing to human settlement. It demonstrates the paradigm shift we are
making as a national government, both in our thinking and in our actions.

We have refined the understanding of our mandate. We have begun to align
our policies, plans and budgets. In this way, we shall achieve our human
settlement mission: to provide decent shelter, the most basic need, for a
better life for all our citizens. We shall highlight the three areas of
human settlements delivery and intervention, which touch every South
African.

Firstly, at the uppermost end of the housing market where people easily
qualify for credit finance, our responsibility as a department, and as a
Ministry, is to create an enabling environment through policies and
legislation which protect consumers. This we do primarily through the Home
Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Act, Act 63 of 2000. In terms of the Act,
financial institutions are required to provide the Minister of Human
Settlements with information in their annual financial statements on
lending patterns. Such information has to be accurate, timeous and
comprehensive to allow for its consolidation and analysis by the
department. This enables us to assess the performance of these institutions
in providing credit to all South Africans who qualify.

The Ministry will play an activist role in monitoring the banks’
performance in this area, in the interests of regulating the homeowners’
property market. In our recent meeting with all the major financial
institutions of our country, we assured them of our commitment to
strengthening our own disclosure office and, to the extent that Human
Settlements is concerned, to examining and, where possible, to easing any
onerous reporting procedures without diminishing their compliance in
respect of the Act.

Secondly, as Human Settlements we have a role to play in assisting people
who don’t qualify for either bank credit or government Reconstruction and
Development Programme, RDP, subsidies. This is the so-called “gap” market.
We have heard their concerns. Consequently, the President, Jacob Zuma,
announced in his state of the nation address the creation of a R1 billion
guarantee fund aimed at providing support for people within this market.
Those who stand to benefit from such a financial platform include, inter
alia, nurses, teachers, police, prison wardens, government officials,
certain categories of management and so on, including blue-collar factory
workers.

We have emphasised to financial institutions that in putting the floor
under their operations in this gap market to mitigate risk, we do so
mindful that the beneficiaries come first, and that prudence should remain
paramount. In no way can there be recklessness in lending practices.
Similarly, beneficiaries also are well advised to exercise responsibility
by adhering to the terms and conditions under which credit is made
available. To a certain extent, the NCOP has a responsibility to play a
role in respect of bringing this knowledge to the attention of these
sections of our people.

Our third area of responsibility in the delivery of human settlements
relates to the bottom-most end of the market known to all of you, where we
provide housing subsidies to the poorest of the poor. This is a critical
area, as the bulk of the housing backlog exists there and affects largely
those who earn between R0 and R3 500 a month.

The total amount allocated to grants for the poor in our budget during this
period is R15 billion, and it will escalate to R17 billion by the end of
the period, which is 2014. A large percentage of this is allocated to
provinces – I’m happy they are here while I’m speaking in their House - in
the form of housing development grants. In addition, starting from this
year, we have an allocation of R1,2 billion for the sanitation programme to
deal with the rural infrastructure backlog.

These endeavors, beyond providing shelter, contribute to economic growth
and job creation whilst at the same time restoring human dignity. Our
holistic approach recognises that the economic fortunes of South Africans
are never static. Someone who lives in a shack in Gugulethu today may
occupy an RDP house tomorrow in Delft or, later, may reside in a more
comfortable place in Rondebosch.

As the Ministry, working within the government collective, we participated
in developing a new outcomes-based approach to defining our targets and to
measuring progress. The January 2010 extended Cabinet lekgotla tasked us
with implementing what is known as Outcome 8, whose objective is
“Sustainable human settlements and improved quality ...” not of life but, “
... of household life”. Consequently, we have prioritised four areas of
work between now and 2014. These are: accelerated delivery of housing
opportunities, access to basic services, more efficient land utilisation,
and an improved property market.

In the field of housing opportunities, the target is 220 000 housing units
per year between now and 2014. Additionally, we are acquiring 6 250
hectares of well-located state land for human settlement development, and
an enabling environment is being created for the provision of 600 000 new
loans in the affordable housing sector. In addition, 500 000 informal
settlement dwellings are being upgraded. We must emphasise that such
upgrading does not detract from government’s long-term objective of
eradicating slums. The combined effect of this is that, by 2014, we will
have made significant inroads in our mission of ensuring sustainable human
settlements and an improved quality of household life.

A series of workshops have already been held with our provincial government
colleagues to align provincial planning and expenditure to the targets set
by the Cabinet lekgotla, and these will be ratified at Minister and MEC,
Minmec, meetings later this month. In this regard, I am happy to announce
that the President and I have signed a performance agreement that puts
Outcome 8 into effect. I assured him of my readiness to fulfil this task.

Irrespective of what skeptics may say, the record of this government on
housing delivery speaks for itself. Since 1994, more than 2,3 million
housing units have been made available for nearly 11 million people. This
work continues unabated and, as things stand today, we have more than 8 000
human settlement projects under way across the country, with preliminary
figures translating this into the construction of 219 000 housing units in
the past financial year.

At the same time, there is a need for realism as we go forward. We must be
candid in this House, and with the nation at large. Despite all these
commendable efforts, the housing backlog has grown by leaps and bounds from
1,5 million in 1994 to approximately 2,1 million. This means that
approximately 12 million South Africans are still in need of better
shelter. We have, therefore, hardly moved in just breaking the backlog,
never mind the numbers associated with population growth.

As a reflection of the increased demand, the number of informal settlements
has ballooned to more than 2 700 today. Our reality is that we are
currently only able to clear the housing backlog at a rate of 10% per
annum. With the current pace of delivery and the resources at our disposal,
and mindful of continued economic and population growth rate and the rapid
pace of urbanisation, it could take us decades merely to break the backlog.
In real terms, as a country, we have hardly moved.

Ka Sesotho ba re, re fatela morao jwaleka kgoho. [We are not making any
progress.]

Nevertheless, we can never turn our backs on the poor. It is not their
fault, nor should poverty be used as a political tool.

The scale of the problem has already been brought to the attention of
government colleagues in a presentation I referred to at the extended
Cabinet lekgotla. Of significance are human settlement presentations made
during the Presidential Co-ordinating Council, PCC, meeting in March where
Ministries, as well as premiers and members of the SA Local Government
Association, Salga, were led in discussion on human settlements by the
President.

In respect of human settlements, it was recognised that the current fiscal
allocations are inadequate, with the potential unintended consequence that
budget allocations do not match what we call the Human Settlements mandate.

Also captured in discussion was the fact that, although budgets are
important, our work also requires thorough co-ordination of government
stakeholders in all three spheres, as well as with the private sector and
civil society. Consequently, the President – and I’m happy to say this -
has instructed that a special PCC meeting be held on 18 May to focus all
the efforts of government and various other stakeholders on one item - and
for the whole day, one item only - human settlements. The Presidency and
the Ministry have already held several planning workshops in that regard.

Questions are being asked about what will continue to propel South Africa,
its economy and life in general beyond the current infrastructural
developments which are associated with the 2010 Fifa World Cup.
Undoubtedly, the World Cup will be a resounding success. I say so as a
member of the local organising committee, LOC, and Fifa as well. South
Africa has constructed massive highways, iconic stadiums, world-class
airports and state-of-the-art technology platforms.
The target for human settlements ought to be nothing less than an enhanced
vision driven by a similar energy and passion as associated with the
current construction around the 2010 Fifa World Cup. This time round, we
are focusing on Human Settlements 2030. To that end, we as South Africans
must explore the possibility – and we can - of marshalling resources in a
similar fashion to the way we impressed the world, but this time to move
our people from the depression in which they are, many of whom would like
to be impressed by new abodes.

The current large-scale mobilisation of human, capital, financial,
logistical, construction, and project management resources should not
dissipate after the 2010 Fifa World Cup. The objective should be to turn
the country into one large construction site, as is happening. In this
regard, we welcome the new National Planning Commission, NPC, whose
responsibility is to develop an overarching national strategic plan. Our
human settlements planning tasks can only succeed within the ambit of a
framework developed nationally.

In crafting our vision, we are mindful that a child born today will be 20
years old by 2030, and will need somewhere to live. We are planning for the
needs of that future adult. To succeed, Human Settlements 2030 must be for
and by the youth. It is about their future homes, apartments, bachelor
flats, and so on. This should be their campaign.

Housing construction and manufacturing are some of the key drivers of the
economy. They stimulate every sector - mining, agriculture, manufacturing,
construction, wholesale, retail and, most importantly, finance. There is no
successful industrialised nation which has human settlements on the
backburner or merely as a welfare issue. In this context, the department is
forging stronger relationships with the financial sector, which plays a
central role in providing credit and housing finance, as we indicated with
our R1 billion fund, to provide a guarantee for them to forward more
credit.

During recent engagements with the country’s major banks, we came away
satisfied with the positive outcomes, and we can confirm to the NCOP that
we agreed to form a joint working team to look into various aspects of
housing finance, including how to generate innovative ideas around the R1
billion guarantee fund.

Let’s come to the current budget. As we plan and implement our expenditure
in this financial year, it is appropriate that we emphasise several
positive developments taking place in human settlements.

Firstly, we can report that provinces spent a total of R12,2 billion or
98,4% of their allocation by 21 April this year. Secondly, there is an
increased roll-out of sanitation infrastructure programmes in rural areas.
Thirdly, significant progress has been made in building local government
capacity through our municipal accreditation process, in which all six
metros and four local municipalities have been assessed. Fourthly, the
Sectional Titles Schemes Management Bill and the Community Schemes Ombud
Service Bill are going to be introduced to Parliament this year. This will
include the Social Housing Bill as well, which will be referred to as the
human settlements Bill for the first time.

Good progress has also been made in two crucial areas of work: our war on
waste, and our deeper resolution against corruption. Preliminary
expenditure reports for the 2009-10 fiscal year indicate that we have saved
R53,2 million in operational expenditure. This includes a saving of
R20,6 million in cuts to travel and subsistence, R24,4 million in cuts to
our advertising budget, and R3,3 million in cuts to administrative fees. In
addition, R31 million was saved from personnel expenditure and R34 million
from transfers to our institutions.

With regard to intensifying the fight against corruption, as part of our
ongoing battle against corruption I appointed a National Audit Task Team
last November, headed by the Special Investigating Unit, SIU, working in
partnership with the Auditor-General’s office, our national department, and
provincial government representatives. I’m happy they are here.

The task team is hard at work tracking down those responsible for
corruption, abuse and malpractices. What have they achieved? Working under
the sterling leadership of the Head of the Special Investigating Unit, SIU,
Willie Hofmeyr – somebody I know very well - the team has made tremendous
progress since its appointment and has almost completed its investigation
into abuse of the low-income housing subsidy schemes. Sir, 1 570 officials
have been arrested to date, of whom 1 189 have been convicted, and R38
million has been recovered. We are sad to announce these things, because
government officials should not behave in this manner. This process has
also seen five lawyers struck off the roll. And more is to follow, as we
are undeterred in our resolution to eradicate this plague.

Additionally, it is noteworthy that Cabinet has created an interministerial
task team to address the scourge of corruption, no matter who may be
involved or how high up they are, as the President indicated.

It would be remiss of us not to highlight some fundamental challenges to
the delivery of sustainable human settlements. The first relates to what we
characterise as the legalisation of illegality. This refers to the negative
impact of unintended consequences emanating from certain landmark judicial
rulings on the human settlements mandate. In some cases, court rulings have
forced the amendment of human settlements policy, with severe and unplanned
budgetary consequences. The most recent and far-reaching is a ruling
against the Johannesburg Metropolitan Council, JMC, where the city has been
ordered by the Gauteng High Court to pay rent to a private company on
behalf of illegal occupants until alternative accommodation has been found
for such illegal occupants.

While being dutifully circumspect about the constitutional independence of
the judiciary, the Ministry of Human Settlements is concerned about rulings
that could virtually collapse government budgets and plans where unlawful
behaviour, in this case illegal occupation of land and buildings, is
legitimised by a series of court rulings. It is not amiss to say that if
they were to occupy this House and were determined to do so, you’d have to
find alternative accommodation for such people.

My colleague, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, Jeff
Radebe, has been mandated by Cabinet to take the lead towards the
resolution of this matter, in consultation with Human Settlements. This
House will need to itemise this discussion.

Of equal concern are bureaucratic blockages which affect every step of
human settlements delivery. As part of its outcomes-based approach,
government has resolved that we must make our work simpler, reduce
compliance work that adds no value, and focus our energies on a few
deliverables, and do them well. The Ministry of Human Settlements could not
agree more.

We conclude by saying that we remain seized with our fundamental mission of
rolling out sustainable human settlements. We do not underestimate the
enormity of the task involved. We appreciate and welcome the constructive
criticism that has always come from this House, particularly from the
select committee. We are equally encouraged by the comments and sense of
common purpose shown by our human settlements MECs.

We are enthused by the fact that our institutions are ready to be in the
forefront of the drive to create sustainable human settlements. We remain
sincere in our dialogue with the poorest of the poor. We also remain
convinced that the unfolding strategy around Human Settlements 2030 is the
right one, and builds upon the other achievements in this area over the
past 16 years. This Ministry carries a responsibility to all South
Africans, who have the right not just to a home but also to privacy,
security and comfort in their homes within the human settlements in which
they live in. I still repeat that I hope Public Works will come on board
with part of their budget. Chairperson, I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP, hon colleague Minister Sexwale - I am the landlord-general and I will
put up your rent! - hon Deputy Minister Bogopane-Zulu and hon Deputy
Minister Kota, members of the provincial executive councils, hon delegates,
hon members, fellow South Africans and ladies and gentlemen, looking back
at the past 15 years since the advent of our democracy, we can confidently
proclaim that a lot has been done but much more still needs to be done. Our
challenge therefore, in the coming years, is to ensure that we maintain the
gains we’ve made in committing ourselves to the values of our founding
forebears since the advent of the ANC almost 100 years ago. We dare not
fail them.

It was in this spirit last year that I gave an undertaking that the
Department of Public Works would be physically and culturally reconfigured
to raise the bar in the execution of its mandate and to improve delivery of
property development and management. This strategy aims to improve
functional efficiencies, inject new performance energy, improve optimal
service delivery and enhance organisational excellence. These are tenets
upon which our government’s strategic outcomes have been rooted, and which
we have signed an agreement with the President to carry out.

In the fulfilment of these strategic outcomes, the department welcomes the
allocation of R6,4 billion for the financial year 2010-11. In addition, the
department will, through the network of its regional offices, execute the
R2,4 billion on behalf of our client departments, injecting the much-needed
capital and stimulating economic activities in various provinces. We have
started reconfiguring the network of our regional offices, strengthening
our presence in the provinces and making the structure more responsive to
service delivery imperatives at the point of contact with the clients.

This is because the department, through its competencies in the
construction and property development industries, plays a pivotal role in
contributing to the integrated economic growth of the developmental state.
In utilising these funds, the department gives effect to accelerating
shared growth by continuing to roll out a state-led infrastructure
investment programme, and promoting strategic investments in productive
activities.

In line with our ethos to raise the bar in service delivery and client
relationship, the department has handed over the pristine Civitas Building
in central Pretoria to the Department of Health. This is to ensure that
they have integrated head office accommodation out of which they will drive
policies to improve health services in the country.

It has also handed over the completed phase one of the renovated Waterkloof
Airbase to the Department of Defence for utilisation. Phase two of the
defence project, encompassing the upgrade of taxiways and storm water
drainage, is due for completion in May 2010.

In the Northern Cape we have completed the building of the new-generation
prison in Kimberley, and handed over the magistrate’s court in Colesberg.

While work has began with the construction of the correctional facility in
Tzaneen in Limpopo, our building programme is extensive and more
infrastructure-related projects will be delivered in the country,
increasing our fixed asset investment in the benefiting provinces.

Inherent in our capital programme will be the accelerated drive to improve
access to all state buildings under our care in the country for persons
with disabilities. This will align the department’s draft policy framework
for persons with disabilities, which aims to promote employment equity,
social inclusion and economic empowerment, with the ethos of a caring
nation.

The Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, remains our government-wide
poverty alleviation programme through labour-intensive opportunities.
Through this implementation of protocols that have been signed with the
premiers and MECs of provinces we will, from Monday 10 May 2010, be
embarking on road shows to maintain the momentum in maximising efforts to
realise the outcomes of this programme. The contribution of the provinces
and local government in the attainment of the EPWP targets is commendable
and their continued co-operation will be vital. I wish to call on all the
premiers and MECs to optimise the benefits in the interests of accelerated
service delivery.

Contrary to conventional perception, the EPWP is not a “numbers game” but
is an essential imperative to promote a people-centred and people-driven
development project and programmed delivery service.

The recent handing over of the pilot projects of three bridges in the local
municipalities of Intsika Yethu, Port St Johns and Umzimvubu in the Eastern
Cape is indicative of a responsive government. They were constructed as a
result of the Department of Public Works funding the project and utilising
the specific bridge-making expertise of the Department of Defence and
Military Veterans. As a result, schoolchildren and the elderly can now
safely cross rivers to get to schools and clinics without risk to life and
limb, especially when rivers are flooded.

On the recent visit to EPWP projects I was introduced to men and women who
are working selflessly and tirelessly to preserve our precious flora and
fauna under the Working on Fire and Working for Water projects of the
programme. Some of those beneficiaries are with us today and we commend
their courage and diligence.

The department will strive to ensure best use of the existing assets and to
balance the ownership and lease portfolio. Furthermore, by 2013, 90% of
state land will be vested in accordance with the national vesting plan,
developed in consultation with the provincial governments and the
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform.

A task team chaired by me, which includes Ministers Nkwinti and Gordhan,
the Auditor-General and the Accountant-General, has as its key focus the
management of state property. We will be reconvening shortly to consider
the technical report from the team headed by the Accountant-General.

The plan to establish the final amnesty call Campaign is quite advanced,
and the launch of this initiative in this financial year will further
encourage those in illegal possession or occupation of state assets to
surrender them without having to face prosecution. I invite hon members to
join me in the lead to seek, recover and return to the government those
assets that were siphoned from the state, particularly during the
transition from the Bantustan system. This will help us to bring closure to
our asset register enhancement initiative.

Transformation in the property sector in provinces remains a challenge, as
the property market remains recalcitrant in the face of transformation, and
government has been forced to transact with entities that are empty of
transformation and monopolistic in outlook. An intervention is under way
currently to sharpen the application of our black economic empowerment
property management proposition and the Property Charter, which seek to
ensure that we promote real economic transformation in the property sector.

On the matters raised by the Auditor-General in his last report, I’m
pleased to announce that the process of cleaning up the Property Management
Trading Entity, PMTE, is at an advanced stage. This includes financial
systems integration, risk management and a substantial reduction in the
debtors’ book. The department is also finalising the business case on the
establishment of the Property Management Entity, PME, as a strategic
measure to improve management of its asset portfolio and enhance the value
chain. It is envisaged that the PME will offer professional, seamless and
integrated functionality, thus restoring value for money, improving
operational efficiencies, offering quality service delivery and achieving
client satisfaction.

Ours is a procurement-intensive environment, and the lack of timely payment
by government to small, medium and micro enterprises has been raised. This
has to stop. The launch of our Re Ya Patala – We Pay – initiative by the
department in 2009 has committed us to ensuring adherence to the 30-day
payment policy, as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, for
services rendered. As such, we will continue to monitor that this practice
is not breached and reinforce this principle through Minmec.

In helping the country to host the Fifa tournament, the department has co-
operated with the hosting cities in the provinces. This is expediting the
completion and handover of stadia through undertaking regular technical
assessments of the construction projects. This is in addition to the
construction regulatory regime that the department established through the
Construction Industry Development Board, CIDB, which has enabled
construction companies to be timeously and appropriately graded, ensuring
that there are minimal comebacks. In addition, we have finalised various
cross-border projects, which will have positive spin-offs for local
economies.

Public Works is an area of concurrent legislative authority listed in
Schedule 4 of the Constitution. Both the provincial legislatures and
national Parliament have legislative competence in relation to the matters
listed in this Schedule. The concurrence often leads to some confusion in
practical terms, and requires a closer study of other constitutional
provisions regarding which sphere of government will prevail over another
and under what circumstances such prevalence is permissible.

There are vexing issues that we like to discuss, not least the issue of
property rates and taxes, which from time to time frustrates the delivery
of services and negatively affects the viability of local governments. The
present confusion brought by the allocation for and subsequent payment of
rates and taxes is a case in point. The devolution of budgets for property
rates and taxes to provinces was effected in April 2008. However, we
continue to experience challenges around late payments, poor billing
systems and processing of invoices, and capacity challenges.

The department is working with the provinces, together with Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, the SA Local Government Association,
Salga, and the National Treasury to streamline processes to clear the
backlog. Achieving our strategic imperatives demands that the department
attracts and retains the relevant skills formation. Equally, it requires
that the department be properly structured and have proper systems,
processes and policies. As part of our turnaround plan we will ensure that
critical skills are concentrated in the core business of the department.
This is to bring about an agile, responsive and result-driven organisation
supported by prudent systems and information technology.

As part of promoting accountability and integrity management, the
department has commissioned the services of the Special Investigating Unit.
As my colleague has said, it is unfortunate that we as the government have
to rely on the services of the Special Investigating Unit to do what we are
getting paid to do. But this follows consistent allegations of financial
mismanagement, deliberate inefficiencies, escalation of costs,
noncompliance with proper supply chain management processes, a lack of
integrity around the procurement processes, and wasteful and fruitless
expenditure in the department. Fraud and corruption remain a cancer that
eats away at service delivery. This will not be tolerated and I remain
steadfast in rooting out all forms of corruption within the department.

Our public entities must share our vision and become responsive to our
developmental agenda. The Independent Development Trust, IDT, as the
development agency within the Public Works family, will continue to pursue
its developmental model of social infrastructure delivery, in particular in
areas that are economically deprived.

In my interaction with emerging contractors, they have raised their
concerns and suggestions on some of the registration regulations. I have
engaged the CIDB to review some of these regulations in a manner that will
progressively benefit emerging contractors.

By the same token, the Council for the Built Environment, CBE, and the
professional councils continue to work together to increase the number of
university programmes accredited by the professions. The CBE, the six
councils and sector stakeholders will continue in the important role they
play in enabling the human resource development strategy in the built
environment in an effort to reduce scarce skills shortages.

In the case of Agrément South Africa, the agency will fill an important
role by facilitating the introduction, application and use of innovative
and nonstandard construction products. It is important for us to finalise
an organisational model that will best enable Agrément to significantly
increase its delivery capability over the next cycle.

On the legislative front, the Expropriation Bill will be tabled next year.
It is currently receiving attention in our department and is co-ordinated
with the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform. The joint
technical teams are at work and both Ministers will be receiving reports
soon. As a department, we are of the view that this legislation is
imperative for real economic transformation in our country, more
importantly as we move towards the centenary of the Land Act of 1913.

The review of the State Land Disposal Act of 1961 is currently receiving
urgent attention. Equally, the review of the department’s White Paper is in
the pipeline.

As I conclude, I would like to reiterate that as part of reclaiming our
mandate, we will have to revisit the resolution that devolved the capital
budgets to line departments. We will be engaging with Parliament and the
Cabinet on this matter to ensure that proper consultations are done as we
seek to improve instruments of efficiency and service delivery.

As hon members are aware, the NCOP occupies a unique position in our
constitutional system of governance. This derives from the fact that it is
the only institution within this system that straddles all three spheres of
our co-operative governance construct - the national, provincial and local.
I am certain that the NCOP will rise to this challenge and continue to
stand in the front ranks of the institutions in our country, committed to
building a people-centred society consistent with the founding visions of
our movement.

I wish to thank the Chairperson, the hon Minister of Human Settlements, the
Deputy Ministers, the MECs present and all committee members of the select
committee, as well as the members of this House, for giving us this
opportunity. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Chairperson, hon Minister of Human Settlements, hon
Minister of Public Works, hon NCOP members, hon MECs from different
provinces and distinguished guests, during 2009 the Minister made promises
to communities all over South Africa to create sustainable communities with
better housing and better living conditions for all. The DA is afraid that
nothing has changed since then. How can anyone expect changes if government
is not willing to see that policies regarding human settlements are
implemented?

Agb Minister, het dit nie tyd geword om die bul by die horings te pak en
toe te sien dat verantwoordbare amptenare in poste van kritieke belang
aangestel word sodat beloftes in dade omskep kan word nie? Ek wil vir u
bedank vir dit wat u ook vandag gesê het, agb Minister, dat daar ook in
hierdie jaar meer huise gebou gaan word, veral in ons verafgeleë gebiede op
die platteland.

Daar moet ernstig gekyk word na dissipline in u departement. Alle
provinsies was veronderstel om ’n besigheidsplan aan u departement te
voorsien vir behuising wat in die volgende drie tot vier jaar gebou en tot
stand gebring moet word. Ongelukkig het vier van die nege provinsies nie
daarop gereageer nie en is hulle behuisingsplanne, asook hulle begrotings,
nie ingedien nie. Die DA wil weet wat u daaromtrent gaan doen, agb
Minister. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Minister, has the time not come to take the bull by the horns to
ensure that accountable officials are appointed in posts of critical
importance in order to transform promises into actions? I also want to
thank you, hon Minister, for what you said today, that more houses are
going to be built this year, especially in our remote, rural areas.

Serious attention must be paid to the issue of discipline in your
department. All the provinces were supposed to provide your department with
a business plan for housing that had to be built over the next three to
four years. Unfortunately, four of the nine provinces did not respond to
that request and did not submit their housing plans and budgets. The DA
wants to know what you are going to do about that, hon Minister.]

The other related concern is the fact that most of the priorities of the
business plans that have been submitted are not in line with priorities set
by the national department.

Met die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies se besoek aan Limpopo gedurende Maart
was dit skokkend om te sien en te hoor van gemeenskappe waar daar geen of
weinig hulp van die staat is ten opsigte van behuising in hierdie gebiede
nie. In Burgersfort waar baie mynbedrywighede aan die gang is, vind daar
onderlinge struwelinge plaas tussen die myn en gemeenskapslede. Die
bewering word gemaak dat die myne nie hulle hulp met die beplanning en
lewering van infrastruktuur aan die gemeenskappe bied nie. Die plaaslike
owerhede, wie eintlik die verantwoordelikheid moet dra om dienste te lewer,
staan op die kantlyn en geniet die gevegte tussen die myn en die
gemeenskap. Sodoende word daar geen noodsaaklike dienste deur plaaslike
owerhede gelewer nie, wat direk neerkom op algemene pligsversuim en swak
bestuur.

In die Noordwes Provinsie, waar ek vandaan kom, is daar by ongeveer 26
bouprojekte gestop met die bou van huise, as gevolg van ernstige wanbestuur
en korrupsie deur plaaslike bestuur en owerhede. In Vryburg is R216 miljoen
bewillig vir behuising. Na ’n verloop van een jaar is slegs vier huise
voltooi en die ander is half voltooi. Daar kan tans van R27 miljoen geen
rekenskap gegee word deur die kontrakteurs wat met hierdie
behuisingsprojekte besig is nie. In Koster is daar 25 tot 30 Hop-huise wat
die afgelope vyf jaar nog nie voltooi is nie. Die kontrakteurs het hul
betaling ontvang en het verdwyn.

Die algehele toestand rakende behuising in die Noordwes Provinsie is
beroerd, as gevolg van tenderbedrog wat plaasvind en openbare
verteenwoordigers wat betrokke is by bouprojekte, wat ’n konflik van
belange is. Substandaard werk word gelewer; minder sement word byvoorbeeld
gebruik; en huise kraak, bars en val uitmekaar. Daar is ’n algehele gebrek
aan kontrolebeheer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[When the National Council of Provinces paid a visit to Limpopo during
March, it was shocking to see and to hear of communities where the state
rendered either no or very little assistance with regard to housing in
these areas. In Burgersfort where many mining operations are taking place,
there are disputes between the mine and the community. The allegation was
made that the mines are not helping with the planning and delivering of
infrastructure to the communities. The local authorities, who are actually
responsible for service delivery, are standing on the side-line and
enjoying the battles between the mine and the community. Therefore they are
not delivering any essential services, which actually amounts to a
dereliction of duty and poor planning.
In the North West province, where I come from, for the construction of
houses have been stopped approximately 26 building projects due to serious
mismanagement and corruption by local government and authorities. In
Vryburg an amount of R216 million had been allocated to housing. A year
later only four houses were finished and the others are still half-
finished. Currently the contractors who are busy with these housing
projects cannot account for R27 million of that allocation. In Koster there
are 25 to 30 RDP houses which have not been completed over the past five
years. The contractors received their remuneration and then they
disappeared.

The overall situation with regard to housing in the North West province is
appalling, due to tender fraud that took place and public representatives
who are involved with housing projects, which is a conflict of interest.
Substandard work is delivered; not enough cement is used, for example and
the houses are developing cracks and fissures and are falling apart. There
is an overall lack of quality control.]

The DA asks for a serious investigation into the activities of the acting
chief executive officer of the National Home Builders Registration Council,
NHBRC, regarding the contract for 1 431 Reconstruction and Development
houses at an estimated cost of R78 million. We need strong political
leadership with integrity in the Department of Public Works, who will send
a strong message to the senior management of the department and who will
demand responsibility that will lead to effective administration and
quality services to the people of South Africa.

In die Noordwes Provinsie is daar talle geboue wat onvoltooid en onbenut
staan wat die belastingbetaler miljoene rand uit die sak jaag. Schweizer-
Reneke se halfgeboude hofgebou is ’n seer oog vir die gemeenskap wat nou
vir etlike jare onvoltooid en onbenut staan. In Moses Kotane is ’n
halfgeboude munisipale gebou. Miljoene rand is spandeer, en die gebou het
nie eens ’n dak op nie. In Klerksdorp staan ’n halfgeboude musiekskool wat
dreig om toegemaak te word, as gevolg van sy onvoltooidheid. In Merafong
City in Gauteng staan ’n opgegradeerde polisiestasie onbenut en
verwaarloos, as gevolg van swak beplanning en word nou deur vandale
geplunder en verwoes.

Die DA wil weet hoe die regering kan toelaat dat miljoene rand so vermors
word en hoe die Departement van Openbare Werke nie tot verantwoording
geroep kan word deur die agb Minister nie. ’n Dringende versoek word tot
die Minister gerig dat bogenoemde strukture wat ’n begroting gehad het, wat
goedgekeur is en waar projekte nie voltooi is nie dringend ondersoek moet
word en dat verslag gelewer moet word oor wat van die fondse geword het.
Die provinsies het onderpresteer en moet tot verantwoording geroep word
deur die departement en die agb Minister.

Ten slotte, die DA wil die Minister gelukwens met sy besluit om van
afgetrede professionele persone se dienste gebruik te maak waar leemtes
ontstaan het in die departement. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In the North West province there are many buildings that are unfinished
and unused and costing the taxpayer millions of rand. The court building in
Schweizer-Reneke is an eyesore for the community, because it has been left
unfinished and unused for many years. In Moses Kotane there is a half-
finished municipal building. Millions of rand has been spent and the
building doesn’t even have a roof. In Klerksdorp there is a half-finished
music school that is threatened with closure, because it is half-finished.
In Merafong City in Gauteng, an upgraded police station is unused and
neglected, due to poor planning and now it is being ransacked and destroyed
by vandals.

The DA wants to know how the government can allow millions of rand to be
wasted like that and how the Department of Public Works cannot be called to
account by the hon Minister. An urgent request is made to the Minister that
the above-mentioned structures that had a budget, that had been approved,
but where projects have not been completed, must be seriously investigated
and that a report must be compiled about what became of the funds. The
provinces underperformed and must be held accountable by the department and
the hon Minister.
In closing, the DA wants to congratulate the Minister on his decision to
make use of the services of retired professional people where deficiencies
developed in the department. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M P JACOBS: Chairperson, hon Chief Whip, hon members, Ministers of
Public Works and of Human Settlements, both Deputy Ministers, members of
the executive committee, members of provincial legislatures, and my fellow
Members of Parliament, let me quickly respond to Mr Groenewald. It is only
a blind person who doesn’t see the changes that are taking place in all the
provinces, where our government is making sure that our people are provided
with houses. It is true that the DA is blind, because where it is, it
provides our people with open toilets without walls! [Interjections.]

Let me hasten my response, and put it up front, by saying that we support
both budgets unreservedly. Let me caution that this is not a blank cheque
but an instrument to be used to complete the journey that was started upon
by our forebears in Bloemfontein in 1912, which culminated in a programme
of action that was crafted by delegates from all walks of life in Kliptown
when they attended the Congress of the People in 1955 - not in 2008.
[Interjections.] Their vision was to create a united, democratic,
nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous South Africa.

It is a journey that has brought us to where we are standing today. This
vision is succinctly explained in the Freedom Charter, which states:

    All people shall have the right to live where they choose, be decently
    housed and to bring up their families in comfort and security;


    Unused housing space to be made available to the people;
    Rent and prices shall be lowered, food plentiful and no one shall go
    hungry;


    Slums shall be demolished, and new suburbs built where all have
    transport, roads, lighting, playing fields, crèches and social centres;

This was not said by the Minister of Human Settlements or by me, but by
those who converged on Kliptown in 1955.

Let me take the debate further by quoting what Marx and Engels said, “If
man is shaped by environment, his environment must be made human”. It is in
this context that the President established the Department of Human
Settlements to deal with the programme of action which was placed before us
to complete the task of the delegates who attended the Congress of the
People in 1955 — not in 2008.

We are appealing to you, hon Minister, to let us make the environment of
our people more human by providing them with decent houses, roads,
lighting, playing fields, crèches and social centres. This is not something
new, because when the apartheid regime were building suburbs, they provided
people with good infrastructure even before erecting houses. Our people
deserve nothing less than what is provided in suburbs.

Whilst we have made strides in addressing the housing backlog, much still
has to be done. The challenges are immense in relation to what we have
achieved. In all of the protests, the battle cry is for the provision of
houses.

We request that you fast-track the accreditation of municipalities to build
houses for their own residents. The process is very slow. There is no
commitment from the department to giving capacity and support to all
municipalities. We need to come up with a plan that will capacitate
municipalities. We should identify and target municipalities that can be
put into this programme, especially municipalities where there is a huge
housing backlog. This should be processed and installed in phases until all
municipalities are put into the programme.

The intention is to cut out the middleman. The resources that normally go
the middleman will increase housing allocations. This will also assist in
job creation and the provision of skills.
Whilst we are addressing the plight of the poor, we should be mindful of
not lowering the standards of the middle class by dragging them deeper into
poverty. The subsidy that is provided to them is insufficient. The banks
are still charging them high interest rates.

Ke a leboha Letona hobane o boletse hore le e shebile taba ena. [I thank
you, Minister, because you have mentioned that you are looking into this
matter.]

Hon Minister, you are leading a department which has been ravaged by
corruption. Corruption is a cancer that is devouring the benefits that are
intended for downtrodden and deserving communities. We met with your
departmental officials, but there was no anticorruption plan in their
presentation. We are not aware of how you envisage combating this practice
and rooting the cancer out of the bones. The time for self-enrichment is
over.

Ke a leboha hape hobane puong ya hao o boletse hore ho na le mehato e le e
nkang ho thibela monyofonyofo. [I thank you because in your speech you
mentioned that you are taking steps to prevent corruption.]

Last month we commemorated the death of Chris Hani, a death and loss from
which we cannot recover, even today. This is what a British journalist,
John Carlin, had to say about him:
    If Nelson Mandela was the patriarch, the jailed Messiah, Hani was the
    man with whom activists identified on a more familiar level. He was the
    brother in arms, an idol among the black youth, the symbol of armed
    resistance, before they even knew what he looked like.


    His charisma survived the legend.

I am just thinking aloud, Mr Minister. What would you say to Comrade Chris
if you were to meet him tomorrow? I know these would be the questions he
would be asking: “We were in the trenches together, and is this the society
we fought for and sacrificed for our entire lives? Is this the society for
which we fought and for which I laid down my life? Is this the society that
we tried to create, where the poor are still poor and the rich are becoming
increasingly richer? Is this how we wanted to break the monopoly on capital
and distribute the wealth of the country to ordinary people?” I know he
would ask you all these questions, on and on.

Let me quote his words from the book entitled Hani: A Life Too Short:

    I’ve never wanted to spare myself because I feel there are people who
    are no longer around who died for this struggle. What right do I have to
    hold back, to rest, to preserve my health, to have time with my family,
    when there are other people who are no longer alive — when they
    sacrificed what is precious, namely life itself?

Lastly, Minister, he would be saying to you that you have been handed a
baton of leadership, which has been transferred from one ANC generation to
the next. What are you doing with that baton in your hand? Our people
deserve better. I rest my case. Thank you. [Applause.]

Nks P MAJODINA (Mpuma Koloni): Sihlalo obekekileyo weBhunga leSizwe
lamaPhondo, mandithathe eli thuba lokubulela ndithi kuwe ngqanga neentsiba
zayo, abaPhathiswa bobabini, nabaPhathiswa abaziinkosi uThandabantu
noSexwale, amalungu ale Ndlu ebekekileyo, ndibulisa egameni lePhondo
leMpuma Koloni. Sibulela le nxaxheba yokuba lapha xa kuxoxwa ngalo mgaqo-
nkqubo wohlahlo-lwabiwo-mali. Ndima kule ndawo namhlanje Sihlalo ndikhe
ndaba ngomnye weli Bhunga leSizwe lamaPhondo. Iyancumisa ke lo nto yokuba
ukhe ubuye ngoba intaka ibhabha phaya phezulu kodwa isela amanzi apha
phantsi.

Ndilapha, Sihlalo, siphantsi kwelifu elimnyama siyiMpuma Koloni emva
kokuswelekelwa ngabantu abangama-28, kodwa kuye kwanyanzeleka ukuba ndize
kuma apha kule ndawo namhlanje.

Iqondo eliphakamileyo lentswela-ngqesho, ukungabikho kwemigaqo, kunye
nokungabukeki kakuhle kwezakhiwo zikarhulumente kwenza ukuba sibhinqele
phezulu phaya kwiPhondo leMpuma Koloni ekuqinisekiseni ukuba iimpula
zikalujaca ziyayibona kwaye ziyixhamle le nkululeko njengoko befanele
ukwenza njalo. Kukho isanxwe sokuba inkonzo zethu azikhawulezi ukufikelela
ebantwini, kulityalwe ukuba kukho apho sisuka khona kwaye kungenxa yoko
sikule ndawo. Ukongeza apho, abanye babenzi bezo zinto namhlanje bathetha
emva naphambili. Sinqanda amahayi hayi kuba kaloku sikule meko
singazifakanga kuyo.

Kodwa ke, siyaqinisekisa ukuba siya phambili nale meko sifike ikhona.
Abantu bePhondo leMpuma Koloni bayatsho namhlanje ukuba izolo bekungcono
kunayizolo elinye kanti namhlanje kungcono kunayizolo. Umntu obesoloko
exhamla, ehamba kwizitalato ezinetha oko wazalwa akasokuze awubone
umahluko. Thina, xa kwenziwe indlela, nokuba yenziwe ngomhlaba, kuba sisazi
ukuba sisuka phi na siyawubona umahluko. Siyambulela urhulumente okhoyo,
ophetheyo, omagama mathathu kuphela, i-ANC.

Sihlalo wale Ndlu yeBhunga leSizwe lamaPhondo obekekileyo, thina sijonge
iinkqubo ezine phaya, eyokuqala ibubunini-zakhiwo zikarhulumente. Eyona nto
siyenzayo ngokukhawuleza kukuqinisekisa ukuba incwadi yengxelo echazayo
ukuba ezi zakhiwo ziphantsi kukabani na siyayikhawulezisa. Asiyenzi sodwa
ke lo nto. Siye sathatha amatyendyana aphuma ezikolweni naphumelele
eyunivesiti ukuba ancedisane nathi siqinisekise ukuba sinayo irejista
ekholelekayo yezinto ezilulutho ezinomninizo. Le rejista yezinto ezilulutho
ezinomninizo iya kwenza ukuba sazi ukuba zingakanani na izakhiwo.

Sesiqalile ukuqinisekisa ukuba izakhiwo zesizwe zenu, Mphathiswa
uThandabantu, ezikumaphondo ethu, niyasinika ukuze sizisebenzise kuba ziba
zizigqubu zezihange. Sifuna ukuzisebenzisa ngokufanelekileyo. Sicela ukuba,
xa kuphunyezwa olu Hlahlo-lwabiwo-mali, sivunyelwe ukuba eli Sebe
lezemiSebenzi yoLuntu libe neqela eliza kulisa kumaphondo kuncediswe
kuqinisekiso esilwenzayo lwezakhiwo zikarhulumente jikelele.

Kumcimbi werhafu yeenkonzo kunye nerhafu jikelele ... (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs P MAJODINA (Eastern Cape): Hon Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, let me take this opportunity to thank you, the two hon
Ministers, and the hon Ministers who are also traditional leaders Nkosi
Thandabantu and Sexwale, members of this hon House, I greet you in the name
of the Eastern Cape. We are grateful for the privilege to be here during
the debate on the budget policy. I stand here today as a former member of
the National Council of Provinces. I am happy to be back here because a
bird might fly high up in the sky but it must still go down to mother earth
to drink water.

I am here, Chairperson, at a time when we, in the Eastern Cape, are
mourning the death of 28 people, but I was compelled to come and stand here
today.

The high rate of unemployment, the lack of roads, and the dilapidated state
of government buildings demand that we pull up our socks in the Eastern
Cape to ensure that the poorest of the poor do not only see but also enjoy
the freedom they are supposed to. There is an outcry that our services do
not reach people fast enough, and that people have forgotten where we come
from and that is why we are where we are now. In addition to that, those
who are responsible for this situation are speaking in riddles today. We
are desperately trying to control a situation that we did not bring upon
ourselves.

However, we assure you that we are moving forward with the prevailing
situation. The people of the Eastern Cape are saying today is better than
yesterday and yesterday was better than two days ago. Someone who has been
privileged, travelling on tarred roads ever since he was born will never
see the difference. To us, when a road has been constructed, even if it is
a gravel road, because we know where we come from, we see the difference.
We thank the present ruling government, the ANC.

Hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, we are focusing on
four programmes in our province, the first one being the ownership of
government buildings. We are immediately attending to the asset register
which records details of ownership. We are not doing it alone. We have
involved the youth that have just finished school and those who have just
graduated from university to assist us in order to ensure that we have a
credible asset register. This asset register will enable us to know how
many buildings belong to the government.

We have already started to ensure that your national buildings, hon
Minister Thandabantu, which are in our provinces, are handed over to us so
that we can use them because they end up being criminal hotspots. We want
to utilise them appropriately. We appeal that, when this budget is
approved, the Department of Public Works must be allowed to organise a team
which will be deployed to the provinces to help in generally ensuring the
registration of government buildings.

With regard to the issue of service charges and tax in general ...]

... in the spirit of intergovernmental relations we have established a
municipal finance unit through which we will provide a hands-on approach in
assisting municipalities to bill and invoice us correctly.

Sicinga ukuba sinolo xanduva xa sisebenza njengoorhulumente abamanyeneyo.
Ubuninzi beendawo esingabaninizo ezikhoyo siza kuzinikezela koomasipala
bethu kuba sivuselela iidolophu ezincinane khon’ ukuze zibukeke kakuhle.
Oku kwakudala ukuba kubekho nemisebenzi kwakuzo.

Ngokuphathelele kumcimbi woMthetho woLawulo lweZinto eziLulutho wama-2007
ezingenakuHanjiswa zikaRhulumente, i-Giama ngamafutshane, uyayazi
uMphathiswa nesebe ukuba bathi xa bekhumsha kule Ndlu yeBhunga leSizwe
lamaPhondo bathi kukho into ebizwa ngokuba yi-unfunded mandate [ugunyaziso
olungabelwanga mali]. Lwafika ke ugunyaziso olungabelwanga mali kwaye yiyo
loo nto ingakwazi ukugqibelela i-Giama. Kodwa ke asihlelanga sibe sikhalaza
singenzi nto. Ikhona into esiyenzayo ngokuqinisekisa ukuba siseke ikomiti
edibanisa onke amasebe aseMpuma Koloni. Oku kwakuqinisekisa ukuba
akuthathwa nje izakhiwo zibekwe kwiSebe lezemiSebenzi yoLuntu kodwa isebe
ngalinye lakuthi liqinisekise ukuba lisinike eziphi na izakhiwo ukuze
umPhicothi-zincwadi xa esenza ingxelo ekupheleni konyaka-mali ayazi ukuba
sinezakhiwo ezingakanani na. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We think we have that responsibility when we work as united governments.
The majority of buildings that we own will be handed over to the
municipalities because we want to revive small towns so that they can be
beautiful. We want them to be just as they were in the olden days; jobs
should also be available in those small towns.

With regard to the Government Immovable Asset Management Act of 2007, or
Giama, the Minister and the department know that the National Council of
Provinces has what is called in English an unfunded mandate. We received an
unfunded mandate; as a result Giama could proceed perfectly. But, we are
not just sitting, complaining and doing nothing. There is something that we
are doing and that is establishing a committee that includes all branches
in the Eastern Cape. This will ensure that buildings are not just
registered under the Department of Public Works but each department will
ensure which buildings it has handed over so that when the Auditor-General
compiles his audit at the end of the financial year, he knows how many
buildings we actually have.]

Modula-setulo, ka boikokobetso, rona se re qadile ka matla ho sheba ka
leihlo le ntjhotjho meaho kaofela e teng ya mmuso, hore re tsebe hore re
tiisehe hore ena ke ya mang; ekaba ke ya hara profensi kapa ke ya mmuso wa
naha? (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, with respect, we have already started looking with keen
interest into all government buildings in order for us to ascertain who
they belong to, whether they belong to the province or to national
government.]

Indibano ngepropati ebesiyibambile ibonakalise ukuba kukho ukuhamba
ngonyawo lonwabu ngokubhekisele ekubeni abantu bakowethu baxhamle apha
kumcimbi wepropati. Thina sisithathile isigqibo kwaye asinazintloni ngaso.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The property summit that we held showed that there is very slow progress
when it comes to our people enjoying the advantages of the property
industry. We have taken the decision and we are not ashamed of it.]

Our resolution is to ensure that we are not going to renew any lease unless
it is black economic empowerment, BEE, compliant. We are not ashamed of
that. We have a mandate, given to us by the electorate, to transform the
property industry.

Ndivumele nawe MPhathiswa ukuba ndithi njengokuba ubuhlabe ikhwelo lokuba
mazibuye iibhokhwe zethu. Kufuneka enyanisweni sibange ukubuyiselwa
kwegunya. Senza kanye loo nto thina silisebe. Sithi mazibuye iibhokhwe
zethu. Ndicinga ukuba obekekileyo uMnu Groenewald akaqondi ukuba lenza
ntoni na iSebe lezemiSebenzi yoLuntu. ISebe lezemiSebenzi yoLuntu lisebenza
njengexhadi lenkonzo yezibonelelo. Ekugqibeleni ezinye zemali zihleli phaya
kumasebe lize iSebe lezemiSebenzi yoLuntu lona lenze ulungelelwaniso
lokusetyenziswa kwazo. Mhlawumbi kufuneka akhe anikwe iMfundo esiSiseko
yaBantu abaDala, u-Abet ngamafutshane, njee mahala ukuze aqonde ukuba
sindawoni na ngoku. [Uwelewele.]

Kubalulekile ukuba ndichaze ukuba sizama ukuphuhlisa oonokontraki
basekhaya. Umcimbi weBhodi yoPhuhliso loShishino loKwakha,i-CIDB
ngamafutshane, uyabonzakalisa abantu bakowethu. Uninzi lwemithethwana
yeCIDB - emininzi sasiyiphakamisile kwindibano ebizwa ngokuba yi-Minmec -
iyafuna ukuqwalaselwa kuba abantu bakowethu ibakhuphela ngaphandle kulo
mcimbi wokwakha esifuna ukuba uguqulwe. Kukho nemithethwana esibopha
izindla neenyawo esekhoyo, ingakumbi leyo yayiseyakuba yeyaseTranskei
naseCiskei. Asinakho ukuyivumela le mithethwana ukuba isibuyisele umva emva
kweminyaka eli-16 sayifumanayo inkululeko. Asinakho ukuyamkela into yokuba
sibe nemihlaba esingakwaziyo ukuthetha ngayo kuba kusithiwa iphantsi
kweTranskei; asinaTranskei ngoku.

Ngokuphathelele kwiNkqubo eYongezelelweyo yeMisebenzi yoLuntu, i-EPWP
ngamafutshane, siliphondo leMpuma Koloni besijolise kuma-60 000 yemisebenzi
kodwa le Ndlu iyayazi ukuba thina sihambe saqabela ngaphaya. Sibophe
omfutshane, sabhinqela phezulu, sadala imisebenzi engama-78 000. Bendiba le
Ndlu iza kuqhwaba xa ndithetha loo nto. Makungaqhwatyelwa ezimbi zodwa.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Njengoko ulwakhiwo lwemigaqo ludityaniswe kwisebe lethu ngomhla 1 Epreli
2010, ndiyaqonda ukuba abantu abazilandelayo izinto babonile ukuba
sesiqalile phaya eCoffee Bay. Sithi yonke into eyakhiwayo mayize kwiSebe
lezeMisebenzi yoLuntu sisebenze ngayo ukuze sikwazi ukuphucula iinkonzo
zabantu bakowethu. Sisebenzisa ulutsha phantsi kwenkqubo yeNkonzo yeSizwe
yoLutsha. Sithathe ulutsha olungama-500. Kulo nyaka-mali siza kuthatha
amanye ama-500 siqinisekise ukuba baziCadets zethu ekwenzeni izindlu
zikarhulumente zibe ntle. Njengokuba usazi ukuba oomama badla ngokuqaba
izinto ezibenza babe bahle. Thina siza kufaka izakhiwo zikarhulumente
izinto eziza kuzenza zibe ntle zithi qoko. Izakhiwo zikarhulumente ziza
kubonakala kwaye zicace. Nokuba ubani uhamba phi na uyakuthi abone ukuba
esi sakhiwo sesikarhulumente. Asizokucenga singazokuthandisa mntu mayela
noku; sinegunya esilinikiweyo.

Xa ndigqibezela ke Sihlalo, sifuna ukuqhogana neSebe lezoKhuselo naMaqgala
oMkhosi ukuze siqhubeke nalaa nkqubo yokwakha iibhulorho ukongeza
kwezintathu esele bezakhile. Loo nto iyakwenza ukuba kwaziwe ukuba amajoni
asekhaya awalindanga imfazwe nje kuphela kodwa anoxanduva lokunikezela
ngezakhono zawo kuluntu, ingakumbi ezi zokwakha iibhulorho. Amajoni
asincedile mayela nalo mba.

Mandibulele kwikomiti yeenkonzo zoluntu endandikhe ndangusihlalo wayo apha
kule Ndlu yoWiso-mthetho ngenkxaso kwakunye nokufika kwiphondo lethu yenze
ulongamelo. SiliPhondo leMpuma Koloni sima apha sisithi siyayixhasa iVoti
yoHlahlo-lwabiwo-mali kunye neNtetho yomGaqo-nkqubo eyenziwa apha kule Ndlu
ngelithi ziza kuphucula ubomi babantu bakowethu. Xa kufuneka sinyuse izinga
lemisebenzi alikho elinye isebe elinokwenza loo nto. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Allow me, hon Minister, to say as you have made the call to claim our
assets back, we must indeed reclaim the right to have authority again. We
are doing just that as a department. We are saying let us reclaim what is
rightfully ours. I think the hon Groenewald does not understand what the
Department of Public Works is doing. The Department of Public Works
functions as the backbone of service delivery. Finally some budget
allocations are not spent in the various departments and the Department of
Public Works spends it. Perhaps he must be given adult basic education and
training, Abet, free of charge so that he can understand where we are now.
[Interjections.]

It is important that I explain that we are trying to develop local
contractors. The issue of the Construction Industry Development Board,
CIDB, is crippling our people. The majority of CIDB rules — we pointed
those out in the Mintec summit — need to be considered because they exclude
our people with regard to building regulations that we want to change.
There are rules which are binding our hands and feet that still exist,
especially those which were applicable to the former Transkei and Ciskei.
We cannot allow a situation in which there is land we cannot talk about
because it belongs to the Transkei; we no longer have the Transkei now.

With regard to the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, the province of
the Eastern Cape had targeted 60 000 jobs, but this House knows that we
have exceeded that target. We are working diligently, with enthusiasm and
we have created 78 000 jobs. I thought this House would applaud when I said
that. Let us not only applaud the bad things. [Applause.]

Since road construction was incorporated into our department on 1 April
2010, I understand that people who follow issues up have seen that we have
already started at Coffee Bay. We are saying anything that needs to be
built should be brought to Public Works so that we can improve the service
delivery to our people. We are involving the youth under the National Youth
Service. We have selected 500 young people. During this financial year, we
will involve an additional 500 youths and we will ensure that they are our
cadets in the renovation of government houses. As you know, women apply
cosmetics to make themselves beautiful. We are going to install fittings
that will make government buildings beautiful and attractive. Government
buildings will be visible and will stand out. Wherever one is walking, one
will see that that is a government building. We will not plead and we will
not appease anyone regarding this because we have been given a mandate.

In conclusion, Chairperson, we want to form a partnership with the
Department of Defence and Military Veterans in order for us to continue
with the programme of building bridges to add to the three that they have
already built. That will make the people aware that our Defence Force is
not just waiting for war, but also has the responsibility to transfer
skills to the community, especially the skills of building bridges. The
Defence Force has helped us in this regard.

Let me thank the committee on public service – which I was the former
chairperson of in the National Assembly – for their support and the
official oversight visit. As the province of the Eastern Cape, we are
standing here saying that we support the Budget Vote and the policy
statement delivered in this House and we believe that they will improve the
lives of our fellow people. If we have to increase the employment rate,
then there is no other department which can do that.]

The nation works because there is Public Works. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! You will all agree that this House has
produced a very good product ... [Applause.] ... and this is the type of
product that we produce in the NCOP. [Laughter.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson and Ministers, the Lebanese-American author,
Kahlil Gibran said:

    Work is love made visible. And if you cannot work with love, but only
    with distaste, it is better that you should leave your work and sit at
    the gate of the temple and take alms of those who work with joy.

Work is defined by some as doing a job for money. Others would say that it
is regular paid work that you do for an employer. Be that as it may, the
concept of jobs and work has become an essential part of our daily
vocabulary, especially for the ANC government in the run-up to the
elections.

We all remember the red election posters in 1994, promising jobs, jobs,
jobs and promoting the ANC election rhetoric of a “better life for all”.
And yes, Chairperson, we all know by now that many of those promises
remained just promises.

Sir, 16 years after liberation many South Africans are, per capita, poorer
and more deprived than before. Despite an era of unprecedented economic
growth for almost 14 years, research suggests that the gap between the rich
and the poor is making South Africa the mostly economically divided country
in the world. Even President Zuma recently admitted that apartheid and the
past cannot be blamed for weak or no service delivery 16 years after the
dawn of democracy.

Departments like Public Works and Human Settlements are, however, the
lifeline and can and must be the catalyst to address these challenges,
dealing especially with the poor and the marginalised. These departments,
with the leadership and guidance of two able Ministers, must take to heart
the advice of self-made billionaire and industrialist Dr Anton Rupert, when
he said that you cannot move forward whilst you are looking in the rear-
view mirror.

In addressing these challenges, the vision and objectives of the department
that are being discussed here today seem to be on the right track to
transform South Africa, as envisaged in the Constitution, and primarily
based on the Freedom Charter accepted by the Congress of the People in
1955, and very recently in 2008. [Laughter.] We can therefore not accuse
the government of not having plans and policies.

However, there is general consensus that there is sometimes not the ability
in general to implement these plans, which are lacking and are the single
biggest impediment to achieving the goals and service delivery targets of
the government.

When these targets are not met for various reasons, the responses by the
President, Ministers and government officials are often very strange and
sometimes border on the ludicrous. The best example was the dilemma created
by the government regarding the promise of creating 500 000 jobs, despite
the warning of the reality of the serious impact of the worldwide
recession. Instead of accepting their failure, the goalposts were once
again shifted by referring to job opportunities created by the government
and refraining from the real issue, which is jobs, hon Minister. In
reality, many of these jobs are an insult to the dignity of the people that
are being supported.

Of greater importance must be the self-worth of the individual, work
ethics, productivity of our nation, meeting our needs and addressing the
housing backlogs through building sustainable human settlements. To achieve
that, it is necessary to acknowledge the wise words of Gibran and not allow
a situation where the job seekers and workers of South Africa “sit at the
gate of the temple and take alms of those who work with joy”.

In conclusion, Chairperson, I want to thank hon Bloem and hon Tolo for
putting the Department of Public Works in a position for once to get the
real audit of the assets in various parks. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy
Minister, MECs present and hon members, good afternoon. I really hope that
one day I will stand at the podium and never have to hear about the assets,
the register and everything that goes with those. That would indeed be a
day I would be very grateful for.

Let me say that in the brief opportunity that the NCOP has awarded us I
want to take members on a journey, so that by the time the 15 minutes
allocated to me by the Chair expire, we will have found a way to master our
minds.

As hon members, it’s important that in our responsibilities and
obligations, and in carrying out the mandate that the electorate has given
us, we find a way to cultivate our minds so that they can blossom beyond
our expectations. The quality of our lives can determine the quality of our
thoughts. In that way we will begin to move beyond recognising mistakes to
regarding them as lessons, and recognise setbacks as opportunities for
personal expansion and spiritual growth. Furthermore, in that way, I
believe, this democracy will indeed thrive, especially for us as leaders.

We will also be closer by a step to the secret of happiness, which is very
simple: Find out what you truly love and invest your energies directly in
that, once and for all. It will not only be about carrying out the
electoral mandate, but also about what we love, the energies we invest and
the desired outcomes. Therefore, our lives will be even more meaningful.

Allow me to take a few minutes to talk about the issues of the asset
register, as well as asset management in particular. I hope that all the
members who have it in their speeches will start editing them now. In that
way I will have answered some of the issues that hon members were going to
raise.

We’ve moved ahead as the Department of Public Works. When we were here last
year, we spoke about developing an electronic system that would enable us
as a country to move one step closer to the issue of asset management and
asset investment. I would like to request members, at their earliest
convenience, to visit the exhibitions outside where we will give members an
opportunity to understand what iE-Works is. This is a system that is going
to assist us in managing our assets.

With your permission, Chair, let me confirm that we know what we own and
what we are busy doing is appropriating it accordingly. The MEC from the
Eastern Cape has actually highlighted and reminded us of the challenges
with regard to the homelands. I will, therefore, not go into that.

Since the NCOP is responsible in a way for provinces and provincial
oversight, we would like to request hon members, during their performance
of oversight, to check the provinces for us, as we are taking them through
a migration system into iE-Works.

In this manner we can, as a country, once and for all have one container
that can house all our assets. We can also get the whole history of each
asset properly registered with its maintenance, condition, assessments and
everything reflected, without losing the different spheres. At the press of
a button one will be able to know whose building it is and who it is vested
in. This whole system will also assist us in ensuring that we resolve the
issues around the property rates. We will also move a step further in the
devolutions, as the Minister said in his speech.

As outlined by the Minister, it will also take us a step further in
assisting provinces and municipalities with billing issues, invoicing and
the capacity related to that. We would really like to urge members to
please join us as we move the country to the iE-Works system, acknowledging
the challenges and the teething problems, as well as the capacities related
to it. Together, we know, we will be able to have one asset register that
we can all be proud of.

The Government Immovable Asset Management Act, Giama, has been alluded to.
We are very close to compliance with Giama. We are calling on provinces and
reminding them that their full Giama compliance is required in 2012. I hope
that as the members have outlined the 2010-2011 budget, they will also look
into ensuring that their respective provinces develop not only their user
asset management plans but also their custodian asset management plans.
That way we will guarantee that we meet and we ensure that ...

... silanda iibhokhwe zethu, siyakwazi ukuzigcina kwaye siqinisekile ukuba
ziza kuhlala zikhona amaxesha amaninzi azayo [... we collect our assets, we
know how to look after them and we are certain that they will remain with
us for a long time].

Let me also say that we have heard about the issue of the unfunded mandate.
As the Deputy Minister of Public Works I can say to the MECs for Public
Works that compliance with Giama is the core function. It cannot be an
unfunded mandate. It is important for us to understand that we are dealing
with issues of concurrent functions. Compliance in regard to the
development of the user asset management plans and the custodian asset
management plans remains the core function of the Departments of Public
Works, both nationally and provincially. It is only when we comply with
these that we will indeed be in a better position to deliver the mandate
and collect ibhokhwe zethu [our goats] in a safe condition.

Of course, the development of these management plans remains an issue of
the relevant capacities. I liked the fact that the MEC from the Eastern
Cape indicated that indeed, as we bring in young people in different
capacities through the provincial learnerships, the national Department of
Public Works would like to ensure that provinces are happy and willing to
ensure that we assist those young people that are sent our way. We must
assist them in the development of the asset management plans, the user
asset management plans and the custodian asset management plans. That way
one doesn’t need to spend more money than one really needs to.

If, as provinces, we can get the whole Giama compliance right, it will also
assist us in ensuring that we deal with the issues of the backlog of
maintenance as well as rehabilitation. The Giama will be a tool and an
instrument that we can take to Treasury and actually use to justify our
case. It will also reduce the challenges that we have and the ongoing
nonpayment of property rates because we will all know what we own, where it
is, and how much it actually costs us.

As the Minister said, we can only do all of this if we have completed our
vesting processes. Vesting is extremely important. Even though the
President said we wouldn’t be blaming apartheid, in this case, hon members,
we are very happy to blame apartheid. The reason for that is that it is
only in the former homelands that vesting has not happened. We need to look
at the realities that come with the issues of vesting. As the Department of
Public Works - as the Minister said - we are looking at 31 March 2014 as
the date when South Africa’s land will all be vested.

However, for that to happen, we need surveyors. Currently, we have only 700
registered surveyors on the professional registers, out of whom 476 are in
private practice, while the remainder are in government. That makes our
vesting ambitions a challenge, which will also affect provinces, because
some of the provinces don’t have even one surveyor.

What we are calling for is for the NCOP to partner with us to develop the
implementation of a focused vesting master plan. This plan will enable us
to take all resources and direct them to one province. That way the vesting
can become one focused project and, come 2014, it will definitely be
completed.

I would like to call on the MECs to join the national department as we
implement a survey of women so that we are able to determine what their
impact on construction sites is, what value they add, and what challenges
they are experiencing. That way we will be able to ensure that women can
participate freely, effectively, and to the best of their ability on
construction sites.

We also request hon MECs to partner with us as we move ahead in meeting the
2% compliance set for disabled people. As the Department of Human
Settlements and the Department of Public Works, we need to utilise young
people in a better way, because we are indeed a technical department.

This Budget Vote is being debated at a very important time when the
President has launched the HIV counselling and testing campaign. I would
like to request hon members not only to join in this but also to bring in
their respective legislatures, provinces and constituencies so that we are
able to contribute to the number set of 15 million people.

Let me thank the ANC, which is the party that awarded me an opportunity to
serve, the President, courtesy of whom I serve, the Minister, with whom I
partner in delivering the mandate, the select committee members, the MECs
respectively, the legislatures, and, last but not least, the team in my
office and my family for being there.

Let me conclude by saying that for us to continue to unite this country and
ensure that our provinces function to the best of their ability, it is
important that we do all the other things. But, never forget the importance
of living with unbridled exhilaration. Never neglect to see the exquisite
beauty in all living things. Whether you see it today or tomorrow, always
see it as a gift, and focus on your purpose. If you do that, the universe
will take care of the rest. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members, MECs
and special delegates, this debate takes place at a time when our nation
has lost a veteran human rights activist, Mrs Sheena Duncan, who sadly
passed away a couple of days ago on Tuesday, 4 May 2010, at the age of 78
years.

Mrs Sheena Duncan was a distinguished and unrelenting community activist
for justice and the pursuit of human rights for all South Africans,
particularly the poor, and women. Her life exemplifies devotion to the
highest ideals of justice and freedom when our nation was ravaged by
institutionalised and socially entrenched racial segregation.

As the ANC, we would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family
of Mrs Sheena Duncan. We hope that they find solace in the contribution she
made in the struggle for a nonsexist, just and democratic South Africa.

Chairperson, under apartheid our people were socially, politically and
economically excluded. They were faced with the harshest living conditions,
characterised by systematic exclusion from the labour force through the
lack of opportunities for developing their skills and education.

When the ANC came to power in 1994, it gave an undertaking to devise many
creative ways to redress the legacy of apartheid in order to afford our
people the opportunity to take part in the economy of their country.

We identified the Department of Public Works as central in assisting our
government to tackle the challenges of poverty and unemployment. Looking at
the department’s Budget Vote, we are indeed happy that it is on the path to
moving our people out of the trap of poverty and that we will halve
unemployment by 2014.

Chairperson, the Expanded Public Works Programme is one of the crucial
interventions by our government, which is intended to create both short-
term and ongoing work opportunities for our people. This programme clearly
speaks to the ANC’s commitment to alleviate and reduce unemployment,
poverty and underdevelopment in our communities.

Chairperson, as the ANC we are indeed proud that the Budget Vote of the
Department of Public Works is in line with our Polokwane resolutions to
absorb the unemployed and unskilled through the following: labour-intensive
production methods and procurement policies; significant expansion of the
Public Works programmes, linked to the expansion of economic
infrastructure, and meeting social needs with home-based care and early
childhood development on a massive scale; a much larger National Youth
Service, ensuring the linkage of industrial strategy with key youth
development programmes in the form of an Integrated Youth Development
Strategy; and programmes that target the employment of women.

Chairperson, it is important to note that by the end of December 2009,
480 000 Public Works job opportunities had been created, which is 97% of
the set target. The jobs were in areas where the majority of the poor and
unskilled people are located, such as construction, home and community-
based care, and environmental projects.

The involvement of women, youth and people with disabilities in the
Expanded Public Works Programme is another area that shows that the ANC
remains a caring government that understands the needs and conditions that
are facing our people. We say this because we know that despite the
challenges that our country faces our people know for sure that the ANC
will do everything in its power to move them out of poverty.

We are indeed grateful that during the 2008-09 financial year, the
beneficiaries of the EPWP in KwaZulu-Natal were as follows: 5 219 women,
10 833 youths, and 302 people with disabilities.

In May 2008, North West province reported that it had created 20 708 EPWP
job opportunities in the 2007-08 financial year, and they were divided up
as follows: 8 106 women, 9 497 youths, and 49 people with disabilities.

As at 6 August 2009, the Sakh’abakhi Contractor Development Programme in
Mpumalanga comprised the following Expanded Public Works Programme
beneficiaries: 55% women, 40% youths and 2% people with disabilities.

The economic activities generated by programmes of the Department of Public
Works clearly indicate that our government is working decisively to assist
the poor, particularly women, unemployed youth and those who are unskilled
and therefore unable to access formal employment.

We are indeed happy that the department prioritises women, the youth and
people with disabilities. We are also aware that the department is
currently working on finalising a policy to expand the participation of
people with disabilities in Expanded Public Works Programme projects.

We want to say, hon Minister, that when we visited provinces during our
last Provincial Week with the programme of Taking Parliament to the People,
our people appreciated the interventions of your department in affording
them opportunities to put food on their tables. Many communities told us
stories of how they had survived through the Expanded Public Works
Programme and taken the opportunity to break the cycle of generational
poverty.

Chairperson, our goal of infrastructure development is informed by our
developmental objectives and commitment to building efficient and reliable
assets for our nation. We say this because we know that the creation of
infrastructure is instrumental in assisting us to achieve a number of
secondary socioeconomic goals, including local economic development, SMME
development, black economic empowerment and skills transfer. There are many
more.

We have seen how our people are able to expand their business initiatives
in their communities because they have reliable roads and transport
systems. They are able not only to produce for the local community market
but also to move to central economic centres to sell their products.

Chairperson, a year ago in Mpumalanga, during the handing over of houses to
women and senior citizens, the women in construction made a plea to
Minister Sexwale, the Minister of Human Settlements, to ensure the
prioritisation of women in the provision of houses. [Interjections.] I hope
the Minister remembers what the women said about the 50:50 ratio in giving
women work to do in construction. The ANC supports the Budget Vote. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr B MADIKIZELA (Western Cape): Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, my fellow MECs, hon members of
the NCOP, and ladies and gentlemen, it is indeed fitting that I have an
opportunity to address the NCOP today. This week my department in the
province of the Western Cape is hosting a rental housing showcase week.
Today is also the second day of the interprovincial rental housing forum,
at which all provincial departments are represented, and where they can
share experiences and learn from each other - from both their successes and
their mistakes. This House, too, provides a platform to share different
perspectives from the various provinces. This morning I launched our
province’s tental housing strategy, which spells out our vision for rental
housing in the province and how we intend to work towards that vision over
the next five years.

Rental housing is an important element of our delivery of housing
opportunities. I agree with Minister Sexwale and his department that we
need to grow our rental stock in the province. As I said during my budget
speech, giving away free houses is not sustainable in the long run, but
providing rental stock is, especially through public-private partnerships.

In my department we have created a directory of affordable housing for
human settlements. The key role of that unit will be to build strategic
partnerships with civil society and the private sector, and to increase the
financing and development of affordable housing, both bonded and rental, in
the province. I am sure that the R1 billion that the Minister spoke about,
which is a guarantee fee, will assist us greatly in this regard, but we
must still be proactive in ensuring that financial institutions and
developers partner with us to increase the private sector’s investments in
this market.

But it is not only pragmatism that drives our intention to increase rental
stock. It is also about increasing choices. That is a key principle of the
open opportunity society for all. Not everyone who comes to the Western
Cape wants to make a home here. We are mindful of the fact that some people
come here for economic opportunities, with the intention of returning to
their province of origin one day, or they wish to move from place to place,
seeking employment before settling down. For them, rental might be a better
choice than a permanent home that they own, which locks them into one
place. We need to make that choice available. I believe we need to expand
even further the choices we make available to potential beneficiaries.

Another area where the Western Cape province has found close alignment
between our five-year strategic plan and the plan of the national Minister
and his department is the prioritisation of serviced sites over the next
five years. The national department has a target of 500 000 sites over the
next five years. We intend to contribute about 150 000 sites by 2014-15. In
the context of the limited resources at our disposal, we believe that doing
a little for many, rather than a lot for only a few, is the right approach
to tackling our backlog. Once we have assisted most of our citizens to gain
secure tenure on a site with access to basic services, we can start to
shift the focus of our funding back to the building of top structures.

I must say that this was evident in the area of Du Noon where more than 500
people became victims after the fire on Sunday morning. One of the reasons
we have the problem of fires in our areas is because people are living
under appalling conditions with no services at all. I know that some
critics are saying that it is inferior service that we want to provide as a
department, but I think the point that we are making about this is very
clear. Because of the limited resources in funding that we have, it is
better that we buy Volkswagen Polos for our people now, so that when the
time is right, they can trade in the Volkswagen Polos for BMWs. I think
that is the point that we are making about this approach.

We would like to ask the national Minister to consider increasing the
options available to people receiving transfer of the serviced sites. One
option that I favour is the People’s Housing Process, PHP. I know that the
hon Deputy Minister shares my view, because she spoke passionately about it
at the handing-over ceremony of the first phase of a PHP project in
Philippi last Saturday. One of the reasons why I feel strongly that this
programme needs to be supported is that it has an element of sweat equity,
skills transfer and empowerment. People really take part in the
construction of their houses and, as a result, these are not the kind of
houses that are often sold or rented out, as is the situation in most
areas.

Having beneficiaries actively involved in the planning and construction of
their homes instils a sense of ownership of and appreciation for the value
of their assets. But we have very limited funding for building top
structures. We need to get creative and provide incentives to encourage
people not to wait for the state to build their houses. The R1 billion
guarantee fund will service the gap market, but we need to consider a micro
loan instrument that allows people earning less than R3 500 to gradually
fund the building of their houses.

People must have a choice. They can choose to live in their shacks on a
serviced site provided by the government while they wait for their turn to
receive a house, which might take 5, 10 or 15 years, or they can choose not
to wait and approach their employer or a micro finance institution to start
building their own homes. If we can develop a sustainable lending model and
then add a portion of our allocation every year, we can grow the available
funds, which will allow people to remove themselves from the needs register
at a lower cost to the state. There are, no doubt, challenges and risks to
overcome in this proposal, but I believe we must interrogate it.

Some people will ask why they must pay for a house when the government will
provide them with a free house. My answer to that question is simple: The
government will still provide houses, but it will take us decades to assist
everyone who needs a house. If you have the means and the will to take
charge of your own situation, then I would like to ensure that you have
that option available. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M GOVENDER (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Minister of Human Settlements,
Minister of Public Works, Deputy Ministers of both departments, hon
members, distinguished guests, in this month when we celebrate Africa Day
it is an honour for me to speak in the debate on Vote No 30 of the
Department of Human Settlements and Vote No 6 of the Department of Public
Works.

This speech is being given at a time when we are just emerging from one of
the most severe worldwide economic recessions in recent times. National
economies have been rent asunder; central bankers have thrown themselves at
the financial woes; government in turn has developed packages to rescue us
from these woes; plans have been derailed; elections are being contested
where the state of the economy determines the outcomes; and politics is in
flux.

It is our country’s first recession in 17 years. Although we have fared
better than any other country due to our sound economic policies, the
impact has, nevertheless, been severe. This crisis has cost our economy
about 900 000 jobs, and many households are still weathering the effects of
the recession.

However, unlike many other countries, the basic economic institutions in
South Africa are intact. Owing to our prudent fiscal policies, we neither
had a debt crisis nor experienced a banking crisis. Our principal funder,
the SA Revenue Service, Sars, has recorded an over-recovery of R8,1 billion
for the year on revised targets.

The task remains, however, that we have to do more with less. In KwaZulu-
Natal we have lost approximately 217 000 jobs. As stated by our premier, Dr
Zweli Mkhize, in his state of the province address, our province recorded
an estimated 3,5 million people as food insecure. This means that 3,5
million people do not know where their next meal is coming from. From this
reality, can we hope for foundations for a better future? Not unless we do
all that we should do to optimise resource usage.

Minister Sexwale, in presenting his Budget Vote, spoke of the new outcomes-
based approach to defining our targets and measuring progress. Against this
backdrop, he identified the accelerated delivery of housing opportunities,
access to basic services, more efficient land utilisation, and an improved
property market as four prioritised areas of work.

Under the section of housing opportunities in KwaZulu-Natal, we have
approved approximately 822 projects that have yielded an estimated 569 998
housing opportunities over a period of approximately 15 years. This figure
includes serviced sites to improve the conditions of households, especially
with regard to water and sanitation provision.

For the 2009-10 financial year, we completed a total of 23 587 houses and
serviced 3 806 sites. We estimate that we will build 25 002 houses and
service 8 001 sites in the 2010-11 financial year.

The subsidies that we approved for the last financial year totalled 21 382
and we project approving 23 435 subsidies for the 2010-11 year. These
subsidies will consist of project-linked subsidies, institutional
subsidies, rural subsidies, and credit, noncredit and finance-linked
subsidies.

During 2009-10, our department implemented in situ upgrades and slums
clearance in various municipalities, thereby making progress towards
meeting our objective of eradicating all slums by 2014. We completed a
total of 6 250 houses and serviced 3 506 sites. We anticipate that in the
2010-11 financial year we will complete 6 502 houses and service
7 091 sites.

There has been a substantial increase in overall housing delivery in rural
areas in recent years, particularly in those areas that were excluded by
apartheid planning. Factors contributing to this include the following.
KwaZulu-Natal is, like other provinces, grappling with the worldwide
phenomenon of urbanisation. It calls for a greater focus on rural housing
development that can be a developmental pull factor that addresses rural
neglect.

Sir, 50% of the backlog statistics in our province indicate that there is a
demand for rural housing. Integrated and sustainable human settlement in
rural areas will also provide economic opportunities that make rural
existence a viable choice.

Therefore, we have focused attention over the past three years on promoting
rural development. We have completed a total of 26 328 housing units, which
have benefited approximately 118 000 individuals.

A contributing factor to this accelerated rural development is the rapid
identification and release of rural land through our continued partnership
with and commitment to relevant stakeholders, including the traditional
councils. In line with the national and provincial priority of rural
development, the department will continue to accelerate housing delivery in
rural areas. We have allocated approximately 41% of our budget for this
purpose.

The housing service delivery to rural areas will further be enhanced by the
construction of 44 900 housing units over the Medium-Term  Expenditure
Framework, MTEF, period, thereby injecting further development and
improvement into the lives of people in rural areas. This programme is
destined to benefit an estimated 202 000 individuals over the next three
financial years.

We have also partnered with the Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries, of Water and Environmental Affairs, and of Rural Development and
Land Reform and with private institutions, to ensure that all new housing
units built have gardens and trees. This will assist in the provision of
food security, income generation and export possibilities, thus
contributing to sustainable livelihoods and creating sustainable human
settlements.

Here we must welcome the allocation announced by Minister Sexwale of R1,2
billion for the sanitation programme to contribute to rural infrastructure
development and offset backlogs for the MTEF period.

The Minister also spoke about the fact that our primary focus is on the
poor, but we do have the responsibility for what we afford to middle-income
earners, enabling them to access affordable housing as well. In this
regard, we welcome the announcement by our President of the key new
initiatives to accommodate people whose salaries are above the threshold
for getting government subsidies, but who earn too little to qualify for a
bank mortgage. The establishment of the guarantee fund of R1 billion to
incentivise the private banking and housing sector to develop new products
to meet this housing demand will go a long way in addressing the needs of
the middle-income sector.

In KwaZulu-Natal we have signed a memorandum of understanding, MOU, with
Absa, FNB and Standard Bank, and we envisage signing an MOU with Nedbank
this year. Nedbank is financing part of the Imbali Village in Ngwelezane
project in Empangeni with 150 units reserved for the middle-income group.
FNB is also involved in this project and is financing 500 units. FNB has
further confirmed 7 projects totalling 17 675 affordable housing units.
Standard Bank has committed to producing approximately 4 000 affordable
housing units.

The department will partner with these institutions to ensure that the
planned projects are successfully executed for the affordable housing
market in line with the President’s programme to assist this market through
the National Guarantee Fund, NGF.

Rectification of housing stock built between 31 March 1994 and 31 March
2002 has been consolidated, including the engagement of the National Home
Builders Registration Council, NHBRC, to assist in the completion of
rectification by 31 March 2011.

We have houses in the province that are of a dismal quality due to poor
workmanship, inadequate supervision of the construction process, use of
substandard materials, and poor infrastructure planning. The list could
continue! Government has not been getting value for the money that has been
spent. It has been said that housing delivery has been like transporting
water in a leaking bucket. There is wastage. It is the end user who is
short-changed, and it is the poor who suffer the most while greedy
developers and contractors harvest super profits. Enough is enough! This
must change.

I am pleased to announce that the chief executive officer, CEO, of the
NHBRC, Mr Mashinini, and I have signed an MOU and a service level
agreement. These agreements signify a mutual understanding and a common
commitment to ensuring quality products for the beneficiaries of low-income
housing.

The NHBRC will support our department to ensure that houses of good
quality, which conform to the required building standards and are NHBRC
enrolled, are built by service providers registered with the NHBRC. We have
also engaged the NHBRC to undertake a detailed forensic engineering
investigation into all projects requiring rectification.

We will, as far as is possible, attempt to recoup costs incurred from the
service providers responsible. We have referred several cases to the State
Attorney’s Office. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, may I preface my
speech by saluting Sheena Duncan for her role in the struggle as a member
of the Black Sash. May her soul rest in peace.

In this august House I greet the Minister of Human Settlements, Comrade
Tokyo Sexwale; the Minister of Public Works, Comrade Geoff Doidge, Deputy
Minister Bogopane-Zulu, MECs present and Members of Parliament. It is a
great pleasure to welcome the officials of the department, led by Director-
General Thabane Zulu; the members of the Ministry, led by Ms Tilly Gasela;
the Chief of Staff, and honoured guests. I recognise the presence of the
chairperson of the select committee, hon Pat Sibande.

This debate on the Budget Votes is taking place at a time when all roads in
South Africa are leading to the 2010 Fifa World Cup. During this year we
will also be celebrating the Freedom Charter, our historic document.

President Jacob Zuma continues to urge all of us to fast-track housing
delivery. Our ability to fulfil this mandate lies in our being able to work
together faster, better and in a co-ordinated fashion, as this collective,
with all relevant stakeholders.

This clarion call is being made to leaders at all levels of society. These
are captains of industry, community-based organisations, nongovernmental
organisations, religious leaders and contractors. We call upon them to roll
up their sleeves and partner with government to provide shelter to our
people. Working together we can do more.

The coming on board of the banks, as mentioned by the KZN MEC for human
settlements and public works, is a positive step.

Last year we acknowledged the importance of making the people an integral
part of our planning as well as implementation. We are still firmly
committed to this approach, as it is the only way that will enable us to
realise our dream, and that of many South Africans who are anxiously
waiting to have a physical address.

We have committed ourselves to moving away from the ethos of chasing
numbers when building homes for our people; we will rather focus more and
more on the quality of the units that we build. Our vision is to build
homes that we can be proud of and that will contribute to changing the
lives of our people for the better.

The accelerated delivery of housing calls for the streamlining of funding
mechanisms. All housing grants, namely the provincial infrastructure grant
and the municipal infrastructure grant, must be consolidated into a single
grant. This means that there is a need for more effective co-ordination as
far as the servicing of land, the provision of bulk infrastructure, and
basic services such as water and sanitation are concerned.

Our visit with the Minister to Port Alfred demonstrates how the lack of
bulk infrastructure can frustrate the efforts of municipalities to deliver
houses to our people. Thanks to the intervention of MEC Mabandla and our
Minister in unblocking this project, the people of Thornhill are now very
happy with the first 500 units agreed upon. [Applause.] We are also hoping
that the 500 000 units will be completed in due course. A solution to the
challenge of bringing water to this area has to be found. What is critical
is that these are houses of good quality that have been built in a rural
area. We have spoken at length about the new mandate.

What we are busy with right now is ensuring that all systems are in place,
and that there is buy-in from each and every one who has something to do
with the provision of human settlements.

In other words, we must in this process move away from the apartheid
spatial framework, where houses for the poorest of the poor were built in
areas far from towns. Our call is to develop megacities, as envisaged in
the Breaking New Ground strategy. Whenever houses are built, there should
be parks, clinics, schools, shopping centres, community halls, police
stations, etc.

What should also be borne in mind is that government-subsidised housing is
indeed asset creation. This is a value-adding exercise in terms of economic
growth, for many families are being rekindled as they now have a place
called “home”. It brings back the dignity of our people. When building
materials are bought and houses constructed, it leads to the booming of the
construction industry. In other words, human settlement provision enhances
the development of the manufacturing industry.

According to our Constitution and the Bill of Rights, all people have the
right to adequate housing. In South Africa there is a need to overcome the
imbalances of the past. This government supports the vulnerable sector in
our society. Our visit to the Lubala village in the Eastern Cape with the
Deputy President on the antipoverty campaign is a case in point. It is very
clear that it is very expensive to bring water to the poorest of the poor,
but it can be done through proper co-ordination.

Le yimfazwe ebaluleke kakhulu yokulwa nendlala apho amasebe karhulumente
nee-arhente zikarhulumente kunye noosomashishini bafunqula kunye.

UTata uMathe obethetha kulaa mbizo ibiphaya eLubala, uza kumkhumbula
uMphathiswa wePhondo, uye wathi laa ndawo yindawo ehlupheke kakhulu yaye
nezinga lemfundo liphantsi. Akukho bongikazi, akukho zititshala kwaye
kunzima ukusa abantwana ezikolweni ngoba izikolo zikude. Kufuneka abantu
bahlawule izithuthi zokusa abantwana ezikolweni ze babahlawulele imali
yokugxamesa kwezo ndawo ngeli lixa abantu bala ndawo bengabantu
abangathathi ntweni.

Kodwa ngoku abantu bala ndawo bayavuya ngoba urhulumente use zonke iinkonzo
ngexesha elinye.Phaya bekhukho abaPhathiswa, kukho amaSekela-baphathiswa,
kukho nabaPhathiswa bePhondo; bonke bayancadisana. ISebe leMisebenzi
yoLuntu belikhona liqeqesha abantu; iSebe lezeNtlalo yoLuntu likhona
lisakha izindlu; iSebe leMfundo linika abantwana inkxaso-mali — zonke
iinkonzo zisiya endaweni enye ngexesha elinye. Yile nto urhulumente
ayifunayo ke le.

Ndinethemba lokuba xa siqhubela phambili lo msebenzi mkhulu siza kuwenza
sonke ngexesha elinye. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[This is the most important antipoverty campaign because it is where the
government departments, the agents and businesspeople are working together.

Mr Mathe, who was speaking in that meeting in Lubala village - the hon
Minister of the province will remember him — said that that place is very
poor and the level of education is very low. There are no nurses, no
teachers and it is difficult to take learners to school because the schools
are too far. People must pay for transport to take their children to school
and again they must pay for lodging in those places, whereas these people
are not working at all.

But today people of that place are happy because the government provided
them with all the basic services, all at the same time. There were
Ministers, Deputy Ministers, and premiers, all of them working together.
The Department of Labour was there and they were training people; the
Department of Human Settlements was also there busy building houses; the
department of education gave bursaries to learners – all the services were
given to the people at the same time. That is what government wants.

I hope when we continue to do this important work we will do it as a
collective and at the same time.]

As we carry this torch forward, we are committed to building partnerships
with all those who are ready to hit the road running. As we dream of a
South Africa free of poverty, free of slums, the Department of Human
Settlements is calling on everyone to be the agents of change in their
communities and in their neighbourhoods. Let us cross this bridge of
transformation together.

Unfortunately, the delivery of these homes cannot happen for all at the
same time; hence the importance of the upgrading of informal settlements,
as was explained by the Minister. What we also want to emphasise concerning
this matter is that while people have unfortunately had to be moved from
homes that were built on river banks or on dolomitic land, there is no
reason why people should be removed from areas where the informal
settlement is situated in a proper place; we can do in situ upgrading.

What is also a key factor, in terms of human settlements, is active
participation of beneficiaries. The People’s Housing Process, PHP, is one
instrument that puts people at the centre of housing development. This
instrument consists of two processes.

There is the managed PHP, where contractors or developers assist people to
build houses, as was demonstrated during my visit to Philippi with MEC
Madikizela, as he said earlier on. Minister Tokyo Sexwale visited another
managed PHP in New Rest. This is a beautiful project which also shows that
managed PHP can give us better products.

What we are saying here is that we must also encourage the PHP where people
do save, build their own homes, and agree on the size and quality of the
house. So, all forms of the PHP must be supported. We also urge
municipalities, in particular, to ensure that the PHP is taken seriously.

Regarding provinces, we ask that they set aside in their budgets a certain
allocation specifically for the PHP. It is a process that is not supported
very much, but we hope that, with a call from this level, there will be
some movement to assist our people with regard to the issue of the PHP.
The other issue that I want to highlight is the issue of social housing –
that is, rental housing stock – because it is our idea that if we also move
in a big way in regard to building the housing rental stock, it will assist
provinces in dealing with the backlog.
What is critical in this area is proper financial and technical support to
municipalities, which will be a key factor in rolling out this programme.
We should also revisit the issue of requesting Treasury to give us a
capital injection so that we are able to do this work in a responsible
manner.

In this process we encourage provinces and municipalities to bear in mind
the need to densify in order to deal with the issue of scarcity of land.
This means building houses of four blocks or whatever in regard to the
rental stock.

It is also important that we revisit the issue of land use management. Our
goal is to continue refurbishing dilapidated buildings in inner cities in
order to integrate our society. Hence, we are proud of some inner city
development projects, particularly the projects in Cosmos City and Emerald
Sky in the Eastern Cape and other beautiful projects that are taking shape
in KwaZulu-Natal.

What we are saying is that there are beautiful programmes that are taking
place in all provinces which we need to emulate. We need to emulate
contractors that are building houses of good quality. We must put
contractors that give us bad quality houses on the blacklisting register so
that they don’t get contracts from government until such time as they give
us a better product.

In conclusion, I want to remind provinces that we are no longer the
Department of Housing; we are now the Department of Human Settlements. As
we plan our projects, we must begin to reflect this element of integration,
supported by all strategic departments.

We also want to make an appeal to premiers, in particular, because in areas
where premiers support this ethos of human settlements, there is a
difference. In KZN, they are very lucky. I’m not saying that other
provinces don’t do that, but we want to see it happening. We are saying
that if premiers are at the centre of understanding human settlements, then
Treasury will understand it too, and we will see a difference in housing
delivery.

We wish Bafana Bafana success in their attempt to win the 2010 Fifa World
Cup. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G PHADAGI (Limpopo): Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP, hon
Minister of Public Works Mr Geoff Doidge, his counterpart Mr Tokyo Sexwale
in Human Settlements, Deputy Minister Bogopane-Zulu, the Deputy Minister of
Human Settlements, hon Kota-Fredericks, hon counterparts from other
provinces, officials from the national and provincial departments, ladies
and gentlemen, comrades and friends, good afternoon.
I wish to start off by commending the national Minister of Public Works, Mr
Geoff Doidge, for the successful tabling of his 2010-11 Budget Vote, and
its accompanying Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, under the theme,
“Shifting the Paradigm for Accelerated Service Delivery”. The budget speech
sets the tone for how Public Works will make South Africa work during the
2010-11 financial year and beyond.

With the tone set by the national Minister, what is left for us in the
provinces is to ensure that we align our priorities with those of the
national department, so that we all make a meaningful impact in the
endeavour to make South Africa work.

The Limpopo department of public works tabled its 2010-11 Budget Vote and
the accompanying MTEF on 19 March this year. With this budget, we aim to
build on the achievements of the previous financial year, and deal with new
and old challenges. The main areas of focus in Limpopo‘s budget for 2010-11
are the following.

With regard to administration, the Limpopo department of public works is at
the centre of providing leadership in provincial infrastructure planning
and development. In order to stay true to the mandate, we have recently
concluded initiatives aimed at redesigning the organisational structure and
developing a service delivery model to align with the strategic plan of the
department and the Limpopo Employment, Growth and Development Plan, LEGDP.
It is envisaged that the new organisational structure and the service
delivery model will ensure that the department meets its key objectives and
remains the service provider of choice for government accommodation and
infrastructure needs.

In terms of how we constituted our committees, this was inconsistent with
the pronouncement in the state of the nation address by our hon President,
Mr Jacob Zuma. The provincial government has clustered government
functions. One such cluster is the infrastructure development cluster,
which we have the honour to chair.

The infrastructure development cluster’s main responsibility is to provide
a single entry point for the delivery of high-quality infrastructure.
Through the pooling of specialised skills in the built environment,
government will build internal strengths and skills which will enable
consultants, contractors and other service providers to the department to
deliver the highest standard of quality, which the people of our province
can be proud of.

We have also engaged the services of a specialist engineering firm as an
infrastructure delivery improvement adviser. Its limited mandate is to
monitor the implementation of the service delivery improvement plan, SDIP,
of the department.

The Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, was conceived as a government-
wide initiative to alleviate poverty through job creation, skills
development and the improvement of public service delivery. It is one of
government’s short-term to medium-term programmes aimed at alleviating and
reducing unemployment and unemployability, and covers all spheres of
government.

The Premier of Limpopo, Mr Cassel Mathale, in his state of the province
address pronounced on the performance of our province, and on the
commitment made by the President to creating 500 000 job opportunities by
December 2009. According to official figures, Limpopo’s contribution
accounts for 49 071 job opportunities towards that target.

The national target of phase 2 of the EPWP is to create 4,5 million work
opportunities in five years. This translates to the equivalent of 2 million
full-time jobs. Of this national target Limpopo has the mandate to
contribute 441 993. From the lesson of phase 1 we can confidently declare
that we will reach our target as set under phase 2 of the programme.

With regard to government housing, in order to ensure that the provincial
government effectively and efficiently delivers on its mandate, the
department is proud to facilitate accommodation and office space for the
following provincial departments: sport, acts and culture; roads and
transport; local government and housing; education; and the legal services
of the office of the premier.

Among the major government housing projects of the 2010-11 financial year
are the following: addressing staff accommodation needs for the health
profession for the provincial department of health and social development;
the relocation of the provincial legislature from Lebowakgomo to Polokwane;
and the handing over of the provincial government offices to the district
municipalities of Mopani and Vhembe to enable them to function optimally.

With regard to the Government Immovable Asset Management Act of 2007,
strides have been made in implementing the provisions of this Act. The
minimum requirements of the Act have been met and further compliance will
be attained during the course of this financial year. The major challenge
in fully implementing the Act lies in the availability of adequate funding.

Regarding the memorandum of understanding with the Independent Development
Trust, IDT, in our quest to deliver on our mandate, we have identified the
need for strong and efficient partners to work with. We have in this regard
signed a memorandum of understanding with the IDT to add impetus to our
social infrastructure delivery mandate.

The Greening Limpopo campaign, which was officially launched by the Premier
of Limpopo, will see over a million trees planted in the province each year
until 2014. Using the EPWP principles, the employment creation potential of
the project is approximately 7 000 in the period from 2010 to 2014.

With regard to property management transformation ... Thank you very much.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M K MMOIEMANG (Northern Cape): Chairperson, hon Ministers - Minister
Sexwale and Minister Geoffrey Doidge — the Deputy Ministers of the two
respective departments, hon members of this august House, MECs for human
settlements and public works from other provinces, ladies and gentlemen,
allow me to extend our greetings to you.

I also wish to make reference to a lesson that we as MECs were taught by
our Minister, Tokyo Sexwale, at the last Ministers and members of executive
councils, Minmec, meeting that we attended in Durban. It was a quotation
from one of the finest theorists produced by the working-class revolution,
Frederick Engels. The quotation goes as follows:

  Until the unjust and evil system we have today is ended, planned,
  healthful living in co-operative, functional, truly human communities is
  impossible.

Let me express our gratitude for the opportunity afforded to us to follow
in the footsteps of our Minister in presenting our plans and programmes
working towards the achievement of goals set for 2012. We pledge that, as
carriers of the baton for human survival, we will treasure and protect this
legacy of a people united to build a better Northern Cape and better South
Africa.

We stand here with this view in mind: unity, determination, shared vision
and common purpose. The purpose of this shared view is to create a sense of
unity and to hold people, organisations and institutions together in moving
towards a positive common end.

Indeed, let us follow in the footsteps of the Minister. In his budget
speech he clearly illustrated that 2010 is the year of working together to
speed up effective service delivery to the people. This declaration is a
clarion call to all of us to do things differently and do them with a new
sense of urgency, as the Minister outlined in his speech in this debate
today.

Let me also quote the words of Anna Hoxie, as follows:

    The past is like a river flowing out of sight; the future is an ocean
    filled with opportunity and delight.

We must at all times appreciate that opportunities need people who seek
them, see them, and thereafter seize them. Delight is the by-product of
sweat and hard work. The Freedom Charter was crafted to be such an ocean of
opportunity and delight 54 years ago.

The tens of thousands of people from all walks of life who put their
demands as part of the campaign leading up to the adoption of the Freedom
Charter on 26 June 1955 could not have fully comprehended the magnitude of
their actions. Yet it was they who, 54 years ago, rose above the daily
oppression and suffering of apartheid and declared, “Freedom in our
lifetime!”

Allow me to say that in the 2009-10 financial year, the Northern Cape
received a conditional grant of R173 million and an additional R152 million
for priority projects. In total, we received R325 million for human
settlements development.

We had built 4 463 houses and serviced 1 794 sites in all five districts of
the province as at 31 March 2010. Furthermore, 3 567 beneficiaries received
title deeds. All housing beneficiaries of these programmes and plans
received the basic services of sanitation, water and electricity.

The department identified the following informal settlement upgrading as
priority projects for our province: Ouboks in Colesberg, totalling 2 220
units; Lerato Park in Galeshewe in Kimberley, with 5 000 units; Upington,
with 915 units; John Taolo Gaetsewe, with 4 500 units; and Pampierstad,
with 1 450 units.

The conditional grant to this province for 2010-14 is as follows:
R273 260 million in 2010-11; R313 million in 2011-12; R426 million in 2012-
13; and R443 million in 2013-14.

In line with Outcome 8 and with the directive by the hon Minister, we have
set ourselves targets as directed by the budget speech of the Minister.

In ensuring that we do things differently, and in line with the directive
of the Minister as outlined in his budget speech, we were able to set
targets for ourselves in regard to the following: acceleration of delivery
of shelter opportunities; access to basic services; more efficient land
utilisation; and an improved property market.

Following on the target set by the Minister, it is expected that as a
province we will be able to ensure that by 2014 we have produced or
constructed 13 980 informal households and 1 864 rental units. Taking into
account the total backlog of the population in the province of 48 000, it
is our firm commitment to double the target set by our Minister.

In regard to numbers, we expect to deliver an average of 3 495 informal
units and 466 rental units per annum. It is important that the province
continuously link-human settlement development to job creation, skills
development, poverty reduction, and local economic development in order to
build sustainable human settlements.

We will strive to ensure that the concept of human settlement is well
entrenched and implemented as directed by the hon Minister. In this
province we have made a commitment to making sure that quality is not
compromised. Learning from the past, we will upscale our inspection of
houses being built; ensure that enrolment of projects with the National
Home Builders Registration Council, NHBRC, is done; and ensure that
defaulting contractors are dealt with in terms of the law.

In ensuring that we expedite our programme of reaching the target as
directed by our Minister, we need to ensure both that we mobilise the
private sector in our region and consistently engage with the national
department to ensure that regional funding is allocated for our priority
projects. [Time expired.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, distinguished guests ...

... inkiyankiya enkulu esihlangabezana nayo yokwentuleka kwezingqalasizinda
ezanele neziphucuzekile nokuyilapho okufanele uhulumeni ophethe umbuso,
uhulumeni kaKhongolose, i-ANC, akhele abantu abangazange balokothe bathole
amathuba anele okuhlomula ekwabiweni kwemihlaba. Lolu daba lwaqala
ngesikhathi kufika izifikanamthwalo ezaziholwa nguJan Van Riebeeck ngo
1652, kwalandela ngokumiswa kwenyunyana yabamhlophe kuphela ngo-1910. Khona
manjalo kwalandela umthetho omubi kakhulu onyantisa umzimba owawubizwa
ngokuthi yi-Group Areas Act ka-1936. Lo mthetho wasungulwa ngunjiniyela
omkhulu wobandlululo uJenene uSmuts.

Ngalokho-ke kunotalatiya lombimbi oluhlongozwa ngabanye bezinhlangano
zosikhwili uphambana nobhoko, akusethusi futhi asikweshwami lokho ngoba
kwaqala mandulo. Sihlalo, umanqoba nje ukuthi thina kwinhlangano ye-ANC
kufanele siphokophele phambili ngokuletha izinsiza ezifanele kubantu
bakithi. Bengifuna ukudlulisa lokhu kwi-Cope, uMnu. Sinclair, izithembiso
akhulume ngazo zango-1994, kubi nje ngoba usaphumile kodwa nimtshele ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... we come across a major problem of the scarcity of viable
infrastructure where the ANC-led government must build houses for people
who had never had enough opportunities to benefit from land distribution.
This started with the arrival of the settlers under the leadership of Jan
van Riebeeck in 1652, and the whites-only Union of South Africa followed in
1910, thereafter followed by the Group Areas Act of 1936 — the most
inhumane law that makes one shudder. This Act was established by the great
architect of apartheid, General Smuts.

Now, there is a hostile coalition in the pipeline planned by the
antirevolutionary parties, but we are not perturbed by that as this is not
happening for the first time because it happened a long time ago.
Chairperson, what we need to do, as the ANC, is to just press forward in
delivering the services that our people need. I want to say this to Cope,
through hon Sinclair, that the 1994 promises that he is talking about ...
Unfortunately he went outside, but you tell him that ...]

... he was amongst the architects of what he is talking about. He must not
pretend to be a preposterous figure of the greatest obesity.

Bese ngiyabuya ngiza kwi-DA, i-DA iyangichaza. Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, nasi
isibonelo, buka umthangala unjani la kodwa bakhona abasebenzi boMnyango
Wezemisebenzi Yomphakathi lapho uhulumeni wesifundazwe uphethwe khona yi-
DA, bakhohlwe yilesi sipokwe sebhuloho elise-Waterfront elingapheli, esabo
lesi sipokwe. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[And then coming to the DA - the DA amuses me, hon Minister. Here is an
example: Look at how untidy the hedge is here and yet the Public Works
workforce is available here. And the provincial government is under the DA
here. They must just forget about the Waterfront bridge that is forever
under construction; that is their ghost.]

The right to access to adequate housing for all, entrenched in section 26
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa and the Housing Act,
Act 107 of 1997, are the bedrock for the ANC-led government’s spending
focus and operational models. The development of integrated and sustainable
human settlements is the ANC-led government’s strategy and, in support ...

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, can I ask, through you, if the hon member will
take a question?

HON MEMBERS: No!

Mr A WATSON: No, I didn’t ask you. I never asked you! I asked the
Chairperson.

Thulani mani! [Oh, keep quiet!]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr F Adams): Order, hon members! Hon member, are you
prepared to take a question?

Mr M P SIBANDE: Cha, umosha isikhathi sami. [No, he is wasting my time.]

Mr A WATSON: He does not want to answer; that’s why. This building was
built in 1854.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr F Adams): Hon Watson, please sit down. Thank you.

Mnu M P SIBANDE: Ngqongqoshe, ngingakaqhubeki nje, ngiyacela ukuthi uzinike
isikhathi uvakashele kuMnyango Wezemisebenzi Yomphakathi  walapha
eNtshonalanga Kapa, ngoba kunezinsolo zokuthi phakathi kwayo inhlangano ye-
DA bafuna ukwenza enye inhlangano okuthiwa i-COBO, Congress of Boys Only,
la kukhishwa khona bonke omama kuqashwe abantu besilisa bodwa. Bese
ngiyabuya kwi-debate yami. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr M P SIBANDE: Hon Minister, before I continue, I am requesting you to
make time to go to the department of public works of the Western Cape
legislature, because there are allegations that within that department the
DA wants to form a new party known as COBO, the Congress of Boys Only,
where all the women are removed and then they only employ men. And coming
back to my debate ...]

... despite the strides made by the government, the housing backlog stood
at 2,2 million in May 2009. It is therefore evident that a great challenge
in the delivery of houses still remains. This daunting task has been
acknowledged by the ANC as one of the government’s five key priorities.

The ANC-led government has committed itself to changing the face of the
rural areas. From the human settlement perspective, there is an
acknowledgement that the existing supply side and commoditised housing
programme has a significant and inherent urban bias.

The comprehensive approach to human settlement requires a close look at key
challenges around spatial planning, such as urbanisation and migration
patterns and further mushrooming of informal settlements. It is reported
that there are 2 700 informal settlements with 1,2 million households
across the country.

The new plan to upgrade 125 000 informal settlement units annually over the
next four years through the National Upgrading Support Programme is an
attempt to step up the delivery of affordable housing. At the same time,
government aims to boost the number of rental housing units by offering
more housing finance. This will be achieved by setting aside 6 000 ha of
land situated near city centres for affordable housing. It remains the
ANC’s target to eradicate all slums and informal settlements by 2014.

Ngizokuphinda lokhu, uNgqongqoshe uke wakusho, kuzofanele sikuphinde ngoba
kunabantu abanezindlebe ezingezwa. [I will repeat it – the Minister has
mentioned it before but I need to repeat it because there are some who are
deaf.]

For this to happen, some 500 000 new units a year must become available.
This stems from the acknowledgement that, while the RDP houses were the
first step towards housing millions of South Africans who had been left
without adequate shelter, the outcomes were flawed. The early generation
policy led to building rows of houses on the outskirts of towns and cities,
which merely replicated apartheid-style housing. Responding to the
shortcomings identified in the RDP programme, the Breaking New Ground
initiative was launched in September 2004 with a view to establishing
integrated sustainable human settlements.

Ngingakakhohlwa Sihlalo, ngizocela ukuthi inkulumo yami ngiyimise kanje:
kubo bobabili oNgqongqoshe, ngicela ukudlulisa lokhu okulandelayo ...
[Before I forget, Chairperson, I would like to put my speech this way: I
would like to put the following request to both Ministers.]

Allow me to start with the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration. Agrément South Africa, ASA, is mandated to assess and
certify innovative non-standard-size construction products, systems,
material, components, and processes which are not fully covered by the
South African Bureau of Standards, SABS, or code of practice.

As things currently stand, companies or individuals can voluntarily submit
their innovative construction products to ASA for assessment and
certification. There is no legal obligation compelling them to do so
occasionally. This status quo has culminated in instances where shoddy
houses have been built, putting the lives of the poor at risk.

To avert this tendency, there is the need for a legislative framework
compelling actors in the construction industry to submit their innovative
construction products for assessment and certification.

Also directed at the Minister of Human Settlements, in terms of section 10
of the Housing Consumers Protection Measures Act, Act 95 of 1998, all home
builders have to be registered with the National Home Builders Registration
Council, NHBRC. This legislative requirement is aimed at ensuring that the
quality of construction can be guaranteed.

Available statistics, however, suggest that not all home builders comply
with this piece of legislation. For example, it was reported that of the
270 000 houses built in 2008, only 7 000 were registered with the NHBRC.
The department should, therefore, devise a mechanism to enforce
legislation. Allow me

... ngidlulise lokhu, Ngqongqoshe Wezindawo Zokuhlaliswa Kwabantu, besicela
ukuthi eMpumalanga laphaya eGovan Mbeki Municipality, ikakhulukazi
eMzinoni, lapho kunalezi zindawo ezilandelayo, i-OR Tambo neChris Hani,
nengxenye ye-extension 23 kunenkinga enkulu yezindlu zangasese, ezinye
sezakhiwe ezinye azikakakhiwa. Kodwa besicela ukuthi uma kukhona
okwenziwayo kusheshiswe, uNgqongqoshe angenelele.

Siyacela futhi Ngqongqoshe ukuthi khona futhi eMpumalanga eDipaleseng,
eSiyathemba Municipality ku-extention 5 ezindlini ze-RDP ezakhiwayo manje
abantu abakahlali nokuhlala phakathi kodwa inkinga esibhekene nayo ukuthi
ziyahlubuka lezo zindlu. Izitende ezilandelayo ngezinye zezitende
ezithintekayo, 4595, no 4613. Ezinye zezinombolo lapho izicabha zakhona
ezingavuleki kahle, ezinye zinemifantu, kanti futhi ezinye uphahla
alwakhekanga kahle.

Bese ngiyabuya ngiya ePedi, e-Eastern Cape, besicela Ngqongqoshe ukuthi
nakhona ulandelele. Kunezindlu ezakhiwe eziningi kakhulu, kodwa
ngemethiriyeli yokwakha engekho ezingeni elihle. Iminyango okufanele ngabe
bakhe ngayo ngaphakathi, bakhe ngayo ngaphandle. Uma imvula inetha zigcwala
amanzi futhi ezinye izindlu zakhona aziphelanga nophahla lwakhona
lufishane.

ELimpompo eSekhukhune District kunenkinga yezindlu ze-RDP endaweni ebizwa
ngokuthi Ga-Masiela. Lapho Ngqongqoshe besicela ukuthi uthumele ithimba
liyohlola ngoba lezi zindlu zitshekile, ezinye iminyango yazo itshekile,
ezinye uphahla lutshekile, azakhiwanga kahle nhlobo, futhi azikho
emgangathweni. Sicela uNgqongqoshe alandelele kulokho.

Futhi, kunenkinga kuzo zonke izindlu laphayana uma ubheka koStockport,
kunenkinga ikakhulukazi kulezi zindawo ezingaphansi kwe-platinum. Zonke
lezizindawo ziyathinteka, izikhamizi zakhona bakhala ngezintuli, kanti
futhi kunokushoda kwezindlu. Ezinye ezakhiwe ziba neminkenke uma
kuqhunyiswa laphaya ezimayini. Ngalokho-ke Ngqongqoshe ngithanda ukuthi
ngithi izabelomali zombili siyazeseka kakhulu, ngaphandle kokungabaza.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... to say this to the hon Minister of Human Settlements. I would like the
Minister to quickly do something about the state of sanitation in
Mpumalanga in the Govan Mbeki municipality especially in Mzinoni, in areas
like O R Tambo, Chris Hani and a part of extension 23. Toilets are built in
some of these areas but in other areas they have not yet been built.
Therefore, I am requesting the hon Minister to intervene in this situation.

I am also informing you, hon Minister, that the same thing is happening in
Mpumalanga in Dipaleseng, Siyathemba Municipality Extension 5 where RDP
houses are being built now. People haven’t moved in yet but the houses have
cracks already. Site numbers 4595 and 4613 are affected by this. And there
are some houses of which the doors open with difficulty, while the doors of
others are cracked, and some where the roofing has been poorly constructed.

And as far as the issues of the Pedi in the Eastern Cape are concerned, I
am requesting you to make a follow-up there too, hon Minister. Many houses
there have been built with substandard building material. And they have
used internal doors for external purposes – when it is raining these doors
retain water. Some of these houses are not complete and the roofing too is
either also not complete or it is poorly constructed.

There is a problem with the RDP houses in Limpopo Sekhukhune District in a
place called Ga-Masiela. I am requesting you, hon Minister, to send an
oversight team there to investigate because everything regarding those
houses is skewed. Some have doors that are skewed, while others have skewed
roofing. Those houses are not well constructed at all and they are also not
up to standard. I am requesting the hon Minister to make a follow-up on
that one too.

There is also a problem with all the houses around Stockport, especially in
areas that are managed by platinum mines. All these places are affected by
these problems and the residents complain about dust and there is also a
housing shortage. Some houses crack when explosives are used in the mines.
Therefore, hon Minister, I would like to say that, without any doubt, we
fully support both budgets. Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, the purpose of our coming
here is to receive the blessing of hon members in approving the budgets,
following on the National Assembly, the other House. We want to thank you
for doing that. The box of money that you are handing over to us is a huge
one - R16 billion is a lot of money - and the fact that the House has
joined the other House in approving that it should be deposited into our
hands is appreciated. We promise that we will handle these funds, as is
written on the box, with care. Yes, we will handle it with care.

Hon Sibande - I don’t see where he has disappeared to - spoke from the
heart about something we are already doing. We know those areas that he
referred to. They are part of 40 000 houses that have to come down or be
repaired – involving 10% of our budget, or R1,3 billion. It is sad that we
and all MECs who are here and those who are not here should be dealing with
this question. That’s why we have committed ourselves to this and said we
have made a resolution that this kind of shoddy workmanship cannot and
should not continue.

I indicated that it was sad to announce that we had arrested many South
Africans. Most of the 1 500 people who have been convicted are in the
national government and some of them are in provincial government, but very
few, interestingly, are in local government.

The objective of having an integrated approach towards human settlement
implies that we work with all departments. Human settlement itself is an
interdepartmental approach. We cannot have the kind of things that we are
going to deliver. Chairperson and hon members, we have certainly started,
but we cannot do it alone. That’s why we are happy to share this debate,
side by side with Public Works.

Something happened whilst we were sitting here, and that shows how fast
Ministers can move, particularly this Minister, Mr Doidge. He contacted the
Director-General of Human Settlements to inform him that the pieces of land
that we require – suitable land, as the President has said – will be given
to us after we have just named the place where we want it. I thought we
should recognise that. I am very happy that you did that. [Applause.]

We are not here to reply to every point made. We appreciate what has been
said, especially the criticisms that have come from the members of the
opposition. It is the responsibility of the members of the opposition to
hold us to account, but as a whole it is their responsibility always to
deliver constructive criticism to the executive, which must also always
come when they call. That is important, so that we can show respect.

After all, we should not believe in the first titles that we have, but in
the last. Our last title is MP. We are members of this House first, before
we are executive members, because you are an executive member chosen by the
President only after you have become a member of this House. Therefore, we
must continue to show respect for being called to account here.
I just want to say that we have received so much advice. I have taken many
notes here, and it is not necessary to get into everything.

Chairperson, we would like to thank the Minister who participated with me.
That shows the essence of good government. In fact, it’s instrumental in
interministerial relationships. Likewise, last time we should have shared a
stage with the Minister of Home Affairs, but we couldn’t be here at the
same time. I am happy about this because it is the first time I’m sharing a
stage and a debate with another Minister.

I want also to thank members of the executive councils of different
provinces who are responsible for Human Settlements and Public Works. You
could hear that a certain member, who graduated from this House, is
actually trying to compete to be the next Minister of Public Works! Wait a
bit - we still have one Minister here! [Laughter.] But, she sounds very
good. I thank Mr Sibande as the chairperson of the select committee and
also thank officials from both departments who are here, without whom we
cannot do our work.

Chairperson, thank you for allowing us to come here and give an account of
our work before these members. After all, we are equal to you as we are
also Members of Parliament. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: In the Minister’s previous life, there was a
TV show that he participated in, and those are big shoes to fill! He has
spoken and he did all the thanking and wrapped up the debate for both of
us! [Laughter.]

Chairperson, let me also thank members of the House and MECs. I don’t know
where Mr Sinclair and my friend Mr Bloem have disappeared to. I am actually
very disappointed that Mr Bloem has left the House because I wanted him to
help me with the reading material for Mr Sinclair. He read the Freedom
Charter wrong and got the year wrong. He also doesn’t understand formal
jobs and work opportunities. But can we ask him please - hon Sibande, can
you invite him — to come to the select committee next time so that we can
help him? Let’s empower him. He might have a role to play.

Hon Groenewald, I have some responses to suggest to you. My team is there,
and after the debate you may engage with them. We’ve got responses to all
the issues you raised. I don’t want to prolong the closing session, but
there are answers and we certainly thank you for raising the issues with
us. We would like to encourage you not to wait until the next Budget Vote
before you raise issues. My cell phone number does work, and you can call
me.

I thank all the MECs for their contributions. We have a very vibrant team
in the Minmec, and the Minmec has certainly strengthened us as Public
Works.
Chairperson, I want to say to the NCOP that they have a crucial role to
play in intergovernmental relations and they can assist us to unpack some
of the difficulties that we have in understanding Schedule 4 of the
Constitution.

Public Works has a very strange concurrent function; it has a qualification
in it that it is not the same as Housing and it is not the same as Health
and Agriculture. Therefore, don’t just blame everything on any one of the
public works departments and be careful because some of the things you are
blaming us for might actually be to do with local government.

I will be good, Chairperson, and at some stage arrange that we have a
discussion on how we can try to demystify the functions of Public Works at
the national and provincial levels. It is important that this House leads
us in that debate. It will also give expression to Chapter 3 of the
Constitution, which deals with co-operative governance, so that we can
assist and strengthen each other in the spirit of the Constitution, rather
than criticise and blame each other. I would certainly like, Chairperson,
to be part of the discussion at some stage in order to assist in that
process.

I’ve been asked by the Minister of Human Settlements to thank both Deputy
Ministers. Firstly, there is the Deputy Minister of Human Settlements,
Deputy Minister Z A Kota-Fredericks. I remember her as chairperson of the
housing committee in our previous life, hence the title sticks, but her
title is now human settlements. Then there is Deputy Minister Bogopane-Zulu
of Public Works and I thank her very much for her contributions.

Certainly, as we can see, there is our NCOP product there, the MEC from the
Eastern Cape, who gives us a very hard time and keeps us on our toes. Now
she wants me to go and build six more bridges in the Eastern Cape! But that
is correct.

Chairperson, I want once again to thank the select committee for giving us
an opportunity to appear before them, to share with them our strategic plan
and to explain the budget. We thank you very much for the oversight role
that the NCOP is playing and we hope and trust that you will support our
Budget Vote positively when you do so, and approve our budget. Thank you,
sir. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister. Let me repeat what I
said yesterday to Minister Rob Davies, because he made the same point. I am
very happy that all Ministers are harping on the same thing, that the NCOP
should now begin to play its role in regard to co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations.

We had a long discussion yesterday with the Rules Committee. We have
adjusted our portfolios to realign ourselves with co-operative governance
and intergovernmental relations. When we come back from recess — I am
saying it in this House — we will call for a debate. The Chief Whip will
decide who will lead it, or I may lead it myself. We will invite the
Minister to come and unpack what he is saying in regard to the Public Works
department in relation to co-operative governance and all those things.

We used to call for debates on policy issues every quarter, and that will
be the first call when we come back. I promise you, we will get in touch
with you and find a date on which you are available. Thank you, hon
Minister. I think the members are agreeing with me. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:47.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:
          a) Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

      2) The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the Black
         Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010], introduced in the
         National Assembly, as a section 76 Bill and as a Bill falling
         within the ambit of section 18(1)(a) of the Traditional Leadership
         and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No. 41 of 2003).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 33156 of 3 May 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Standing Committee on Finance
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled
     1) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Social
        Services:

        (a)      Report of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) on
             the National and Provincial Elections for April 2009.

     2) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Finance
        and Select Committee on Appropriations:

        (a)      Estimates of National Expenditure 2010.


     3) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Social
        Services for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Independent Electoral Commission for
             2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for 2010-
             11 to 2012-13.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Government Printing Works (GPW) for
             2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (d)      Strategic Plan of the Film and Publication Board (FPB) for
             2009-14.


     4) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration:


        (a)      Medium-Term Strategic Plan of the Public Service
             Commission (PSC) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.
        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
             Administration for 2010-14.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Public Administration Leadership and
             Management Academy (Palama) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


     5) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Finance
        and Select Committee on Appropriations:


        a) Letter dated 3 March 2010 from the Acting Minister of Finance,
           explaining the delay in submitting the strategic plan of
           National Treasury.


    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
Finance


        (a)      Government Notice No R.1085 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Correction Notice:
             Imposition of Provisional Payment (PP/135), in terms of the
             Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (b)      Government Notice No R.1086 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1389), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (c)      Government Notice No R.1087 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1390), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.1088 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1391), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No R.1089 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1392), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No R.1090 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/652), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No R.1091 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 2 (No 2/323), in terms of section 56 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (h)      Government Notice No R.1092 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/324), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (i)      Government Notice No R.1093 published in Government
             Gazette No 32732, dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/325), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

     7) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Economic
        Development:
        (a)      Letter dated 3 March 2010 from the Minister of Economic
             Development, explaining the delay in submitting the strategic
             plans of the Competition Commission, the Competition Tribunal,
             the International Trade Administration Commission (ITAC), Khula
             Enterprise Finance Limited (Khula), the South African Micro-
             Finance Apex Fund (SAMAF) and the Industrial Development
             Corporation (IDC).

     8) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises:

        (a)      Letter dated 3 March 2010 from the Minister of
             Communications, explaining the delay in submitting the
             strategic plan of Sentech.

     9) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic Development:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Mineral Resources for
             2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Energy for 2010-11 to
             2012-13.

    10) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:
        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry
             and Fisheries for 2010-11, including the Strategic Plan of the
             Marine Living Resources Fund for 2010-11.


        (b)      Business Plan of the Agricultural Research Council for
             2010-11 to 2014-15.
        (c)      Strategic Plan of the National Agricultural Marketing
             Council for 2010-13.


        (d)      Strategic Plan of Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP)
             (Ltd) for 2010-13.


    (11)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by
             the World Wine Trade Group (WWTG), tabled in terms of section
             231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Mutual
             Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the World Wine Trade
             Group (WWTG).


        (c)      Agreement on Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World
             Wine Trade Group (WWTG), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
             the Constitution, 1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Requirements
             for Wine Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group (WWTG).

    12) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:
        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Water for 2010-11 to
             2012-13.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs
             for 2010-11 to 2014-15.
        (c)      Strategic Plan of the South African Weather Service for
             2010-13.


        (d)      Strategic Plan of the South African National Parks for
             2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (e)      Strategic Plan of the South African National Biodiversity
             Institute (Sanbi) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (f)      Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the iSimangaliso
             Wetland Park Authority for 2011-15.


    13) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for 2008-
             09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for
             2008-09, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-
             09 [RP259-2009].

    14) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Cooperative Governance
             and Traditional Affairs for 2009-14.


        (b)      Addendum to Strategic Plan: Deliverables to be completed
             by 31 March 2011.

    15) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations for consideration:

        (a)      Medium-Term Strategic Framework of the Department of Trade
             and Industry for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (b)      Medium-Term Strategic Framework of the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office (Cipro) for 2010-11
             to 2012-13.


        (c)      Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (Cafcom) for 2008-
             09.

    16) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises for consideration:


        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2010-15.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the National Economic Development and
             Labour Council (Nedlac) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (c)      Strategic Plan and Business Plan of Productivity SA for
             2010-15.
        (d)      Strategic Plan of the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF)
             for 2010-11 to 2013-14.


        (e)      Strategic Plan of the Commission for Conciliation,
             Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (f)      Strategic Plan of the Compensation Fund for 2010-15.

    17) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Rural Development and
             Land Reform for 2010-13.


        (b)      Strategic Plan and Budget of the Ingonyama Trust Board for
             2010-11.

    18) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service for
             2010-14.


         (b)     Annual Performance Plan of the South African Police Service
             for 2010-11.
        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate
             for 2010-13.

    19) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for
             2010-13.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the National Electronic Media Institute
             of South Africa (Nemisa) for 2010-11.


        (c)      Strategic and Business Plan of the Universal Service and
             Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2010-11.


        (d)      Strategic Corporate Plan of the South African Post Office
             for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (e)      Strategic Plan of the South African Broadcasting
             Corporation for 2010-13.


        (f)      Strategic Plan of the Independent Communications Authority
             of South Africa (Icasa) for 2010-11.


        (g)      Strategic Corporate Plan of Sentech for 2010-13.


        (h)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for
             2010-13.

    20) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of International
             Relations and Cooperation for 2010-13.

    21) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Higher Education and
             Training for 2010-15 and Operational Plans for 2010-11.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the National Skills Fund (NSF) for 2010-
             13.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of Safety and Security Sector Education and
             Training Authority (SAS SETA) for 2010-11.


        (d)      Strategic Plan of the South African Qualifications
             Authority (SAQA) for 2010-13.
        (e)      Strategic Plan of the Tourism and Hospitality Sector
             Education and Training Authority (THETA) for 2010-11.


        (f)      Strategic Plan of the Agricultural Sector Education and
             Training Authority (AGRI-SETA) for 2010-11.


        (g)      Strategic Plan of the Council on Higher Education (CHE)
             for 2010-13.
        (h)      Strategic Plan of the National Student Financial Aid
             Scheme (NSFAS) for 2010-13.


        (i)      Strategic Plan of the Media, Advertising, Publishing,
             Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training Authority
             (MAPPP) for 2010-11.


        (j)      Strategic Plan of the Mining and Minerals Sector Education
             and Training Authority (MQA) for 2010-11.


        (k)      Strategic Plan of the Health and Welfare Sector Education
             and Training Authority (HW-SETA) for 2010-11.


        (l)      Strategic Plan of the Chemical Industries Sector Education
             and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2010-11.


        (m)      Strategic Plan of the Clothing, Textiles, Footwear and
             Leather Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-SETA) for
             2010-11.


        (n)      Strategic Plan of the Energy Sector Education and Training
             Authority (ESETA) for 2010-11.


        (o)      Strategic Plan of the Insurance Sector Education and
             Training Authority (INSETA) for 2010-11.


        (p)      Strategic Plan of the Food and Beverage Manufacturing
             Industry Sector Education and Training Authority (FOODBEV-SETA)
             for 2010-11.


        (q)      Strategic Plan of the Transport Sector Education and
             Training Authority (TETA) for 2010-11.


        (r)      Strategic Plan of the Banking Sector Education and
             Training Authority (BANK-SETA) for 2010-11.


        (s)      Strategic Plan of the Wholesale and Retail Sector
             Education and Training Authority (W&R-SETA) for 2010-11.


        (t)      Strategic Plan of the Local Government Sector Education
             and Training Authority (LG-SETA) for 2010-11.


        (u)      Strategic Plan of the Public Service Sector Education and
             Training Authority (PSETA) for 2010-11.


        (v)      Strategic Plan of the Manufacturing, Engineering and
             Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority (MER-
             SETA) for 2010-11.


        (w)      Strategic Plan of the Construction Education and Training
             Sector Education and Training Authority (CETA) for 2010-11.


        (x)      Strategic Plan of the Education Training and Development
             Practices Sector Education and Training Authority (ETDP) for
             2010-11.


        (y)      Strategic Plan of the Financial and Accounting Services
             Sector Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2010-11.


        (z)      Strategic Plan of the Information Systems, Electronics and
             Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education and Training
             Authority (ISETT-SETA) for 2010-11.


        (aa)     Strategic Plan of the Forest Industry Sector Education and
             Training Authority (FIETA) for 2010-11.


        (bb)     Strategic Plan of the Services Sector Education and
             Training Authority for 2010-11.

    22) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Finance
        for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service (Sars)
             for 2010-11 to 2013-14.


    23) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Long-
             Term Insurance for 2007.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Short-
             Term Insurance for 2007.

    24) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Social
        Services for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for
             2010-11 to 2014-15.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
             (SASSA) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency for 2010-
             13.

    25) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of South African Tourism for 2010-11 to
             2014-15.

    26) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the South African Council for Educators
             (SACE) for 2010-13.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Council for Quality Assurance in
             General and Further Education and Training (Umalusi) for 2010-
             13.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Education Labour Relations Council
             for 2010-13 and One-Year Service Delivery Plan for 2010-11.


        d) Strategic Plan and Operational Plans of the Department of Basic
           Education for 2010-11 to 2012-13.
    27) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services
             for 2010-11 to 2014-15.

        (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Defence and Military
             Veterans for 2010-11 to 2012-13.

    28) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2010-11
             to 2012-13.

    29) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the Department of
             Science and Technology for the Medium Term 2010-13.


        (b)      Medium-Term Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the
             Technology Innovation Agency for 2010-13.


        (c)      Strategic Plan for the Africa Institute of South Africa
             (AISA) for 2010-12.


        (d)      Strategic Plan for the Human Sciences Research Council
             (HSRC) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (e)      Strategic Plan for the Council for Scientific and
             Industrial Research (CSIR) 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (f)      Strategic Plan for the National Research Foundation (NRF)
             2010-15.

        (g)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation
             South Africa for 2010-14.


    30) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2010-
             13.
        (b)      Strategic Plan of Agrément South Africa for 2010-11 to
             2012-13.


        (c)      Strategic Plan of the Construction Industry Development
             Board for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


        (d)      Business Plan of the Council for the Built Environment for
             2010-13.


        (e)      Strategic Plan of the Independent Development Trust for
             2010-13.

    31) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Social
        Services for consideration:
        (a)      Strategic Plan of the national Department of Health for
             2010-11 to 2012-13.

    32) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration and to the Select Committee on Security
        and Constitutional Development for information:

        (a)      Consolidated Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC)
             on Inspections of Service Delivery Sites: South African Police
             Service.


    33) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration and to the Select Committee Land and
        Environmental Affairs:

        (a)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on An
             Evaluation of Integration and Coordination in the Integrated
             Sustainable Rural Development Programme – October 2009 [RP250-
             2009].

    34) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Office of the Public Protector for
             April 2010 to March 2013 and Annual Performance Plan for April
             2010 to March 2011.


        (b)      Strategic Plan of the South African Human Rights
             Commission (SAHRC) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.

    35) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
        and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Debt
             Collectors for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2008-09.

    36) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
        and Constitutional Development:

          a) Register of Debt Collectors contemplated in section 12(1)(a) of
             the Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).


    37) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations:

        (a)      Letter dated 27 February 2010 from the Minister of Trade
             and Industry, explaining the delay in submitting strategic
             plans for 15 DTI entities not previously required to table
             strategic plans.


        (b)      General Notice No 40, published in Government Gazette No
             32877 dated 18 January 2010: Withdrawal of Notice 1762 in terms
             of section 12(6)(b) of the Consumer Affairs (Unfair Business
             Practices) Act, 1988 (Act No 71 of 1988).


        (c)      General Notice No 41, published in Government Gazette No
             32878 dated 18 January 2010: 2010 Soccer World Cup Liquor
             Policy, made in terms of section 6(1)(a) of the Second 2010
             FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Act, 2006 (Act No
             12 of 2006).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.16, published in Government Gazette
             No 32891 dated 3 February 2010: Regulations relating to the
             registration of persons in control of any activity with regard
             to controlled goods or who have controlled goods in their
             possession or custody or under their control, made in terms of
             section 24(1)(n), read with section 13(3)(a), of the Non-
             Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No
             87 of 1993).


        (e)      Government Notice No R.17, published in Government Gazette
             No 32892 dated 3 February 2010: Regulations on the application
             of provisions of  the Chemical Weapons Convention, made in
             terms of section 24(1)(l) of the Non-Proliferation of Weapons
             of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No 87 of 1993).


        (f)      Government Notice No 18, published in Government Gazette
             No 32893 dated 3 February 2010: Declaration of certain chemical
             goods as controlled goods and control measures applicable to
             such goods in terms of section 13(1) of the Non-Proliferation
             of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No. 87 of 1993)
             and on the recommendation of the SA Council for the Non-
             Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction.


        (g)      Government Notice No 19, published in Government Gazette
             No 32894 dated 3 February 2010: Declaration of certain
             biological goods and technologies as controlled goods and
             control measures applicable to such goods in terms of section
             13(1) of the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction
             Act, 1993 (Act No. 87 of 1993) and on the recommendation of the
             SA Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
             Destruction.


        (h)      Government Notice No 20, published in Government Gazette
             No 32895 dated 3 February 2010: Declaration of certain nuclear-
             related dual-use equipment, material and software and related
             technology as controlled goods and control measures applicable
             to such goods in terms of section 13(1) of the Non-
             Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No.
             87 of 1993) and on the recommendation of the SA Council for the
             Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction.


        (i)      Government Notice No 21, published in Government Gazette
             No 32896 dated 3 February 2010: Additional declaration of
             certain nuclear-related dual-use equipment, materials and
             software and related technology as controlled goods and control
             measures applicable to such goods in terms of section 13(1) of
             the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993
             (Act No. 87 of 1993) and on the recommendation of the SA
             Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
             Destruction.
        (j)      Government Notice No 22, published in Government Gazette
             No 32897 dated 3 February 2010: Declaration of certain missile
             technology and related items as controlled goods and control
             measures applicable to such goods in terms of section 13(1) of
             the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993
             (Act No. 87 of 1993) and on the recommendation of the SA
             Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
             Destruction.


        (k)      General Notice No 95, published in Government Gazette No
             32916 dated 5 February 2010: Regulations made in terms of
             section 36 of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008)


        (l)      General Notice No 96, published in Government Gazette No
             32916, dated 5 February 2010: Amendment to the Compulsory
             Specification for Motor Vehicles of Category 03/04 in terms of
             section 13(1)(a) of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008)


        (m)      General Notice No 97, published in Government Gazette No
             32916, dated 5 February 2010: Amendment to the Compulsory
             Specification for Motor Vehicles of Category 01/02 in terms of
             section 13(1)(a) of the National Regulator for Compulsory
             Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).


        n) General Notice No 167, published in Government Gazette No 32988
           dated 26 February 2010: Declaration of members of the Southern
           African Institute of Government Auditors as qualified to act as
           accounting officers in terms of section 60 of the Close
           Corporations Act, 1984 (Act No 69 of 1984)


    38) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation:

        (a)      Letter dated 27 February 2010 from the Minister of Science
             and Technology, explaining the delay in submitting the
             strategic plan of the Academy of Science of South Africa
             (ASSA).

    39) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Economic
        Development for consideration:

        (a)      Medium-Term Strategic Plan for the Department of Economic
             Development for 2010-11 to 2012-13.

    40) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs:


        (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on the status of climate
             change initiatives in South Africa.

    41) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Air Service
             Licensing Council (ASLC) for 2008-09


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the International Air
             Services Council (IASC) for 2008-09

    42) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration
        and report

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
             Government Association (Salga) for 2008-09, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2008-09 [RP44-2009]

    43) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration and to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises for information:

        (a)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Assessment of the Public Sector Education and Training
             Authority’s Contribution towards the Development of Skills and
             Career Progression Prospects in the Public Service – August
             2009

    (44)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
    Finance:


        (a)      Government Notice No R.1048 published in Government
             Gazette No 32606, dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1388), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (b)      Government Notice No R.1049 published in Government
             Gazette No 32606, dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 2 (No 2/321), in terms of section 56 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (c)      Government Notice No R.1050 published in Government
             Gazette No 32606, dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/651), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (d)      Government Notice No R.1051 published in Government
             Gazette No 32606, dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/323), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (e)      Proclamation No 74 published in Government Gazette No
             32724, dated 26 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule 1, in
             terms of section 33 of the South African Revenue Service Act ,
             1997 (Act No 34 of 1997)


        (f)      Government Notice No R.1146 published in Government
             Gazette No 32785, dated 04 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1393), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (g)      Government Notice No R.1186 published in Government
             Gazette No 32806, dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 Part 2B (No 1/2/151), in terms of section 48 of the
             Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (h)      Government Notice No R.1187 published in Government
             Gazette No 32806, dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/326), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (i)      Government Notice No R.1221 published in Government
             Gazette No 32825, dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1395), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (j)      Government Notice No R.1222 published in Government
             Gazette No 32825, dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1394), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (k)      Government Notice No R.1232 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1398), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (l)      Government Notice No R.1233 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1396), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (m)      Government Notice No R.1234 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1397), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (n)      Government Notice No R.1235 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/653), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (o)      Government Notice No R.1236 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 3 (No 6/654), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (p)      Government Notice No R.1237 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/655), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (q)      Government Notice No R.1238 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/327), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (r)      Government Notice No R.1239 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 5 (No 5/90), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (s)      Government Notice No R.1240 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Rules
             (DAR/67), in terms of sections 49B and 120 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (t)      Government Notice No R.1241 published in Government
             Gazette No 32838, dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/328), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (u)      Government Notice No R.32 published in Government Gazette
             No 32899, dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1399), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (v)      Government Notice No R.33 published in Government Gazette
             No 32899, dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1400), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (w)      Government Notice No R.34 published in Government Gazette
             No 32899, dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/656), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (x)      Government Notice No R.35 published in Government Gazette
             No 32899, dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/329), in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964)


        (y)      Government Notice No R.126 published in Government Gazette
             No 32966, dated 26 February 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1
             (No 1/1/1401), in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    45) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
         Services:
        (a)      Letter dated 11 March 2010 from the Minister of Public
             Works, requesting the withdrawal of the Department of Public
             Works’ Strategic Plan for 2010-13.


        (b)      Letter dated 11 March 2010 from the Minister of Public
             Works, explaining the delay in submitting the strategic plans
             of the Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB), Council
             for the Built Environment (CBE), Independent Development Board
             (IDB) and Agrément South Africa (ASA) for the financial year
             2010-13.

    (46)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and to the Select
        Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs:

        (a)      Eskom’s 2010-11 tariff increase and amended pricing
             structure for municipalities with effect from 1 July 2010,
             tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), and
             supporting documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the
             same Act.


    47) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs:

        (a)      Albany Coast Water Board’s proposed increase in water
             tariffs for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (b)      Amatola Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (c)      Bloem Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


        (d)      Botshelo Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (e)      Bushbuckridge Water Board’s proposed water tariffs for
             2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


        (f)      Lepelle Northern Water Board’s proposed increase in water
             tariffs for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (g)      Magalies Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (h)      Mhlathuze Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (i)      Namakwa Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (j)      Overberg Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (k)      Pelladrift Water Board’s proposed increase in water
             tariffs for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (l)      Rand Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
             2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


        (m)      Sedibeng Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


        (n)      Umgeni Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).

    48) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Social
        Services:
        (a)      Letter dated 11 March 2010 from the Minister of Health,
             explaining the delay in submitting the strategic plans of the
             National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS), South African
             Medical Research Council (MRC), and Council for Medical Schemes
             (CMS) for the financial year 2010-13.

    49) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services:

        (a)      Exchange of Notes Amending the Exchange of Letters of 2004
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the People’s Republic of China concerning
             Construction of 400 Units in Graskop, Mpumalanga Province of
             South Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Exchange of Notes Amending
             the Exchange of Letters of 2004 between the Government of the
             Republic of South Africa and the Government of the People’s
             Republic of China concerning Construction of 400 Units in
             Graskop, Mpumalanga Province of South Africa.

    50) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
        and Constitutional Development for consideration:
        (a)      National Instruction 2/2010, tabled in terms of section
             97(5)(b) of the Child Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of 2008).


