---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 26 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-08-26
---

THURSDAY, 26 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

               COMPOSITION OF PARLIAMENTARY INTERFAITH COUNCIL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL (Mr S S Mazosiwe): Chair, I move
without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) notes that on 10 March 2010, the National Assembly passed a
        resolution to the effect that Parliament would shortly establish a
        Parliamentary Interfaith Council;

     2) further notes that the matter has since been canvassed with all
        political parties; and therefore

    3) in concurrence with the National Assembly –

           a) agrees to establish the Parliamentary Interfaith Council
              which will consist of nine National Assembly members, as
              follows: ANC – 5; DA – 1; Cope – 1; IFP – 1 and other parties
              – 1; and five National Council of Provinces members, as
              follows: ANC – 3; DA - 1 and other parties - 1; and

           b) mandates the Parliamentary Interfaith Council to perform
              those functions that are stipulated in the National Assembly
              resolution of 10 March 2010.

I thank you.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL (Mr S S Mazosiwe): Chair, I move
without notice:

   That Rule 239(1), which provides inter alia that the consideration of a
   Bill may not commence before at least three working days have elapsed
   since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes of
   consideration of the South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B10-2010]
   (National Assembly – sec 75) on Thursday, 26 August 2010.

I thank you.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                  SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr C J DE BEER: Deputy Chairperson, all the Ministers and members of the
House, we are celebrating Women’s Month, and we salute those women who,
through their relentless efforts, helped to establish our democracy and the
liberation of women.

Hon Deputy Chairperson, the time is now. I don’t know who of you can recall
the posters in 1994 on the lamp posts that said: “The time is now”. For us
to introspect about the contribution the financial sector has made in the
feminist fight against poverty, we must also assess how the financial
sector has assisted in the redirection of a lack of equal opportunities for
women in positions of authority in the economy.

The hon Minister emphasised the important role of the SA Reserve Bank in
the economy, as well as the relevance of the amendments to the existing Act
which addresses the challenges that the Reserve Bank has encountered in the
past.

In the processing of this Bill, the Select Committee on Finance also
attended a briefing given by National Treasury and the Reserve Bank to the
Standing Committee on Finance in the National Assembly, as well as hearings
on 2 and 3 June 2010. The select committee also received a briefing on the
amending Bill on 12 August 2010 and also received written submissions and
had presentations made by shareholders on 24 August 2010.

Hon members will be aware of the debate in the public domain regarding the
role of the Reserve Bank which has been going on in the recent past, and
now currently since the publication of the Bill for public comment. Prior
to the publication of the Bill, the debate was about whether it is
desirable to have private investors and shareholders in the Reserve Bank
and whether or not it should be entirely nationalised. This question arose
out of a concern that private shareholders could use their shareholding
power to influence the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy to the detriment of
the national interest.

With regard to the composition of the board, the committee’s work was
guided by the minimum regulatory interventions aimed at ensuring that the
substance of the key mandate of the Reserve Bank remains the domain of the
Governor of the Reserve Bank and other executives. The proposed amendment
to the composition of the board gives effect to the separation of
responsibilities between the executive and the board. The Bill also
proposes that four directors be appointed by the President in addition to
those who would be nominated through the public process.

With regard to shareholders, the Reserve Bank is a public institution that
derives its mandate from the Constitution, which guarantees its
independence from external influence. The role of the shareholder is very
limited, and this makes it different from commercial banks. It is in this
regard that each person is allowed to own a maximum of 10 000 shares, which
entitles him or her to an equal 50 votes in an annual general meeting, AGM.

The attempt by some of the shareholders to increase their shareholding
through proxies and associates, such as family members, has serious
implications for the Reserve Bank and may lead to monetary policy
manipulation of the Reserve Bank, which will have a serious impact on the
economy. The consequences of these activities will lead to a narrowing of
the public participation share of ordinary citizens in the Reserve Bank.

With regard to the appointment and powers of the board, the select
committee is in support of the establishment of the panel which will ensure
that certain proper persons will serve on the board. It is important to
support these amendments in order for the Reserve Bank to play its central
role, where the main task is to achieve and maintain price stability by
using various instruments of monetary policy, such as interest rates, which
have an impact on inflation and the economy as set out by a democratic
government.

I agree that there are opponents to this Bill. We met them yesterday. The
question we should ask is: What kind of society do we seek to create? It is
about understanding the process of transformation. It is significant to
note that our Reserve Bank is only but one of the few – nine, in fact –
central banks in the world with private shareholder participation. The
others are the United States of America, Belgium, Switzerland, Japan,
Greece, Pakistan, Italy and Australia.

It is evident that, after the financial economic crisis, the majority of
governments in the world are beginning to review the role of central
banking in the economy. Through correct policy mix and choices, a central
bank can determine the rate of inflation, which influences the size of the
consumer basket. It is important that the value of money remains stable
because no modern economy can function well if its currency continuously
loses value.

The committee is in support of the establishment of the open process of
nominating directors to the board. The creation of legitimate state and
public institutions can only be derived through regular and popular
participation of ordinary people. The independence of the Reserve Bank can
be safeguarded by ensuring that those who are nominated to serve will do so
with the full understanding that the primary objective of the Reserve Bank
is not to satisfy the likes and expectations of shareholders whose primary
motive is to make sure of profit at the expense of the poor.

Hon Deputy Chair, the select committee puts its report to this honourable
House and asks the House to adopt their report in support of the SA Reserve
Bank Amendment Bill. Hon Deputy Chairperson, I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, on a point of order: May I request the Minister of
Finance to declare his vote? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You have been answered.
You have the answer.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

        THE ROLE OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES IN CO-OPERATIVE
      GOVERNMENT AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS: UNLOCKING THE SYNERGY
                            FOR COLLECTIVE EFFORT

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers here today,
Premier of the Northern Cape — that’s the only one I can see currently —
MECs here today, permanent delegates and special delegates, I want to thank
you for attending this debate in your numbers. I also want to give special
thanks to the Minister of Public Works, Mr Doidge, who actually challenged
us long ago, saying that this debate is overdue and needs to be called, and
I promised that I would call it.

I really appreciate that the provinces are also here today to debate the
role of the National Council of Provinces in co-operative government and
intergovernmental relations: Unlocking the synergy for collective effort.
The topic recognises the inherent synergy within the National Council of
Provinces, NCOP; however, in order to realise its potential, the NCOP needs
to unlock this synergy to ensure and facilitate collective action.

Let me try to conceptualise this. The new South Africa was founded on the
principle of a unitary state, with regional features being the products of
the compromise. Given this, it became necessary to have an institution to
replace the old Senate that you know as the second House of Parliament. At
conceptualisation, the primary function of the new institution, the NCOP,
was to facilitate co-operative governance, by facilitating co-operation, co-
ordination and consultation in executive matters within and across the
different spheres of government.

The arrangement of South Africa according to provinces then necessitated
the existence of a co-ordinating forum at a national level. That is why all
of us are here today, co-ordinated at a national level, to come and discuss
this important issue.

What is the constitutional framework that depicts this? In terms of the
Constitution, all of you would remember that our government is constituted
as three spheres of government, namely national, provincial and local
government. These spheres are distinctive, but are however interrelated and
interdependent. They are obliged to observe and adhere to the principle of
co-operative government and intergovernmental relations.

This includes that they must, firstly — and all of us should listen
carefully — provide effective, transparent, accountable and coherent
government; secondly, respect the constitutional status, institutions,
powers and functions of government in other spheres of government; and
thirdly, co-operate with one another in mutual trust and good faith. These
are the three important principles that come from the Constitution. All of
us have to understand them in order to function properly as the three
spheres of government.

Further, the Constitution provides for an Act of Parliament to establish or
provide for structures and institutions to promote and facilitate
intergovernmental relations. In this regard we have in place the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act. This Act establishes a framework
for national, provincial and local governments to promote and facilitate
intergovernmental relations and provide for mechanisms and procedures to
facilitate the settlement of international disputes. It is the
responsibility of Parliament therefore, especially this House, the NCOP, to
oversee the implementation of this Act by the executive.

What is the position and role of the NCOP in doing so? Against this
background, it is important to note that the NCOP is strategically placed
to play a central role in promoting co-operative government and
intergovernmental relations. It brings together representatives of three
spheres of government, that is national, provincial and local government,
under one roof, like we are today, to consider issues, including issues
relating to how their governments are impacted by the decisions taken at a
national level. It is very important that these three spheres of government
realign and talk to each other for better service delivery on the ground.

The inherent synergy of the NCOP has been expressed practically through the
way in which it conducts its business. For example, with the “Taking
Parliament to the People” programme, representatives of the three spheres
of government embark on public participation together. None of them is left
out. We are all there as the leadership to take questions, respond to the
issues, and therefore follow up on the issues that people raise on the
ground, and make sure that their lives are bettered.

During provincial week we do the same thing. The three spheres of
government come together, work together and make sure that the work is done
and co-ordinated in a better way. However, this synergy needs to be further
unlocked so as to enhance co-ordination among the three spheres of
government. It is very clear that for any meaningful oversight to take
place there must be co-operation, collaboration and consultation at the
level of the executive, which is the arm of government responsible for
implementation. It is for this reason that we always employ a cluster
approach, bringing related portfolios together when considering Budget
Votes, for example.

To facilitate co-operative government and intergovernmental relations, we
have rationalised the portfolios of the House Chairpersons. We now have a
portfolio for co-operative government and intergovernmental relations. This
signals the maturity of the NCOP, because this portfolio encapsulates the
essence of our mandate.

Through the creation of this portfolio, these are the things that we want
to achieve: firstly, a high level of understanding of the role that the
NCOP can play in promoting the principle of co-operative government and
intergovernmental relations; secondly, to improve the capacity to monitor
and assess government performance with regard to ensuring a co-ordinated
and co-operative approach to service delivery; and lastly, to enhance the
impact of public participation initiatives and the role of the NCOP in
international fiscal matters.

The NCOP has many instruments that it uses to advance the principle of co-
operative governance and intergovernmental relations. These include the
Division of Revenue Act. This is an oversight tool that is essential for
the purpose of promoting sound internal fiscal administration. However,
there are some challenges in the implementation of this Act which require
our attention. I hope some of the members will touch on these, but let me
touch on a few of them: Firstly, with regard to fiscal capacity and
efficiency, when resources are allocated we need to ensure that provinces
and municipalities have the necessary capacity to utilise those resources,
otherwise we might be locking up money that could be used elsewhere.

Secondly, it is also important to check whether or not government resources
are used efficiently, meaning without any wastage. That is a very important
aspect, not just for the NCOP, but for all of us - whether one is a
national Member of Parliament, a provincial Member of Parliament or a
councillor. How those particular resources are used on the ground to make
the lives of the people on the ground better is a very important issue.

The third issue is with regard to long-term planning. Planning remains one
of the challenges facing government at the moment. One often finds that
people do not adopt a long-term view when planning. Few people know today
what they want to do in 10 years’time. As a result, government projects are
often done in a piecemeal fashion, often without properly assessing the
needs of the people.

Yet we have a progressive three-year rolling expenditure framework in the
form of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework which can be used as a basis
for multiparty year planning. That is why the Minister of Finance has come
with this Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, because it allows one to plan
better for one’s longer- and mid-term planning, so that it goes together
with the resources that one has, and one is then able to achieve the plans
that one has in place. I hope the Minister of Finance will dwell on this a
little bit. That is actually why we found it important that he also
participates in this type of debate.

Let us look at the issue of budget management very quickly. Poor planning
leads to poor budget management. For instance, this can be seen in the
following expenditure figures in infrastructure budgets, which I picked up
in one of the provinces: In the 2008-09 budget they spent 132% of the
infrastructure budget. In 2009-10, they spent 84% of the infrastructure
budget. In both instances it does not appear that proper planning was done.
This requires proactive oversight on our side and making sure that the
planning is proper and is properly done.

Recently, during my visit to the Free State, I think it was about two weeks
ago, I was shown a project that is run by the province which the local
municipality is not aware of. Yet the local municipality will be expected
to provide services such as water and electricity once the project is
finalised. We cannot work like that. Surely, if there is a project that is
done by either of the spheres of government on the ground, it has to speak
with the other sphere of government and check what the services are that
the other sphere has to be engaged in. Otherwise, at the completion of that
particular project the local sphere of government will not be able to
provide the necessary resources — the water and electricity — that they
should and are supposed to provide, because they will not have budgeted for
that as they did not know what was happening. Therefore we need to plan
together and make sure that the plan tallies into the three spheres of
government.

In order to promote that sustainable local development, it is therefore
very important to consider the integrated development plans, IDPs, of
municipalities. Among other things, IDPs are crucial for: firstly,
effective use of scarce resources; secondly, speedy delivery of services;
thirdly, strengthening democracy; and lastly, promotion of co-ordination
between local, provincial and national government.

These are important, because they then begin by helping role-players to
focus on the most important needs of local communities, taking into account
the resources that are available. This is also possible through the
identification of, at least, the services in the most impoverished areas.
Through the active participation of all of the stakeholders, we can achieve
to better planning and use of those particular resources. As a different
sphere, local government is encouraged to work in a co-ordinated manner to
tackle and develop the needs of the local area.

In conclusion, the NCOP has an important role to play in facilitating co-
operative government and intergovernmental relations. As such, today’s
debate should serve as a catalyst for further elaboration on mechanisms of
how the principles of co-operative government and intergovernmental
relations could be advanced in practice by this House.

It is with this in mind that we will note, very clearly, the issues raised
by all the people who will be participating today for the purpose of
strengthening the role of the NCOP in ensuring that government, although
constituted at different spheres, works as one for the betterment of the
delivery of services on the ground.

I would suggest to the House, if you agree with me, that, at the end of
this debate, the NCOP will have to sit down further and work out the
mechanism that we can use to take forward the issues that will be raised by
the different speakers in this House today. Thank you. [Applause.]
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, premier, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I am going to
display the facts. I’m getting a little bit older, so I’m going to reflect
on a bit of history, which I think is not unimportant in this context.

We are 16 years into democracy, of which 14 years have been guided by one
of the most respected constitutions in the world. This Constitution of ours
enjoins us, and I quote:

   To heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on
   democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights;


   Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government
   is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected
   by law;


   Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of
   each person; and


   Build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful
   place as a sovereign state in the family of nations.

I quote from the preamble to the Constitution. Forgive me for coughing; I’m
recovering from flu.

It is also important to remind ourselves that our Constitution and the
intergovernmental system we have today, as the Chairperson pointed out, is
a product of political negotiations and compromises during those
negotiations. The Interim Constitution, which embraced the outcome of our
constitutional negotiations, lists a set of constitutional principles,
which the 1996 Constitution had to be based upon.

Among the constitutional principles are that government shall be structured
at the national, provincial and local levels. In other words, we couldn’t
produce the 1996 Constitution if government wasn’t structured this way.
Other principles are that at each level of government there shall be
democratic representation; powers and functions of the national government
and provincial governments and the boundaries of the provinces shall be
defined in the Constitution; and powers and functions at the national and
provincial levels of government shall include exclusive and concurrent
powers. There are a number of others, including that a framework for local
government powers, functions and structures shall be set in the
Constitution. When you see the written version of my speech, you could have
a look at that.

When we drafted a new Constitution in 1996, we had to ensure - and
eventually the Constitutional Court ensured - that the new Constitution
complied with these principles.

We in the ANC have always been clear that we required what we call unitary
federalism in South Africa, if we were to overcome the legacy of apartheid.
Today we aspire to be a developmental state, which is uncompromisingly
focused on creating jobs, improving education and health, providing better
security to our people and developing our rural areas. Clearly, dynamic
economic growth, which both creates jobs and eradicates poverty, is central
to our mission. We also want an activist state. We want a capable state — a
state which has the strategic leadership and operational capabilities and
resources to ensure that we can accomplish our mission.

The recent financial crisis has clearly demonstrated that strong
governments are essential throughout the world. I quote from a recent
column on this in the Financial Times which states:

   The state remains the ultimate protector of people’s interests as markets
   overreach, on both the upswings and downswings of capitalism. Self-
   regulation — à la 16th-century Scottish bankers — or a light-touch
   regulatory system cannot be the solution for the modern financial world.
   A co-ordinated, activist and sceptical regulatory system is needed ... A
   smarter, more active state is the way forward.


      The question for us is whether the way in which co-operative
      governance and intergovernmental relations are structured today and
      the way in which the NCOP works enhances this kind of objective.

Our Constitution recognises that centrifugal forces — for those of us who
might have forgotten our physics, these are forces that pull apart —
operate within a quasi-federal system. There’s always a tendency to move
away from one another and not quite co-operate with one another.

So, we developed a unique Chapter 3 on co-operative governance, which sets
out principles of a co-operative government and intergovernmental
relations. Among these is the need to secure the wellbeing of the people of
South Africa; provide an effective, transparent, accountable and coherent
government for the Republic as a whole; and respect the constitutional
status, institutions, powers and functions of government in other spheres,
and several others. It also asks all of us to be friendly to one another. I
don’t see too many of you smiling.

The NCOP is also a unique institution, which was designed, as it says in
the Constitution, and I quote, “to ensure that provincial interests are
taken into account in the national sphere of government”. In addition, the
participation of 10 part-time local government representatives in the NCOP
was probably a first, if you like, for constitutions around the world.

The allocation of exclusive and concurrent powers to the different spheres
of government determines roles and responsibilities of each sphere within
this framework of co-operative government and intergovernmental relations.

Chairperson, this summit asks crucial questions. After 16 years of
democracy, can we say that co-operative governance is optimal in our
country? Do we have the maximum synergy amongst the various structures of
government? Are we as organised and aligned as we need to be to deliver
government services to our people and to be a leading force for development
and change in our society? We have done very well, I believe, in our first
16 years, but I’m sure all of us would admit that we could have done
better.

We have made excellent gains in providing access to water, electricity,
housing, health and education. Our access to health and education services
is on par with the most developed nations, but the quality of our services
could be much better. Our expenditure on education, for example - and I’m
sure you have heard this many times - is on par with most developed
nations, but the quality of our learners lags behind that of our peer
countries. In 2006, South African learners ranked last out of 40 countries
for overall Grade 4 reading achievement and last out of 46 countries on
Grade 8 mathematics achievement.

Despite increased spending on health and other relevant social services,
life expectancy in South Africa has consistently decreased since 1990. We
are one of only 12 countries whose maternal mortality has increased since
1990. So, all of us need to ask some very serious questions about whether
our intergovernmental systems are working, and whether the right kind of
delivery is in fact taking place. If not, what can we, as the House of
provinces, so to speak, do to improve this delivery at the provincial
level?

Health and education outcomes are also impacted on by a range of factors
outside these sectors, including poor delivery of housing and basic
services to our people. The Constitution and the local government
legislation require national and provincial government to support and build
the capacity of municipalities, yet so many of our municipalities are in a
financial crisis, mainly because the basics are not done properly.

This world, and indeed South Africans themselves, have become accustomed to
the idea that we pull off miracles repeatedly. The peaceful path to
democracy, the 1994 elections, the uniting role of sport and, more
recently, the World Cup, are but some examples of the miracles we can pull
off.

There is another massive task we have been undertaking, unnoticed, for the
past decade and a half, which is that of building a developmental and
capable state still in the making and at the same time transforming South
Africa and offering a better life for all South Africans. This balance
between building capability and delivering capably is a crucial one for us
to understand ourselves better so that we can identify where we could do
things both differently and on a much more improved basis than we are doing
currently.

In 10 to 20 years’ time we will know whether we have pulled off another
miracle in this regard or not. For now, Chairperson, you ask a more focused
question: What role can the NCOP play in enhancing co-operative governance
and intergovernmental relations? I offer the following thoughts and
challenges for your consideration. Firstly, we need to do more to inculcate
the ethos of unitary federalism and co-operative governance in the minds
and hearts of the public, politicians and civil servants. We must question
whether the culture of politics and the operational culture of civil
servants enhance our regional vision of a cohesive state and society.

Secondly, in bridging the provincial and local government voice into
national deliberations there is a need to review the interaction and
quality of discussions between the NA and the NCOP, so that both a
diversity of views and different perspectives are embraced in national
deliberations. In other words, are we doing enough in really bringing the
provincial voice to national deliberations or is there a different quality
of conversation that needs to take place between the NA committees and your
committees in order that we could lift our gains in terms of the provincial
inputs into these conversations?

Thirdly, we need a more active engagement from provinces and local
government on economic matters, in particular the dynamic role that
provinces and municipalities can play in providing economic infrastructure
and opportunities to our entrepreneurs and our unemployed youth.

Fourthly, the NCOP could more critically look into whether we are building
focused and resilient institutions of the developmental state
appropriately. If we think that we have a developmental state, then we
don’t have to worry; we have the institutions. If we think that we are
building a developmental state, then we need to examine more carefully each
of our institutions and ask whether they are correctly focused and
operating correctly.

Fifthly, the concurrent areas of education, health and housing require
urgent attention. There must be a more vigorous interrogation of
organisational and delivery capability and obstacles in genuinely ensuring
that our children are receiving better education and our people are
receiving better health care.

Sixthly, poor utilisation and misuse of resources in our provinces and
municipalities is reaching serious proportions. Honest citizens can no
longer sit passively while a small clique of rent—seekers plunder the
state. The NCOP must urgently play an active role in this regard.

Seventhly, the area of procurement practices in provinces and
municipalities requires your urgent attention. The recent country-wide
arrests are but the tip of the iceberg in terms of what’s going on. We are
losing billions of rand as the country, through provinces and
municipalities, let alone national departments, and this is something that
you as the House of provinces need to pay urgent attention to.

Eighthly, there’s also a need to review current fiscal arrangements. We can
no longer have a situation where, for example, a national goal is set for
health and money is allocated to provinces as part of the equitable share.
But because this is not earmarked, provinces have been using money intended
for health for all sorts of special projects that have nothing to do with
improving the lives of our people. That is why health is in the state that
we find it in today in many of our provinces.

Ninthly, provinces are also spending inordinate amounts of money on
personnel costs at the expense of learning material and equipment vital for
theatres in hospitals.

Tenthly, provinces are also hiring too many administrative staff and
creating bloated bureaucracies, rather than hiring more teachers, nurses
and doctors, and those who deliver front—line services.

Lastly, I believe that, above all, a developmental state is judged by what
it delivers and the impact it has on the lives of our people. We can
certainly do more, through both the NCOP and other institutions, to truly
create more synergy and better alignment so that we can all say at some
stage that we have indeed made a difference.

The challenge facing the NCOP is how to select the right kind of issues,
and I’ve suggested some of them. You concretely intervene whilst addressing
the concept of intergovernmental relations and the concept of co-operative
governance, but by direct engagement on these concrete issues rather than
as an obstruction.

In conclusion, Chairperson, may I thank Mr De Beer and the NCOP for so
kindly and expeditiously dealing with the SA Reserve Bank Amendment Bill,
and for all the support that we’ve had from all of you. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon
Ministers, premiers, MECs and hon members, the theme for today is “The role
of the NCOP in co-operative government and intergovernmental relations:
Unlocking the synergy for collective effort.”

The process of unlocking the synergy of the NCOP for advancing the
constitutional principles of co-operative government and intergovernmental
relations is gaining momentum. The ANC has deemed Parliament to be an arena
of activism. An activist NCOP is one that is robust and constructive.

The creation of a new portfolio to champion co-operative government and
intergovernmental relations at the level of the presidium provides the
House with the opportunity to discharge its mandate in a more meaningful
manner.

The NCOP Rules provide that the House Chairperson for Co-operative
Government and Intergovernmental Relations must, amongst other things,
perform certain important tasks on behalf of the institution. These include
facilitating the NCOP process of monitoring adherence to the principles of
co-operative government and intergovernmental relations by government as
outlined in Chapter 3 of the Constitution; monitoring and reporting on
planning and implementation of service delivery programmes, policies and
laws by the three spheres of government; monitoring the overall processing
of interventions in compliance with section 139 of the Constitution, the
regular review of interventions approved by the House, and providing
strategic advice when necessary; facilitating the participation of the SA
Local Government Association, Salga, processes in the NCOP and its
committees; facilitating the consideration of issues emanating from Salga;
and assessing measures taken by the national and provincial governments to
support and strengthen the capacity of municipalities to manage their own
affairs, exercise their powers and perform their functions.

Many of these tasks are derived directly from the Constitution. This means
that the process of unlocking the synergy for collective effort must, among
other things, empower and assist us to do what the Constitution expects of
us.

The workshop for NCOP Whips and chairpersons held earlier this month
provided space for us to deliberate on some important issues with regard to
the implementation of the mandate of this House. Today’s debate is a
deliberate attempt at sharing our common expectations on how best to
realise an efficient and effective government that, through a co-operative
approach, moves increasingly faster to deliver services to the people.

The drafters of our Constitution would not have thought it significant to
dedicate a chapter to co-operation and good relations if they did not
believe that these were important issues in facilitating service delivery.
We must note that the emphasis in the Constitution is on co-operation and
not competition.

Beyond this debate we are looking towards convening a round table
discussion for purposes of informing ourselves about mechanisms for
promoting co-operative government and intergovernmental relations. We will
use this opportunity to get a deeper understanding of some of the inbuilt
technicalities in our laws. We hope that such an engagement will help us to
enhance our capacity to monitor the extent to which the three spheres of
government work in a co-operative and co-ordinated manner.

As the NCOP, we have committed ourselves to ensuring that we always put
policy issues for debate on our agenda. In doing so we hope that we will be
able to assess weaknesses and also appreciate strengths of policy
interventions.

On the other hand, such debates will provide a platform to demonstrate how
co-operation can improve the delivery of quality services to the people,
and our handling of challenges in implementation.

It is my belief that, in articulating the role of the NCOP in promoting the
principles of co-operative government and intergovernmental relations in a
more meaningful manner, we will be contributing to the shaping of an
activist parliament.

An activist parliament must encourage robust and constructive debate – as I
have said – on matters that are of concern to our people. It must stand on
the side of the poor and the vulnerable. The ongoing process I have
referred to – of unlocking synergy for collective effort – must culminate
in the development of a clear programme of action for the advancement of co-
operation and co-ordination. It must take into account previous engagements
and thoughts on how to strengthen the functioning of the NCOP.

In this regard, we must, among other things, look at the question of
whether the number of permanent delegates – there is a total of 54 – is
enough to enable the NCOP to fulfil its constitutional mandate more
effectively. This has long been a subject of debate.

We have to note the call made consistently by the Chairperson of this
House, which is that, in carrying out our mandate, we must always focus on
the best advances of the mandate of the NCOP, for example section 76
matters.

We must devise mechanisms to deal with the issue of unfunded mandates.

We must clarify the role of the second Deputy Chairperson who, according to
practice, is a premier. Properly conceptualised, this position could be
used to advance co-operation and co-ordination if we still want to keep it.


We must promote, share and disseminate information from the various spheres
of government in order for citizens to be empowered with such information.

We must consider legislation meant to promote intergovernmental relations
to see whether there are any gaps as far as the role of the NCOP is
concerned. These are thoughts on which there has been agreement in the past
and which I suggest we reflect on going forward and implement.

In conclusion, it is my view that, whilst the representation of Salga in
this House is critical, we need to ensure that Salga derives value out of
engaging the NCOP. This is one of the priority issues I will be considering
as I take up the role of leading the function of co-operative government
and intergovernmental relations. Salga must participate meaningfully here.
Also, where we agree, we must sharply raise the issues they bring to us
with both provincial and national governments, and ensure that they receive
the necessary attention.

Hon members, our success in promoting co-operative government and
intergovernmental relations depends on active participation and
collaboration by all key role-players to strengthen our intergovernmental
system. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T D HARRIS: I am glad you are not sleeping. [Interjections.] Deputy
Chairperson, Ministers, MECs and delegates, I agree with the Minister of
Finance’s comments on a strong, smart and more active state. Firstly, I
think such a system that he is proposing does not need to amend the current
devolution of power in our system; and secondly, I suggest that the
Minister of Finance should not have to look very far for a strong, smart
and more active state when he is standing in this House.

Indeed, he only needs to look as far as the metro of the city of Cape Town
and the Western Cape province. The Minister of Finance spoke about the
misuse of resources in the provinces and municipalities and the whole list
of other issues afflicting them. I would like to tell the Minister of
Finance that is not the case in this municipality and/or province.

The fact is that the performance of the DA in this province and in this
city is the example that proves that the constitutional principle of
federalism and a unitary state is the best way of improving service
delivery, if only voters exercise their democratic rights. Unfortunately, I
disagree with the Chairperson’s reading of the Constitution. I will explain
why I say that. The topic today is “The role of the NCOP in co-operative
government and intergovernmental relations: Unlocking the synergy for
collective effort”.

Let me first point out that the role of the Council is clearly defined in
section 42(4) of the Constitution. The NCOP represents the provinces, to
ensure that provincial interests are taken into account in the national
sphere of government. The simple answer to the debate topic is that,
constitutionally speaking, the NCOP has nothing to do directly with co-
operative governance. Co-operation between the spheres of government needs
to take place outside of this House, in Minmecs, extended Cabinet meetings,
as well as Salga and the co-operative governance Ministry forums.

Instead, along with the NA, the NCOP is meant to provide a check and
balance on executive power at a national level. In particular, we are meant
to ensure that the views of the people living in our provinces are taken
into account at a national level. It is as simple as that. Section 42(4)
goes on to say that the NCOP should achieve this mainly by participating in
the national legislative process and by providing a national forum for
public consideration of issues affecting the provinces.

We can debate the story of unlocking the synergy for a collective effort as
an abstract issue. I am fine with that. But in this House we want to be
debating specifics. My reading of the Constitution means that it may not
allow us to specifically debate how to unlock the synergy for a collective
effort. It is not in the mandate of this House. That is not to say that we
should only think in terms of the narrow silos of individual provinces. As
the Chairperson has indicated, section 42(4) of the Constitution states
that the spheres of government are distinctive, but they are also
interdependent and interrelated. We can and must learn from each other.

In our Finance committee yesterday, we saw several provinces offering to
help the North West with the staffing issue which they had previously
experienced themselves. This is something we should do. We are all in this
together. If one province succeeds, it will raise the whole nation, and
hopefully the world. If one province fails, we will all bear the costs.

However, you will excuse me if I choose to reject the proposal that we
should be unlocking the synergy for collective efforts in this House. I
will leave that to the Western Cape’s MECs in their Minmecs and the Western
Cape Premier and her Cabinet. Instead, I will stick to the constitutionally
defined mandate of the NCOP, to ensure that provincial interests are taken
into account in the national sphere of government.

My first point is that it is not in the interests of the people of the
Western Cape to develop any governance synergies in this debate. On the
contrary, the very reason provinces exist is to ensure that government
services are tailored to the different circumstances our people face in
their provinces, to move government closer to the people, and to ensure
diversity. In addition, our Constitution recognises the principle that
absolute power corrupts. So it devolves key portions of power to the
provinces in Schedules 4 and 5.

The people of the Western Cape value this. They expressed this when they
came out in overwhelming numbers to elect the DA government last year. This
has proven to be a good choice. The DA has cleaned up government. Yesterday
the Auditor-General announced a clean sweep of 25 unqualified audits in the
Western Cape provincial government. These results are unprecedented in this
province. [Applause.]

The DA has created jobs in this province. As we moved into 2010, despite a
1% increase in unemployment nationally, in the Western Cape it dropped by
1%. We have also delivered services. This recent report on service delivery
shows that the Western Cape is the best performer of all provinces in
delivering basic services. In the Cape Town metro, where we have been in
power for five years, 94% of households have proper sanitation; 95% have
access to electricity; 98% are having their refuse collected; and 100% have
access to water. These numbers are way above any other municipality in the
country.

All these have been achieved by the DA provincial government, despite a
poor recent performance by the ANC in national government. This leads us to
believe that the ANC wants synergies because it is threatened by divergent
views. Its recent behaviour backs the media tribunal and Protection of
Information Bill and firm control of the SABC.

The Minister of Finance spoke about a centrifugal pulling apart of things.
I am afraid the only centrifugal forces pulling things apart are within the
ANC itself. I can prove this by asking the Minister of Finance where his
proposal on youth wage subsidies is, five months after he promised that it
would be tabled.

I am afraid I am out of time. The DA’s municipalities in provinces are
going from strength to strength; and the ANC’s aren’t. This is the proof of
how devolution of power in our Constitution works. We are ensuring better
delivery of services to our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Chair,
hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon Ministers, hon
members of the House, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I must
take note of the comments made by the hon T D Harris directed to my
colleague, the Minister of Finance. I must say that I was rather
disappointed, though, with what he had to say, because I thought that the
debate was giving him the opportunity to make a constructive contribution
to what is an important topic: to promote intergovernmental relations; but
he rather sought the opportunity to wave his party’s flag, which I thought
was unnecessary.
I wish he had been at a meeting that was held in the Western Cape last
weekend at which the Deputy President and the delegation from the national
government visited Plettenberg Bay on an antipoverty campaign. Present at
that particular meeting was his leader – the DA leader and Premier of the
Western Cape. I wish he had been there to hear what she had to say about
intergovernmental relations when she aligned herself completely with the
strategic outcomes that the national government is driving towards in the
antipoverty campaign and said that the only difference between the Western
Cape and the national government in the way in which they conduct their
affairs is that we sought the same outcomes to eradicate poverty.

The Deputy President said, “One of the things we have to do in promoting
intergovernmental relations is not to bother with the fact that we have
different parties governing at different levels, but that we need to
discover how to work with each other so that the national goals of this
country could be achieved.” The eradication of poverty, hon Harris, is such
a common goal that it should inspire all of us.

This particular debate needs to ensure that strategic alignment and
harmonisation of government institutions within the three spheres of
government remains a strategic priority of the ANC-led government. We are
confident that the creation of a single, integrated and seamless Public
Service will unlock the bottlenecks in providing quality public services to
our various communities.
A single system of public administration, management and governance that
covers the three spheres of government is a strategic intervention to
further enhance the attainment of South Africa’s developmental goals. For
the state to intervene effectively and in a coherent way to address social
and economic developmental goals, the Public Service must be seen as one
and must function harmoniously. Resources must be utilised effectively and
efficiently and national norms and minimum standards must be established
through the appropriate legislation and regulatory framework.

The Chair of the NCOP in his address reminded us that the Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa requires co-operative and effective
government, while recognising that government in the national, provincial
and local spheres is distinctive, interdependent, and interrelated.
Together, the three spheres of government are required to provide an
effective, transparent, accountable and coherent government for the entire
country. This requires that the spheres respect each other’s territories,
powers and functions while striving to work together in a meaningful way to
maximise service delivery and its impact for the citizens.

My contribution in this debate is to focus on how the single Public Service
strategic project could enhance leadership roles for the NCOP in achieving
the outcomes that we seek. The single Public Service initiative has been
identified as the vehicle that will integrate, harmonise, and align the
system of governance, administration, management, accountability, and
planning across the spheres of government to fulfil the following
objective: To deepen integrated service delivery by creating service
delivery points from which the citizen can access a basket of public
services. Multiple institutions are to collaborate on creating a single
window from which citizens can access a range of services, be it the
service delivered at the local, provincial or national spheres.

It also has the objectives of strategically aligning the institutions that
comprise the machinery of government to complement one another; to ensure a
common culture of service delivery, based on the precepts of Batho Pele in
order to ensure consistently high standards of service from the public
service; to stabilise and strengthen intergovernmental relations,
recognising the distinctiveness of the spheres while emphasising their
interdependence and interrelatedness; to achieve more coherent, integrated
planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring and evaluation within a
single or integrated Public Service; to create a single senior management
service cadre, where appointments will be to the service rather than to the
post, facilitating the mobility of these managers within the integrated
Public Service; and to provide a uniform framework of remuneration and
conditions of service for the single Public Service.

It also seeks to establish uniform norms and standards for employment in
the single Public Service, including employment practices and employee
relations frameworks and mandating arrangements; to provide for a mechanism
for the approval of deviations from the norm in exceptional circumstances;
and to provide a mechanism for the transfer of functions and staff between
institutions or spheres of government within the framework provided by the
Constitution and the Labour Relations Act.

It also seeks to provide for a human resource development strategy and the
development of an integrated skills database to support our human resource
planning; it seeks to provide for an anticorruption strategy that must
prevail across all three spheres; and to ensure that e-governance,
information, communication and technology regulations, norms and standards
are adhered to within the single Public Service.

Government has made inroads in achieving integrated and accessible service
delivery through the usage of platforms such as Thusong centres, the Batho
Pele Gateway, call centres, mobile units and community development centres,
but it is recognised that much more needs to done to strengthen our current
initiatives, to capitalise on new technology and to expand on existing
access initiatives through creative, innovative and cost-effective means,
to increase the number of services delivered to the citizens via these
various channels, to focus on human resource-related matters such as
capacity-building, remuneration and conditions of service, and to inculcate
an ethos of Batho Pele as central to each of these access initiatives.

In July 2007 Cabinet approved the establishment of the Geographic
Information System for the single Public Service to assist in consolidating
the abundance of special data pertaining to the delivery of services across
the three spheres of government. The aims of the Geographic Information
System include support for service delivery planning across the Public
Service; support for the improvement of the utilisation of resources across
the spheres; and support for collective efforts in monitoring and
evaluation.

One of the strongest arguments for a single Public Service is the
facilitation of mobility between the institutions of government. The
challenge here is to create a more cohesive workforce consisting of all
spheres of government and, most importantly, a multiskilled and mobile
cadre of public servants to deliver integrated services.

It is therefore imperative that urgent attention be paid to the
harmonisation of remuneration, conditions of service and benefits in all
spheres of government. The harmonisation of conditions of service requires
initially that local government rationalises its conditions of service.
This process has already commenced and there have been positive
developments in this regard.

Local government is now working towards a single medical aid and a single
pension fund. In the Public Service there is a single pension fund and
there is a substantial shift of employees from open medical aid schemes to
the Government Employees Medical Scheme, known as Gems. The membership of
Gems now stands at 500 000 principal members.

The SA Local Government Association, Salga, instituted 10 categories of
municipalities, limiting the number of pay scales, and instituted a common
job evaluation system. Despite these efforts, Public Service and local
government conditions are indeed still very disparate.

Through the single Public Service overarching legislation should define all
spheres of government as being part of the single employer for the purposes
of the transfer of functions and personnel. The overarching legislation
should also enable the transfer of staff to and from the national and
provincial level and from other organs of state.

Experience has shown that institutions in all spheres and public entities
have human resource capacity problems which impact on their ability to
deliver services on the ground. Under the single Public Service it will be
critical that resources are allocated to areas where they are needed. To
achieve this goal it is imperative that the existing human resource
framework be aligned. To realise this it will be critical to establish
whether current human resource management practices across the three
spheres of government will support this vision; and, if not, what should be
done to ensure the required degree of alignments.

As indicated, human resource management and development, conditions of
service, remuneration, and fringe benefits in the Public Service and local
government are indeed significantly different. This is informed by a
comprehensive study conducted in 2008 on remuneration, grading, conditions
of service, policies and practices in the public service and
municipalities. In the Public Service a salary is determined in terms of
job weight, whilst in municipalities affordability determines the salary
level. There are also glaring disparities within municipalities in the
provision of benefits, which also makes transfers within the local
government level even more difficult and thus fails to support effective
service delivery across the spheres.

Noting that there are different approaches currently adopted by
institutions within the three spheres of government and the need to ensure
that there is ease of mobility between the spheres, there is a need for a
clear policy on remuneration that allows for the determination of a key
salary structure and flexibility in respect of major occupational groups in
the three spheres of government. The envisaged overarching legislation
should provide for a national framework to set norms and standards in
respect of all aspects of human resource management and development
remuneration on related issues.

The overarching legislation should make provision for the development of a
regulatory framework to foster the institution of appropriate human
resource management systems and the development of relevant policies to
facilitate: the identification and adoption of a common human resource, HR,
information system in all institutions; the development of a comprehensive
human resource strategy; the determination of recruitment and selection
procedures to facilitate the attraction and recruitment of staff with the
necessary and appropriate skills; and the development and implementation of
career planning development and advancement programmes across the three
separate spheres.

A major challenge in all spheres of government is the inability of public
sector institutions to attract, develop, retain, and deploy competent
managers and professionals to fulfil service delivery commitments.

Noting these challenges, it is envisaged that senior managers in the
various spheres of government would constitute the Senior Management
Service, SMS, under this overarching legislation. Uniformity in the
following areas should be achieved for this management service: the
recruitment and selection of personnel; remuneration and conditions of
service; performance management and development; competency framework;
ethics and conduct; misconduct and incapacity; financial disclosures; and
transfers on secondment and deployment.

The introduction of a single Public Service has implications for the
current bargaining arrangements. The three spheres of government currently
have separate collective bargaining systems and labour relations
arrangements. A move towards the realisation of a single Public Service
calls for the integration and alignment of relevant arrangements and
procedures for the existing labour relations issues.

In conclusion, let me say that the NCOP has a distinctly important role to
play in the realisation of appropriate and improved constitutionally
aligned intergovernmental relations through the mechanism of a single
Public Service. The opportunity to discuss this and to take this matter
forward when the Bill is reintroduced in Parliament will present itself
again at the end of this year. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M J ZWANE (Free State): Deputy Chair of the National Council of
Provinces, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon Premier of the Northern
Cape, hon MECs who are here today, hon members, distinguished guests,
friends, ladies and gentlemen, we feel honoured to meet today under the
theme “The role of the National Council of Provinces in co-operative
government and intergovernmental relations: Unlocking the synergy for
collective effort.” It is an opportunity to reflect on our current
performance and opportunities lying ahead.

The National Council of Provinces is the creation of our Constitution as
one of the two Houses, allowing equal provincial representation to ensure a
balance of interest between provinces. The Constitution went further and
created three spheres of government, namely national, provincial and local
government, and clearly directed that all spheres must operate in an
intergovernmental and co-operative manner.

Since its establishment, the NCOP has continued to perform well in
executing its mandate and function with regard to national and provincial
Bills, annual Appropriation Bills and budgets. Allow me to provide the
House with the executive summary of the state of performance in our
province with regard to service delivery and local government. Access to
water is at 97%; sanitation, 69%; electricity, 87%; and access to refuse
removal, 76%.

With regard to the state of local government, our assessment is in line
with the recent state of local government assessment report, and the
following points are highlighted. We are faced with serious leadership and
governance challenges, including weak responsiveness and accountability to
communities; weak financial management; high levels of indigent households
affecting the financial position of municipalities; insufficient technical
capacity to fast-track infrastructural projects; and limited financial
support from provincial government to municipalities.

Deputy Chairperson, in line with the national developmental priorities as
outlined by our President, our premier tabled the provincial state of the
province address with clear outcomes for each sector department, and was
later followed by the MEC for finance, who tabled our provincial budget,
which is linked to our outcomes.

The National Council of Provinces is a collective voice of the people to
ensure that service delivery promises are achieved within the allocated
time and budgets. The NCOP has a role to play in highlighting required
interventions and interprovincial co-operation to achieve the national
priorities.

It can also serve as a platform of performance appraisal for provinces and
local government, a platform for communicating service delivery
achievements and challenges. It can also play a role of intervention with
regard to resource allocation and reallocation where necessary.

In conclusion, in achieving its enhanced role the NCOP must consider
improving on its interaction with provinces and local government by
adopting a more proactive role. I will also suggest that the NCOP should
facilitate and create performance monitoring sessions for the provinces and
local governments on a quarterly and biannual basis.

The provinces and local government must come and present their
achievements, challenges and required interventions. The National Council
of Provinces must also have more regular provincial visits to get a sense
of what is being done in provinces and by local government.

I am sure that by creating the above enhanced role for the National Council
of Provinces, we will be able to unlock the synergy for collective effort
on intergovernmental performance and co-operation on resource allocation,
leading to the creation of a better legislative framework. I thank you.

Prince M M M ZULU: Deputy Chairperson, hon members and hon Ministers ...

... kubahlonishwa bonke abakhona kule Ndlu, ngimi lapha nokuziqhenya
ngokuthi uMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe unendima ebonakalayo okufuneka
uyidlale ekuhlanganiseni izinhlaka zikahulumeni nohulumeni wokubambisana
kanye nobudlelwano kohulumeni.

Lokho kwenza ukuthi le Ndlu ikwazi ukuthatha olapha emakhaya, phansi
komasipala basekhaya kanye nohulumeni wesifundazwe ukuba kuzoxoxwa ngakho
ezingeni likaZwelonke. Sibhalisa ukubhekwa omasipala bonke kuzifundazwe
noma ukubhekwa komasipala ngamunye komasipala basekhaya. Lokhu kukodwa
kusinikeza umthwalo ukuba siqikelele ukuthi sibheke lokhu okungenziwa
yizifundazwe nomasipala ukuthi kuyenzeka nakuhulumeni omkhulu. Sikubheke
ukuthi oNgqongqoshe bayakwazi ukuba bachaze ukuthi izinto zenzeke kanjani
ezweni lakithi.

Le Ndlu ngiyayincoma ngokuba yizwi labantu. Isakhamuzi sakithi esingakwazi
ukuzokhuluma sime la ngimi khona, le Ndlu iyakwazi ukuba ithathe
iPhalamende iliyise ebantwini ukuba babeke izimvo zabo. Bagxeke noma
bancome ngokwenziwe nguhulumeni. Impumelelo yezwe lakithi iyobonakala uma
leli Phalamende likwazi ukulalela izimvo zabantu. Sikwazi nathi ukuba khona
ezintweni ezenziwa oNgqongqoshe, ngikubeka ngokucacile ukuthi kuzo zonke
izifundazwe eziyisishagalolunye  akukho nowodwa uMnyango kahulumeni okumele
ubabukele phansi omasipala kumele kusetshenzwe njengohulumeni obumbene
sikwazi ukuthi izidingo zabantu zifezeke.

Sengiphetha ngiphatheka kabi ngenxa yokuthi uNgqongqoshe Wezemisebenzi
Yomphakathi usehambile kodwa ngifisa ukuthi omasipala abangazilawuli bese
beqasha abantu ngendlela engafanele ngoba kulo lonke lezwe sikhala ngokuthi
omasipala baqasha abantu ezindaweni ezingafanele.

Ikhomishana Yezemisebenzi Yomphakathi kufanele idlale indima ebalulekile
ekuhleleni ukuthi izinto kufanele zihambe kanjani. Uma kwenzeka kufanele
siwuvakashele Umthethosisekelo sibheke ukuthi uthini ngezikhungo zezaHluko
9, ngoba zikhona kwizifundazwe kodwa azichazi ukuthi izinto zenzeka kanjani
kwizifundazwe, zichaza kuMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe. Noma nje lezi
zinto zingiphathisa ngekhanda njengendoda yakwaZulu. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... to all the hon members who are present in this House, I am standing
here with great pride in knowing that the National Council of Provinces has
a major role to play in uniting the spheres of government in co-operative
governance, as well as bringing about good relations in the spheres of
government.

This House makes it possible for someone who serves at a municipal level
and someone at provincial level to come to talk about their issues at the
national level. We record the monitoring of all the municipalities or each
municipality in the provinces. This ensures that what cannot be done by
provincial governments or municipalities is done by national government. It
also ensures that Ministers are able to account for what is done in our
country.

I commend this House for it is the people’s voice. If a citizen cannot come
and stand where I am standing and speak for him or herself, this House is
able to take Parliament to the people where they are able to air their
views. They can either criticise or commend the government on what it has
done. The success of our country will be seen if this Parliament is able to
listen to the views of the people. We, as members, must also be informed of
what the Ministers are doing, and I want to put it very clearly that in all
the nine provinces not even one government department should look down upon
the municipalities, because we need to work as a united government in order
to meet the people’s needs.

In conclusion, although I regret saying it when the Minister of Public
Works has already left, I want to say that municipalities should not
control themselves with regard to the appointment of people, because their
appointing processes are inappropriate as the whole country is complaining
about municipalities which are appointing unqualified people to certain
positions.

The commission for Public Works must play a significant role in planning
how things should be done. If necessary, we need to consult the
Constitution to find out what it says about Chapter 9 institutions, because
they are there in the provinces but they don’t explain how things are done
in the provinces; they only explain how the National Council of Provinces
should operate. These things give me a headache as a Zulu man. Thank you.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Ministers, premier, MEC
and respective leaders of our provinces, the Deputy President of the
Republic, when addressing the NCOP last year, guided us by saying:

   As government, we have long recognised the imperative value of
   partnerships across all fronts. What needs to be emphasised, however, is
   the need to ensure that we use partnerships to maximum advantage, such as
   in addressing service delivery challenges.


   Achievement of government Programme of Action goals assumes exactly that
   our efforts are well co-ordinated across the three spheres of government,
   consciously driven by common imperatives.

An activist NCOP is one that ensures through its oversight and legislative
role that there is a speedy roll-out of basic services to the people by
passing appropriate legislation that speaks directly to the needs of our
people. It further ensures this through oversight work, working with the
executive and ensuring that they execute both their constitutional and
political mandates to better the lives of our people.

In the effort of today’s debate, we want to emphasise a point that is
missing. At the level of the executive, there are, indeed,
intergovernmental relations, IGR, structures. At the level of legislatures
and Parliament there is that legislation, but there is a need to debate in
order to make all these IGR structures better co-ordinated and better
strengthened to avoid them being a talk show.

The NCOP should be a forum where battles of ideas take place between
parties, as any party can talk the way it likes. And also, parties should
be guided correctly by their ideological and theoretical focus in
implementing and advancing the objectives of the Fourth Parliament.

The main challenge facing our party, the ANC, in the second decade of
freedom is how then do we deepen this debate within the context of a
national democratic revolution in order for us to create more jobs and
decent work, emphasise the eradication of poverty and unemployment, and
accelerate programmes to improve the lives of black people.

This debate is not lost, as other parties think it is. It is in a
developmental state where we say moving forward is a dynamic process. If
our state was a conservative state, yes, we would be locked in one place;
we would be static! But because it is developmental, we need to continue to
debate to see how we strengthen co-operative governance and the IGR
structures.

This would be done to ensure that participation of the people is clear in
what it is that they need. And their needs must find expression in the
planning – and our planning is not ordinary planning; it is integrated
planning.

Since it is integrated planning, it means there is a need for a serious co-
ordination of the plans, and the plans can only be well co-ordinated if the
intergovernmental framework is well applied everywhere, wherever we are
within our three spheres of government.

The three spheres mean that the structures are not separate. You have a
national, provincial and local structure. It’s like a person - a complete
human being - where you have a head, a body and legs. In this context, the
legs could be defined as local government. Therefore, they implement or run
the programme of both the provincial and the national government. It says:
continue to debate and strengthen what you are supposed to be doing!

Ready to Govern and the Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP,
emphasised the need for an integrated approach to governance and
accountability for accelerated service delivery. This implies strengthening
oversight work by Parliament and legislatures.

The ANC’s strategic objective is to promote the transformation of South
Africa into a united, democratic, nonracial and nonsexist country. In order
to achieve these objectives, the ANC government needs to advance service
delivery as it is done in nine provinces; not in eight provinces, in nine
provinces – those are the achievements of the ANC government in this
country. But the emphasis is that those achievements must not be based on
racial or ethnic lines. They should address the spatial legacy that has
been left or that we have inherited as a compromise, precisely because we
should not forget where we are, fighting the challenges of service
delivery.

In sunset clause we said, “We go on with this situation; when we are in
Parliament we will address this depth of apartheid, and these are social
depths of apartheid.” Therefore, there is no time or party that can be
blamed, precisely because we are doing what has been left by some of them.

The ANC is committed to the principle and practice of bringing government
closer to the people to ensure popular participation in government. What we
are here for, in summary, is Chapter 3 of the Constitution, as I have
learnt it. However, you still have to contend with the three arms of our
state, between which there is a separation of powers.

Many people confuse this with having, federal states. Separation of powers
simply refers to legislative, executive and judiciary matters, only in that
context. The three spheres of government say: Come together, integrate, and
move like a stream towards bettering the lives of the people in this
country.

The other issue that needs to be emphasised in co-operative governance and
IGR is how we should follow the decisions that are taken at IGR level,
because they are there. As I said, we have the President’s Co-ordinating
Council, PCC, Ministers, MECs, districts, mayors’ forums and all sorts of
things – where the provincial and national seek to support these
municipalities.

What is prevailing is that the debates are held, decisions are taken, but
after the meeting, after catering, no one makes a follow-up on those
decisions. How then do we follow up on decisions in order to strengthen and
implement the outputs of the IGR? I think that is the debate that we need
to undertake, moving forward.

So, once that has been undertaken, there will be a way in which there will
be monitoring and a follow-up on the decisions. This way will also minimise
the application of section 139 across the country. The challenges of this
application will be detected in time at the IGR level and proper
intervention will be done. If there is no such thing, you will always see
section 139 interventions.

As you try to check prior to the application, you will find that there was
a meeting, but there were no follow-ups. One other thing is that national
government must provide resources to provinces, so that when the provinces
intervene in section 139, there are resources to address that chronic
problem within our state.

The Ready to Govern document says that ”democratic local government should
facilitate creation of a strong civil society”.

The impression is that you want to take people to be part of your
governance, because if you have a strong civil society that guides your
planning, and whatever is done in your government, people will move with
you.

And if there is that type of civil society that understands, after planning
has been done, then we need to go back, in that spirit to say: In terms of
your needs, you said you want a temple on top of the mountain; we can’t
afford that. What we are going to do is to bring a pipe of water to ward so
and so. Own it as a community, as a village and as a municipality. This is
one thing that is lacking, in our view, in terms of intergovernmental
outputs in our country.

Municipalities across the country have been involved in protracted,
difficult and challenging transitional processes over the past years. This
has further been compounded by a redemarcation issue, after involving each
and every municipality.

In conclusion, the ANC will be going to the national general council next
month. Amongst many things that will be debated there - which will be taken
forward, which other parties should also do - is that we need to review the
division of revenue. [Applause.] [Time expired.]

Mr K PELELE (North West): Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers
present here, premiers, hon Members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen,
allow me to express my profound delight at the North West province being
given an opportunity to address this august House. It is said that the
world has become a global village and my understanding of that is that the
world has become inextricably interwoven to the point that, when a far away
country sneezes, other countries catch a cold.

It is further said that no man is an island. Allow me to make another
inference: No province, no department, no sphere is an island. History has
constantly taught us that co-operation, and not competition, is the way
forward. What intergovernmental relations underscore is that indispensable
link that is present between government entities, spheres or departments.
And that link enables those entities or spheres to pursue those common but
different objectives of social, economic and political development to
accomplish the national democratic revolution.

It is significant to understand the underlying assumption about the
legislative process and its impact on society. When we talk about unlocking
the synergy for collective effort, we mean having that fundamental
appreciation of the law-making process, a discourse that is all-inclusive
and takes into consideration the overwhelming interests of the public.

The law is not by definition a product independent from society, but a
product of society. So, in order to unlock the synergy, or that key, it is
imperative to define what role each player will assume and consequently
what the expected outcomes are. It is therefore reasonable to expect that
co-ordination and co-operation should be our modus operandi. To put it
simply, we have seen anecdotal evidence that suggests that if we work
together we can succeed, because working together we can do more.

Hon Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen, it is not beyond us to chart a
different course by utilising our institutional mechanisms and our
engineering ability to promote transparent and accountable governance. Our
Constitution in Chapter 3 provides for how that institutional framework
ought to function. Co-operative governance is essential as a way to foster
institutional capacity and sustainability.

The framers of the Constitution intended our system of government not to be
federal, but unitary in its objective - a quasi-federal system in
implementation to speed up service delivery. Understanding local needs in
policy formulation, whether it is by statute or just by policy, is
paramount. That is precisely what intergovernmental relations seek to
accomplish. For example, if you read section 41(1)(g) and (h)(i), (ii) and
(iii), it says that:

all spheres of government and all organs of state within each sphere must
exercise their powers and perform their functions in a manner that does not
encroach on the geographical, functional or institutional integrity of
government in another sphere; and co-operate with one another in mutual
trust and good faith by fostering friendly relations; assisting and
supporting one another; and informing one another of, and consulting one
another on, matters of common interest.

The ingenious nature of this arrangement is that it opens up space for a
government that works, taking into consideration local needs while
advancing the common agenda of building sustainable economic development
that will benefit all.

The delegation model of the NCOP as enshrined in the Constitution
guarantees the effective and efficient running of government by ensuring
that the legislative arm in the national government remains in touch with
the needs of the people across all the provinces. It seeks to promote
diversity and preserve cultural differences via a national platform. It
captures the essence of a nation seen through a rainbow.

We are a nation of people who migrated southwards looking for a better
future and when we reached that southern point we stopped and settled. We
were met by other forces which attempted to obliterate us, but because of
that spirit of love we remained steadfast in our belief in the fundamental
nature of humans. We indeed remain committed to that principle embodied by
the former statesman Nelson Mandela who when he came out of prison,
explicitly implied that “you must do unto others as you would have them do
unto you.” Today we are living out that principle, albeit with some
imperfections. The manifestation of that can be witnessed in the sporadic
conflicts that have their root cause in our distant past.

Chairperson, as I conclude, our model of governance has defied observers,
because I believe that the genius of our model is in our history. It
captures the aspirations of a nation determined never to go back to the
dark past when humanity was unaware of that greatest common denominator
that binds us and implores us to remember that we have more in common than
we are different. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson of the NCOP the hon M J Mahlangu,
fellow members of the executive, Deputy Minister Carrim, Premier Jenkins,
members of the executive councils, members of the National Council of
Provinces and provincial legislatures, ladies and gentlemen, it was during
the policy debates in May this year that we spoke in this House of the
importance of hosting a debate on how best we can further support and
strengthen the role of the NCOP in terms of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations, in order for us all to achieve our objectives.

I would therefore like to thank this House and the hon Chairperson for
making this much-needed debate a reality. Hon members, without a doubt we,
as government, have a clear understanding of the mandate we have been given
through the results of the 2009 national government elections, as to the
expectations that the South African electorate have of us. This
responsibility we carry speaks to the need to ensure that in our work
across all spheres of government we are always conscious of improving the
functions of government to ensure maximum quality outputs in service
delivery.

The need for our work to have a greater impact is further highlighted by
the outcomes-based approach of President Zuma’s administration, where each
national government Minister has signed a performance agreement based on a
number of government outcomes, relevant to the particular national
department.

In the case of the national Minister of Public Works, and in turn the
department, our commitment to the President is based on achieving the
following outcomes: creating decent employment through inclusive economic
growth; ensuring an efficient and effective development-orientated Public
Service and an empowered and inclusive citizenship; and, lastly, achieving
sustainable human settlements and an improved quality of household life.
The achievement of these outcomes therefore depends on ensuring that there
is proper alignment between the different spheres of government and in an
effort to attain national socioeconomic goals for the benefit of South
Africans, wherever they may be located. Key structures where Ministers meet
their provincial counterparts, such as Minmec, ensure that the national and
provincial spheres of government align their objectives to work as one in
the achievement of the outcomes as agreed to by the national Ministers with
the President.

Chairperson, it is therefore imperative that if we are to speak of ways in
which we can ensure effective delivery by government or how we unlock
synergy for collective effort, we use as a basis the rock which remains the
birth certificate, founding document and pillar of the existence of this
House, our government and our country as a whole. I think, hon Mokgobi, you
are quite correct. It is a pity that the hon Harris wasn’t here to listen
to your political lecture, because I think hon Harris is a bit young. The
federalism debate took place long before he had considered entering
politics, and those that were promoting the federalism debate hardly have a
presence in politics today; so be careful. Your easy victories might be
short-lived. [Applause.] In this regard, it is the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa of 1996 which is the supreme law of the Republic.
Law or conduct inconsistent with it is invalid and the obligations imposed
by it must be fulfilled. The ANC stands by this.

Hon members, in the case of the national Department of Public Works, I
would like to reflect on the mandate of the department, as spelled out by
the Constitution. In its description of the mandate of the Department of
Public Works, Schedule 4 of the Constitution speaks of the Department of
Public Works as having functional areas of concurrent national and
provincial legislative competence. It is the only department that is
referred to in Schedule 4 as such. This does not apply to any other
national department that has concurrent functions with the province.
Section 40 of the Constitution speaks of how these functions should also be
understood within the context of the basic principles of co-operative
governance and intergovernmental relations, at a national, provincial and
local sphere of government. These are distinct, interdependent and
interrelated.

Hon members, it is, however, important that we qualify the Constitution’s
description of the mandate of Public Works. Our functioning is not the same
compared as other national departments in relation to the provincial
spheres of government. For instance, in the debate we had here in May, the
issue was raised about schools, provincial roads, clinics, hospitals and
housing. That is not the mandate of the national Department of Public
Works. However, when it comes to the Expanded Public Works Programme, we
are the co-ordinating department of what happens at provincial and local
government levels.

It is our view that the interdependence and interrelatedness, in ordinary
terms, point to the fact that actions or omissions in any of the spheres
affect or impact on others, and vice versa. Since coming into office I have
seen how the public’s – and not only that of the public but also our own –
somewhat limited understanding of the different roles of the Department of
Public Works has impacted on the message we send out and caused further
confusion.
Examples of this include numerous complaints and comments that we receive
via the talk-to-the-Minister e-mails where, on a daily basis, we receive
correspondence from members of the public on Public Works-related matters,
where the majority relate to a provincial or local government competency. A
number of these complaints, have to do with the construction and
maintenance of roads, which, in terms of the prescripts of the
Constitution, do not fall within the mandate of the national Department of
Public Works, but rather within that of the provincial or local government.
This presents us with an opportunity to look at ways in which we can,
whilst respecting the Constitution, find ways in which we can collectively,
as government, put in place mechanisms where, irrespective of the complaint
or provision of service in terms of our respective competencies, be able to
assist each other in responding to the concerns of South Africans.

Crucially, provinces follow their own budgetary processes in their
respective provincial legislatures. They further table their own strategic
plans, annual reports and other reports to the legislatures.

As we reflect on the role of the NCOP in terms of co-operative government
and intergovernmental relations, it is this House, the NCOP, which brings
the business of national, provincial and local government together. It has
the potential to unlock the synergy of our collective efforts. The unique
role of the NCOP, that of bringing together the three spheres, could enable
the identification of blockages to service delivery, so that we improve the
lives of our people.

Hon members, for the purposes of this debate I would like to highlight, in
particular, portions of the Constitution relevant to section 41, which
speaks to the need for all spheres of government to co-operate with one
another in mutual trust and good faith, by fostering friendly relations,
assisting and supporting one another, informing one another of, and
consulting one another on, matters of common interest, as well as co-
ordinating their actions and legislation with one another.

A proper understanding of Public Works does indicate that the Minister and
the department have wide constitutional executive mandates that should not
be confined to narrowly conceived national or provincial legislation on
Public Works. The broader constitutional interdependence and
interrelatedness of government departments at national level and between
the three spheres of government provide the proper contextual understanding
of concurrent competence at legislative and executive levels.

It is critical that government Ministers, Members of Parliament, MECs,
members of provincial legislatures, mayors and councillors have regular
productive forums at which to discuss and find concrete deliverable ways in
which we can improve service delivery to our people. It is through these
platforms that I believe we will be able to find synergy and resonance in
terms of fulfilling our mandate to the South African electorate as a whole.


I am certain that we all share the view that it is only with our reflection
on these principles and through our own conscience that we will be able to
foster closer ties and relations between the various spheres of government,
which will allow us to be more effective as a government. I refer to our
conscience so as to highlight the importance and responsibility we have in
ensuring that our work is done in line with the founding principles of a
democratic South Africa. This, I believe, is one way in which we can unlock
the synergy for collective effort and ensure that we remain committed, and
I quote from President Zuma, to “working together to speed up economic
growth and transform the economy to create decent work and sustainable
livelihoods”.

In conclusion, the central message I would like to reinforce is that we
must demystify the functions of Public Works at national and provincial
levels. This can be done through our thoroughly interrogating Chapter 4 of
the Constitution and ensuring that we properly understand what it says and
agree that the outline of the concurrent functions of government does best
serve us in terms of our provision of service to our people.

Hon members, for us to unlock synergy for collective effort, it is
imperative that we utilise the principles of the legislative framework as
set out in our founding document, which govern our existence as spheres of
government. These principles compel us to work together, instead of in
silos, to ensure quality service provision to our people. I thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mr A W BREDELL (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon premier,
hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members of the NCOP, ladies and
gentlemen, I appreciate the opportunity to be able to appear before this
esteemed House for the first time since taking office and to participate in
this very important debate, not only because of its topic, but also because
of its timing, given the looming local government elections.

Local government is, of all government spheres, the closest to the people.
It is the first contact for service delivery to our communities and it
plays a key role in ensuring that our communities receive the services they
have the right to.

The NCOP serves as a bridge between national, provincial and local
government. The Council is a linking mechanism which aligns national,
provincial and local interests in national legislation, policies and
planning processes, specifically those that may affect these spheres.

In the same breath, it is the department of local government that is the
bridge or linking mechanism for local municipalities to provincial and, in
many instances, national government.

I believe that through local government processes, oversight and support,
provincial and national government can be sensitised to local government
interests and needs when developing their policies, legislation and
planning programmes.

It is therefore the responsibility of my department to ensure that our
local municipalities are fully supported and to make certain that there is
proper functioning, responsiveness and accountability within these
institutions. This mandate can only be achieved through co-operation
between the spheres of government, commitment to good governance and strong
intergovernmental relations.

In line with the above statement, our overarching goal is to ensure that
our municipalities function efficiently and effectively, and that they are
accountable.

In the Western Cape our political environment is quite unique. Our
municipalities are governed by coalitions which, in many instances, have an
impact on administration but are a reflection of the level of maturity of
our democracy.

Within this environment we have, however, successfully been able to foster
and maintain strong intergovernmental relations across the province, which
has enabled us to collectively resolve and effectively address any
challenges. Many stakeholders participate in these structures and are
afforded the opportunity to express themselves, a case in point being the
SA Local Government Association, Salga, and the Development Bank of
Southern Africa, DBSA.

Another area which highlights the level of co-operative governance within
this province has been that of service delivery. One key responsibility we
share with the NCOP is that of ensuring that service delivery and the
quality thereof is not compromised. This is done through the oversight work
we do in assessing integrated development plans, IDP’s, and local
government budgets.

The Western Cape departments of local government and treasury have,
together, for the past couple of years held local government medium-term
expenditure committees, LGMTECs, and this year these processes have evolved
to become IDP indabas, which seek to promote intergovernmental planning and
budgeting.

The key outcome of the IDP indaba will be to provide a space for joint
planning between spheres of government, where engagements will focus mainly
on current development realities within municipalities.

Furthermore, government will be able to reach a mutual agreement on what
the development priorities are within each of the 30 municipalities and on
future investment of government per municipality.

I want to emphasise that our provincial government takes very seriously the
responsibility both the NCOP and local government have, as stipulated in
section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, Act 32 of 2000
which, in a nutshell, promotes good governance and mandates both the MEC
for local government and the NCOP to act in the event of maladministration
within a municipality.

In promoting participatory democracy, there are synergies in the work done
by the NCOP and that of the province, in that, while the NCOP has the
responsibility to facilitate public participation in terms of section 72(1)
of the Constitution, the department has committed itself to unlocking
opportunities for communities through improved access and active
participation.

Strong emphasis has been placed on active citizen participation in local
government through ward-based planning. Furthermore, through the community
development worker, CDW, programmes, the institutional gaps in service
delivery are addressed and investment programmes of government with a
specific focus on poor and vulnerable communities are being implemented.
There is a strong correlation between these two custodians of co-operative
governance and intergovernmental relations, and yet they have distinct
roles and responsibilities, which are clearly defined by the Constitution
and applicable legislation.

It is imperative to understand that these roles and responsibilities
complement each other. For example, in matters of socioeconomic development
there may be great overlap, where local government shares its legislative
power with both the national and the provincial governments and may oversee
a similar matter. However, the way that municipalities exercise their power
is key.

It is against this background that it becomes clear that unlocking the
synergies through co-operative governance is a non-negotiable imperative.
It is only through the collective effort of government that integrated
planning, budgeting and implementation can effectively accelerate service
delivery.

In conclusion, intergovernmental relations are key for a successful
province and a successful South Africa, but we must also focus on
interdepartmental relationships, otherwise we are going to stay and work
within our silos. To get out of our silos, the Western Cape has decided to
make use of our strategic objectives to align all the departments to work
towards a common goal. I thank you.

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms H G Jenkins): Chairperson, Chairperson
of the NCOP, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Minister Carrim, hon
members of the NCOP, hon MECs, representatives of the SA Local Government
Association, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf the
Northern Cape provincial government, I would like to convey our best wishes
and sincere appreciation to the NCOP for its continued support in ensuring
that provinces carry out their mandate to the best of their abilities.

Our relatively new administration, under the custodianship of President
Jacob Zuma, is convinced that through effective co-ordination across
government as a whole, and acting in harmony with communities, we can
accelerate service delivery and sustainable development. Hosting the 2010
Fifa World Cup is an example of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations in action.

We established the framework for intergovernmental relations which provides
ways for all spheres to work together effectively. The three spheres of
government need to work in partnership and constantly communicate with each
other, so that each sphere is aware of its roles and responsibilities in
driving provincial priorities and ensuring that local needs are considered
in line with national and provincial law-making processes.

Intergovernmental relations are intended to promote and facilitate co-
operative decision-making and ensure that policies, activities and
programmes encourage service delivery across all spheres of government to
meet the needs of the citizens in an effective way.

For us to achieve our vision of a caring, responsive, people-centred and
people-driven government, it is essential for all spheres to work in
harmony with each other. We must work together to achieve our goal of
effective service delivery to our communities in terms of poverty
eradication, good governance, enhancing social integration and promoting
the advancement of women, which remains among the key priorities in our
programme for decisive action and change.

Of critical importance is the ongoing need to strengthen partnerships
between national government, provincial government and local government as
well as our communities and civil society. We need to ensure that
communities and other development partners are mobilised to partner with
municipalities in service delivery and development.

Various challenges, especially the poor revenue base of the majority of the
municipalities in the Northern Cape, have negatively affected the capacity
and performance of our municipalities to deliver services effectively to
our communities who interact directly with them on a regular basis.

It is for this reason that all spheres of government must play a distinct
and proactive role in the process of socioeconomic development, with a
special focus on our province’s rural population, in terms of their
maintaining sustainable livelihoods. Through sustained efforts our system
of co-operative government has made impressive progress in various segments
of our economy, particularly in tourism, infrastructure development,
agriculture and rural development.

The Northern Cape province has prioritised the important issue of co-
operative governance and intergovernmental relations. We have committed
ourselves to ensure that systems, structures and procedures are developed
and enforced to deal with challenges and to ensure that provinces and
municipalities communicate and account more to communities. We have also
worked around the clock to ensure that the core administrative and
institutional systems are in place and are operational to improve
performance.

Through co-operative governance and intergovernmental relations we will
ensure that our municipalities are able to attend effectively to the matter
of quality service delivery in a manner that continues to improve the lives
of all our people. Local government is thus the focal point of delivery of
all government services.

Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to advise that our executive council,
together with municipalities in the province, has embarked on an
interactive programme with communities, which is termed the executive
council, or Exco, outreach programme. In essence, this programme is
characterised by intense and meaningful engagement with communities to
determine their needs, particularly from a service delivery perspective.
Although certain challenges remain, we are, by all accounts, convinced that
we are gradually making the necessary inroads in addressing the needs of
communities.

This strategy is designed to ensure that municipalities meet the basic
needs of communities. This implies that an environment is created, support
provided and systems built to accelerate quality service delivery within
the context of each municipality’s specific conditions and needs.

As South Africans we are indeed a unique breed of people, for we have
pioneered a system of co-operative governance underpinned by democratic
norms and values. In a short space of time we have made progressive strides
in giving meaning to our co-operative model of governance, based on our
constitutional imperative for co-operation between the spheres of
government.

This constitutional imperative therefore calls on the respective spheres to
assist and support each other in order to protect the wellbeing of our
country, by providing a government that is both transparent and accountable
to the people. Indeed, we have formalised and put structures in place with
specific focus areas and objectives, outlined in the policy and legislative
framework. Be that as it may, our system of co-operative government needs
re-evaluation to ensure greater efficiency.

One of the critical factors that must be addressed in the enhancement of
this system is the principle of accountability. In my home province, the
Northern Cape, as in all other provinces, we have intergovernmental
structures that interact and operate on a so-called gentleman’s agreement,
in the absence of a legal framework. Attendance of meetings is not
obligatory and this has a negative impact regarding the content and quality
of debate and discussion.

In conclusion, since the promulgation of the Intergovernmental Relations
Framework Act on 13 August 2005, we have, on a government-wide basis,
established formal structures with specific focus areas and objectives.
However, the following questions remain: Firstly, how many of these are in
sync with the aims and vision of the IGR Act?

Secondly, do we need a more rationalised and strategic IGR and co-operative
governance approach?

Thirdly, is the substance of the current IGR engagements adequate and in
the best interests of the people we serve?

Lastly, how does contestation between spheres of government, government
departments and organs of state undermine the letter and spirit of co-
operative governance?

While we are proud of our system of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations, much more work needs to be done to synchronise
the planning and delivery cycles of the three spheres of government. What
is also needed is a simpler and more effective IGR approach to accelerate
our developmental objectives to ensure a degree of coherence in the
intergovernmental arena. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, let me start by bringing greetings from the
president of Cope, president Lekota, to all of you. Chapter 3 of our
Constitution sets out the principles of co-operative governance in section
41. I can see when I mention the President of Cope, people are getting hot.
That is the President of Cope.

All spheres of government must, however, observe and adhere to the
principles of Chapter 3 and must conduct their activities within the
parameters that the Chapter provides. All in all, the intention of
government has been very good. The problem is implementation. Let us admit
that there is a problem. Cope has identified what the problem is, and it is
that one hand does not know what the other is doing.

This is a serious problem for service delivery. Our Chairperson, tata
[father] Mahlangu, has just mentioned an example of a project in the Free
State. If you are screaming, you are screaming and saying that tata
[father] Mahlangu is not talking the truth.

On the side of implementation, government, by its own acknowledgement, has
been failing very badly. The President’s recent unannounced visit to
Sweetwater left a bitter taste in his mouth. The fact that an
interministerial committee on corruption has been established and the
Special Investigating Unit, SIU, has been asked by the President to
investigate seven departments or entities is a sad outcome.

Many don’t know what they are required to do and many steal what they are
supposed to protect. Corruption is a cancer in all spheres of government.
All the alliance partners, like the SA Communist Party, SACP, are competing
in challenging each other to come clean. The SACP introduced the term
“tenderpreneur”.

Comrade Vavi went so far as to mention two Ministers, and Cosatu called for
a lifestyle audit. Some premiers, MECs and mayors are also being mentioned.
The list is long. You can call it whatever you want, but corruption is a
cancer. Every day it is in the media, which holds the executive to account
while we, who have been given a constitutional mandate, hardly ever do so.
When last did we ever really subject a Minister to proper scrutiny?
Cope is offering very good solutions. The problem is that people and the
executive are not doing what they are supposed to do. Let me mention an
example in the debate here. The executive, provincial legislature and local
government are under one roof. I can say without any doubt that I have seen
the passion in the Chairperson of this NCOP, Mr Mahlangu, who is trying
very hard to make this House work. I want to congratulate him. He is very
passionate. Cope will always support him in the work that he is doing.
[Interjections.] You can get angry. [Time expired.]

Ms G N SWARTBOOI (KwaZulu-Natal): Deputy Chairperson, let me kick off by
first apologising for my colleague, MEC for co-operative governance and
traditional affairs in KwaZulu-Natal, Ms N Dube. She wanted to be here but,
due to commitments, she could not make it.

The President of this country, hon J G Zuma, at the beginning of this year
emphasised that this year is the year of the programme of action. This
debate offers us a welcome opportunity to deliberate on strategies that
will sharpen and unleash the full potential of our government delivery
machinery in order to breathe life into the injunction of our Constitution
to create a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous society.

The constitutional system of governance in our country is one of co-
operative governance in which the powers of important functional areas are
located concurrently in the different spheres of government. Adopting this
system of governance was indeed a remarkable accomplishment of the new
South Africa and a sound policy choice, as opposed to the competitive
federal system which was favoured by a few. This choice, therefore,
cemented co-operative governance as a cornerstone principle of our
democratic dispensation.

Whilst one acknowledges that a lot has been done to institutionalise co-
operative governance through a framework of intergovernmental relations,
the reality, however, is that there is a pressing need to ensure that we
move beyond the legislative pronouncements. We also need to ensure that
what is envisaged in our Constitution and legislation finds practical
expression on the ground by changing the lives of our people for the
better.

We are still experiencing poor co-ordination and accountability within the
different spheres of government. This has resulted, in some cases, in
communities picketing and toyi-toying to show their dissatisfaction with
the level of provision of services and sustainable development
opportunities. Most of the communities are in the Western Cape. Clearly,
this talks to the need to improve the entire government delivery chain by
ensuring better accountability and co-ordination. This includes planning,
budgeting, implementation, support, monitoring and reporting, all supported
by a stronger oversight by the legislatures.

Intergovernmental co-operation lies at the core of the success or failure
of our system of co-operative governance. It is our humble submission that
the NCOP, by virtue of being the only House that is endowed with the wisdom
of public representatives from all the different spheres of government,
should play a pivotal role in ensuring that the executive and the
government unlock the synergy for collective delivery by promoting and
enhancing our system of co-operative governance.

We thank the NCOP for visiting KZN where we, together with them, visited a
number of municipalities. We also took Parliament to the people and
strengthened public participation. We hope that a similar programme is
extended to all provinces, as this has a valuable impact.

The introduction of the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, and the assignment of a new mandate to it, is one sure
effort by government aimed at encouraging integrated delivery and doing
away with the silo mentality in government. We as legislators have a duty
to play an effective oversight role in monitoring whether co-operative
governance is happening in practice across the spheres of government.

Being a body of legislators, there are challenges that we must deal with
and we must analyse whether they need legislative tightening. Among these
are the different standards and oversight mechanisms that apply to the
various spheres of government. Yesterday a question was asked about the
Public Service Commission. The point that was raised was that whereas this
body plays its role with regard to the conduct of provincial and national
public servants, there is no such body at the local level. What implication
does the absence of this body at the local government level have in
promoting the values within the Public Service as enshrined in section 195
of the Constitution?

One of the important issues that we have to deal with is the
intergovernmental relations fiscal formula, in particular the need to
ensure equity when allocations are made so that they take into account the
delivery conditions on the ground. There is a disjuncture in this area
because rural municipalities and provinces are granted revenue which does
not accommodate topography and the amount that they have to spend
travelling to their communities to deliver services.

The allocation of the municipal infrastructure grant, MIG, to
municipalities does not include maintenance. Municipalities keep on
building and building, but there is no money for maintenance. They also
have to commit themselves to using 100% of their MIG in each financial
year. When we deal with the appropriation Bills we must address this as it
has a serious impact on the intergovernmental fiscal relations issue.
Together with the NCOP we must ensure that there is an equilibrium in
financial relations among the spheres of government.

To promote co-operative governance and intergovernmental relations in
KwaZulu-Natal we have established 10 district intergovernmental forums. We
have also established the municipal legal forum, which engages legal
practitioners in all municipalities; the peer networking forum, which
engages with all municipal managers in the province; and a synergistic
partnership forum between the district municipality and the local house of
traditional leaders to deal with service delivery matters of mutual concern
to both institutions.

The government has made a concerted effort to improve intergovernmental
relations with the implementation of various policies and frameworks. These
positive developments, however, are hampered by a number of challenges
originating from the national sphere of government. In the provinces and
local municipalities or governments we have departments that have national
competence like, for example, Home Affairs. When people have problems with
identity documents, IDs, land or water, they go to local government or
provincial government. These issues should be taken into consideration. For
instance, it is unfair for the community of Umkhanyakude District
Municipality not to have water when they have a big dam known as Jozini in
their area.

With regard to the so-called unfunded mandates, the approach in
implementing the community development worker programme, for example, gave
rise to unnecessary tensions between councillors and community development
workers, CDWs, and confusion in respect of functions, roles and
responsibilities. In addition, once implemented the responsibility for
funding the programme was devolved to the provincial department responsible
for local government, without providing for the associated financial
obligations.

Again, without arguing the necessity of the occupation-specific
dispensation, OSD, this is a measure developed and implemented by the
Department of Public Service and Administration, DPSA. There is an enormous
impact on the finances of many provincial departments which have to
reprioritise their budgets and curtail service delivery projects.

Again, proper planning, consultation and alignment of fiscal resources
could have avoided these negative impacts. Municipalities even have to fund
libraries, museums and some aspects of environmental health functions.
These functions should either be assigned to the local sphere, with
accompanying funding, or should be taken up by the relevant responsible
departments.

Our recommendations are as follows. A review of the planning and budgeting
cycles across the spheres of government is required and must lead to key
legislative amendments relating to local government and a restructuring of
the fiscal system. There is clearly a need to establish a co-ordinated
system for planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring and reporting,
and the system must be outcomes-focused as alluded to by hon Mahlangu.
There should be a better allocation of roles and functions to address the
fragmented approach and problems with local municipalities.

In conclusion, we want to say good governance is about good co-ordination.
We therefore call upon the relevant structures to play their roles in
ensuring there is co-ordination. Together we can do more. I thank you

Mr M QOBOSHIYANE (Eastern Cape): Hon Deputy Chairperson of the House, the
National Council of Provinces is constitutionally established; it is the
glue that binds the provincial aspirations of diverse provinces, as they
are for a common good as a nation. This debate is on “The role of the
National Council of Provinces in co-operative government and
intergovernmental relations: Unlocking the synergy for collective effort”.
Despite the enormous progress made over the past years in growing the
national economy in an inclusive way and extending access to basic
services, South Africa is still faced with massive unemployment, poverty
and inequality. This is not surprising, taking into account the scale of
transformation required in overcoming entrenched inequalities and spatial
distortions. Intergovernmental relations, as a crucial element of
government organisations in the South African context, is not in itself a
solution, but a means to achieve effective outcomes in the different
municipal spaces across the country.

Developmental local government has to be conditioned with regard to the
practicalities of managing limited state resources in a prudent and
efficient way. This lies at the heart of intergovernmental relations, where
the optimal use of resources needs a collective effort that fosters an
integrated, predictable and sustainable input for community development to
evolve.

Experience has shown that alignment of governmental plans and strategies
has been an illusion, because it is difficult to pursue outside a strategic
national thrust and if it is based on mere paraphrasing of provincial and
national priorities without a genuine contextualisation and localisation of
national policies, objectives and targets in different municipal areas.

The key challenges that we face as a province in broad terms relate to the
following areas. Firstly, co-ordination and integration of provincial and
municipal strategic planning must take place in such a manner that
provincial and national planning in the province are informed by and inform
the national plans, provincial growth and development plans, PGDPs, and
IDPs. Secondly, there is an absence of a credible, single, integrated
planning, budgeting and reporting schedule for the province. Thirdly, there
is a need for the existence of a coherent IGR framework for the province.
And fourthly, on governance, there is a devolution of powers that is not
always accompanied by capacity-building. Concurrent functions, like
housing, also call for maximum co-operation among the spheres as a
concurrent function, while public participation among the spheres and
between organs of state remains a bit disjointed.

Taking our cue from national legislation such as the Intergovernmental
Relations Framework Act, Act 13 of 2005, as well as Chapter 3 of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, in addition to the whole
plethora of legislation geared towards improved service delivery, we
adopted a provincial intergovernmental relations strategy, together with
the protocols of engagement, at the end of the last financial year, as a
mechanism to foster working together in the province.

The strategy was based on an assessment that was done of the state of the
intergovernmental relations in the province, which found a number of
weaknesses in the IGR co-ordination and management, including a lack of
capacity on the secretariat functions; delays in the implementation of
decisions of IGR structures; a lack of linkages between the various IGR
structures; limitations in the communication system within the IGR function
in the province; a lack of proper co–ordination and communication of the
national interventions in the province, with regard to the provincial
administration and local administration, leading to multiple challenges,
and many others.
To change the situation for the better, the provincial government has
introduced an annual executive council, Exco, outreach, which brings the
spheres together under one roof to discuss issues of importance in service
delivery, while at the same time the office of the premier and the
department of local government are currently playing their role of IGR co-
ordinators in the province to ensure that the provincial and national
departments participate in the local planning.

In conclusion, as part of the above work, a roll-out plan by the department
of local government and traditional affairs together with the office of the
premier, Salga and the provincial treasury, will be implemented to
strengthen the IGR system in the province, and this will include
capacitating various functionaries of IGR within the province, particularly
in the local sphere.

There is a concerted effort to implement the provincial IGR strategy that
was developed in 2009 and approved by the Exco to ensure a proper and
functioning IGR system in the province. I thank you.

Mr M N MOKOENA (Mpumalanga): Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces and Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers present, Deputy
Ministers, Premier of the Northern Cape, members of our various executive
councils, chairpersons of our various portfolio committees present today,
allow me to thank the NCOP for affording us the opportunity to discuss this
very important matter of co-operative governance and intergovernmental
relations between the three spheres of government.

Hon members, we were reminded by various speakers before us that the
Constitution of the Republic makes provision for how government should be
constituted, and that the government is constituted as national, provincial
and local spheres which are distinctive, interdependent and interrelated.
They further stated that all spheres of government must observe and adhere
to the principles of co-operative governance and must conduct their
activities within the parameters that the Chapter provides. The
distinctiveness, however, does not give them absolute power over one
another, but should be understood within the context of the developmental
role of each sphere.

Madam Chairperson, this debate could not have come at a better time, as our
country is gearing itself for the 2011 local government elections and,
invariably, we are in the process of assessing and interrogating our
performance, particularly because the municipal space is where service
delivery hits the ground.

The outcome and impact of national and provincial sector departments’
planning and strategy execution can largely be felt and measured within the
wall-to-wall local government space. It is in this context that we submit
that part of what should define the character of a developmental state,
which we envision as a nation, is the creation of a local government system
that is responsive, efficient, effective and accountable. This is Outcome 9
of our government priorities.

Furthermore, it is our considered view that at the centre of the
developmental agenda is our collective responsibility across spheres of
government and sector departments to build a strong state capacity capable
of intervening decisively in defence of the poor and historically
marginalised communities.

I humbly submit that in this context national and provincial government
must, by legislative and other measures, support and strengthen the
capacity of municipalities and thus co-operative governance in the context
of intergovernmental relations. This is a non-negotiable constitutional
imperative. However, I must be quick to caution that a legislative
framework alone will not deliver the desired result. We need to elevate
this debate and bring other critical ingredients on board, as the Minister
of Finance earlier conceded, such as the question of the organisational
culture within government structures, because the lessons drawn from the
past 16 years should tell us that organisational culture is stronger than
any policy or strategy.

Our attitudes, government atmospheric pressure, the right organisational
temperature defined by values and ethos and how we do things moving forward
will determine the success of any legislative and policy provision. In
realising the ideals of co-operative governance and intergovernmental
relations, we should spare no effort in changing the organisational culture
in the administration of the three spheres of government and demand
professionalism, excellence and accountability for results.

Chapter 5 of the Local Government Municipal Systems Act, Act 32 of 2000,
clearly outlines integrated development planning and its processes. We wish
to underscore that the integrated development plan, IDP, is an overarching
development strategy. It is our view that for the greater and practical
alignment of intergovernmental relations both provincial and national
sector departments should align themselves around the IDP.

Chairperson, there is only one strategic document that must be implemented
to achieve the objective of our developmental state in a local space, and
all of those things should be contained in the IDP. We submit therefore
that co-operative governance and intergovernmental relations must find
expression in the context of the IDP. The shift from a technical approach
to intergovernmental relations to a more sociopolitical one of co-operative
governance provides a fresh environment in which the three spheres of
government can more effectively plan, implement and monitor in an
integrated manner.

It also provides for a more coherent approach to deepening democracy
through institutions created to promote participatory governance. Co-
operative governance therefore provides us with a renewed opportunity to
improve on inclusive and integrated governance and administration.

Regional and rural economies, such as ours, often derive limited benefits
from national inward investment initiatives, as intergovernmental relations
do not result in national, provincial and local government planning
together. Co-operative governance, however, provides us with this
opportunity to collectively support municipalities to build economies
through local and inward investment by ensuring that their local economic
development strategies are linked to national and provincial initiatives.

It structures participation and collaboration between government and the
business sector and communities in general in collectively strengthening
local economies and creating decent work for the unemployed, in particular
the youth. It allows for all stakeholders to identify their roles and
responsibilities in the value chain that builds local economies, and in
facilitating land availability and sufficient economic infrastructure
through forward planning.

It also provides new impetus to past attempts to address intergovernmental
planning challenges on issues such as, for example in our case, the damage
being done to road networks in the province as a result of coal haulage,
where the province and affected municipalities carry the financial burden
of maintaining these road networks. Our desire for co-operative governance,
implying better purposeful relations within and outside government, is not
an idealistic one. It will have to be improved over a period of time and
managed on an ongoing basis.

What is important is that tighter and clearer objectives, mechanisms,
incentives and noncompliance penalties for nonco-operative governance
should be clearly defined. Co-operative governance is a rather unique and
ambitious governance model, like the Constitution that embodies the best
ideals of a new democracy.

Chairperson, as I conclude, I wish to congratulate the NCOP for lifting up
this debate, because, as the festival of ideas continues on co-operative
governance and intergovernmental relations, we also want to suggest that
the debate must find concrete expression in our collective responses on
issues such as climate change, infrastructure development, national waste
management, water sector issues and energy-related matters, municipal
account committee issues and so forth. I thank you, Chair.

Mr M K LEKGORO (Gauteng): Deputy Chairperson and Chairperson of the NCOP,
all protocol observed, when I saw Dennis Bloem coming up here - Minister
Yunus Carrim remembers very well when Terror Lekota was threatening to move
away from the ANC - the first person I thought of was Dennis Bloem and the
fact that he would not be able to make out the difference between extreme
love for a friend and a political choice. There is one reason – and only
one - why he is in Cope, and that is his undying love for Terror Lekota.
[Applause.]... a tantrum he threw here when he ... [Inaudible.][Laughter.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, and I told him ... [Inaudible.]

Mr M K LEKGORO (Gauteng): I know!

Deputy Chair, the debate on this important topic takes place during a very
important month in our calendar of events as a country. I wish to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to all the women of our country. We owe it to
them and always must make sure that, for their sake, our democracy
flourishes for generations to come.

Building sound intergovernmental relations and ensuring that the spirit of
co-operative governance finds resonance in our developmental agenda speaks
directly to our noble cause of building a developmental state, which
constitutes the central subject of our theme “to transform South Africa
into a truly democratic and caring society”.

Our Constitution directs that all spheres of government and all organs of
state within its spheres must secure the wellbeing of our people in the
Republic. It goes without saying that our spheres of government and organs
of state cannot secure such wellbeing outside the context of a well-
rounded, developed country. It therefore requires that, as different
spheres, we consistently marshal ourselves in making sure that we work as
equal partners to ensure that our democratic state does not walk away from
its developmental responsibilities.

We must always remind ourselves that our Constitution directs that all
spheres of government and all organs of state within each sphere must co-
operate with one another in mutual trust and good faith, by assisting and
supporting one another, and co-ordinating their actions and legislation
with one another. This provision in the Constitution guarantees that each
sphere is bound to succeed in its constitutional responsibilities, with a
more formidable relationship with the others, and further ensures that
support is directed to other spheres of government to areas where it is
needed.

As we debate this important topic, we must be reminded that our approach to
intergovernmental relations and co-operative governance has always been
informed by the need to promote relationships across and between the
spheres of government for a shared, integrated, developmental vision. It is
also because of our appreciation of the existence of interdependence that
exists between these spheres of government.

The enactment of a number of pieces of legislation, by the two Houses of
Parliament, to give effect to the spirit of sound intergovernmental
relations and co-operative governance is a living testimony that our
approach to provide sustainable livelihoods to our communities is not the
exclusive responsibility of a single sphere of government, but a result of
sound policy co-ordination, planning and implementation by all spheres of
government.

In an attempt to ensure that the above finds expression in our daily
programmes as the provincial government in Gauteng, we have adopted the
Gauteng provincial intergovernmental relations programme of action. The
programme is being considered by executive structures in the local
government sphere in our province. There are also further engagements
through forums such as the premier’s co-ordinating forum in the province on
policy and strategic issues.

The Gauteng intergovernmental relations, IGR, framework aims to provide
programmatic guidelines that will shift co-operative government from an
abstract concept and governance mechanism to focusing on service delivery
and ensuring responsiveness to citizens’ needs at both macro and micro
levels.

The implementation of the framework will strengthen relations between the
three spheres of government, and link and synergise provincial sector IGR
forums, including the premier’s co-ordinating forum, and intermunicipality
and interprovincial forums.
The basis of the framework is that unless an integrated and coherent
approach to address the challenges of governance is undertaken, the spheres
of government and departments will continue to plan and implement policies
and programmes in isolation from each other. Poor co-ordination will lead
to inadequate, inefficient or duplicate service delivery.

We continue doing all of the above with a very firm commitment to
strengthen the developmental state and good governance, and heighten
service delivery in the province. It is perhaps important to mention that
the decision to strengthen intergovernmental relations and co-operative
governance also includes an attempt to respond to limited or no monitoring
and evaluation of the IGR forums, and to respond to the limited use of
broader provincial integrated planning.

This led to a proliferation of forums that were not necessarily aligned to
the provincial strategic objectives, and this has had a direct impact on
the alignment of planning and budgeting cycles. In implementing our IGR
framework, we focus on the integrated planning and co-ordination of
government programmes and projects; strategic agenda setting; contributing
to a shared vision through a programmatic governance approach across the
two spheres; ensuring effective IGR structures and systems in both local
and provincial spheres; and creating opportunity for capacity development
in sector departments and municipalities in the implementation of the
framework. The successful implementation of the framework will assist in
ensuring that the provincial integrated planning and co-ordination of
programmes and activities contribute to achieving service delivery outcomes
in the province.

Hon Deputy Chairperson, the unique nature of the NCOP finds expression in
its constitutional mandate, as the House that brings together the three
spheres of government. The legislative scrutiny and oversight role of the
NCOP in promoting co-operative governance is fundamentally captured in
section 76 of our Constitution, when it empowers the NCOP to pass a Bill,
to pass an amending Bill or reject a Bill referred to it by the National
Assembly.

The NCOP is a platform for the expression of the interests of provinces,
and therefore acts as one of the central vehicles in the provision of
quality service delivery. The NCOP is at the cutting edge of
intergovernmental relations and serves to entrench co-operative governance
across the three spheres of government, as mandated by the Constitution.

The Gauteng provincial government, through its own leader of government
business, sees to the IGR processes, and sees these processes as
complementary ...

Is my time over? Oh! Thank you. [Applause.] [Time expired.] [Laughter.]

Cllr C JOHNSON (Salga): Chairperson, hon Chairperson of the NCOP Mr
Mahlangu, members of the NCOP, Ministers in absentia, Deputy Minister
Carrim and other representatives from the provinces, we have heard today
the NCOP being described as the second Chamber. We also heard about the
glue that binds us together and the factory of ideas. I would like to coin
a new phrase, the “House of possibilities”, in the spirit of the challenge
and call by President Zuma that we have to look at renewal, particularly in
view of today’s theme, unlocking synergy for collective legislation and the
role we as the SA Local Government Association, Salga, can also play in the
NCOP.

The critical role of the NCOP must be seen in the context of the
constitutional commitment to co-operative government. Co-operative
government in this context implies that national policy and legislation
that provinces and municipalities will be expected to implement are
reflective of the provincial and local realities.

The NCOP has two critical roles in respect of intergovernmental relations:
firstly, that it works with the National Assembly to make and pass new laws
and to focus on laws affecting the provincial and local spheres, thereby
ensuring that the provincial and local interests and concerns can be voiced
as part of the national legislative process. Therefore, the “envoicing”
role comes out very strongly.

Secondly, the NCOP plays an oversight role in the event of national
interventions in a provincial government or provincial interventions in a
municipality. The NCOP thus functions as a bridge-builder between the three
spheres of government. In this regard, we also have seen a number of
perceptions, whether justified or not, which must be seriously considered.

I would like to quote P Reddy, with regard to the assumed role of the NCOP
in intergovernmental relations in order to do it effectively:

   ... the NCOP suffers from problems of both internal credibility, where
   South African politicians pay little attention to it and external
   legitimacy, where the public does not see it performing a useful role.

Reddy further criticises the NCOP by arguing that the NCOP lacks focus,
suffers from lack of internal cohesion created by the presence of permanent
and special delegates, allows national Cabinet to dictate its agenda and
does not challenge either national Ministries or the National Assembly on
matters of provincial interest and fails “to express distinctive regional
interest”.

The NCOP has a number of shortfalls which compromise its status as an
effective intergovernmental forum. Some of them I agree with, but not
others.
Chairperson, these are serious issues which we must collectively address to
ensure that the NCOP fulfils its vision of a strong representative voice of
provincial and local government in the legislative debate shaping our
developmental state. As members of the ruling party we have said that the
people shall govern. How do we voice that within the structures of state?

The NCOP thus plays a crucial role in forging a coherent government for the
country in that it is a platform for engagement to take place between
national policy direction for the country and the distinctive service
preferences of provincial and local government.

As the representative body of local government, the focus of Salga’s
participation in intergovernmental relations, IGR, structures -
particularly the NCOP - is and must be to optimise local government’s
participation and thereby to position local government at the centre of our
co-operative and developmental governance system. Again, the people shall
govern, as the local government turnaround strategy adopted by Cabinet
reflects that local government is everyone’s business.

Salga is a political body created to represent, protect, safeguard and
promote the interests of local government. Salga participates in
intergovernmental structures and is thereby able to influence national and
provincial legislation and to gauge the impact of such legislation on local
government.

As a full partner in government, Salga is expected to be an active
participant in the various intergovernmental forums to provide policy and
positions on numerous issues and to represent local government interests.

Our Constitution provides for participation in the NCOP of designated
representatives and this in itself says that we have to review that in
order for Salga to be effective. This is within the scope of section
163(b)(ii) of the Constitution, which requires procedures by which local
government may designate representatives to participate in the National
Council of Provinces. The Organised Local Government Act must be amended to
reflect the unified nature of Salga, including the logical consequence that
its NCOP delegates are nominated at the national level.

We also find that the current leadership of Salga is either made up of
mayors or district representatives, and they are doing this on a voluntary
basis. They both have to exercise their representative responsibilities in
IGR structures and at the same time execute their executive obligations to
the primary institution.

It can be safely argued that only when Salga has a full-time political
leadership that can serve in the NCOP and portfolio committees of the
National Assembly, as well as Minmecs, will local government take up its
role at the heart of our co-operative local government and avoid being
marginalised in national debates and in other structures where issues which
impact on developmental local government are discussed. Substantial
political leadership is therefore required if Salga is to assume its
constitutional and legislative obligations and participate in the key
strategic intergovernmental structures.

We would like to engage the NCOP and lobby that the Rules be amended to
include the provision whereby the NCOP is compelled to afford organised
local government the opportunity to address the Council before a matter
affecting local government is voted on. This would apply particularly when
the NCOP considers the approval or discontinuation of provincial
interventions.

Local government has been given a challenging set of responsibilities.
Effective performance against its constitutional mandate requires a
coherent and co-ordinated set of support initiatives, including enabling
legislation from the other two spheres of government. The NCOP has a
crucial role to play in this respect.

In the light of the current developments, challenges and opportunities
confirmed in local government and the developmental state, for instance, or
physical divisions or allocations and the critical role that Salga needs to
play to lobby for the best interests of member municipalities, it is
critical that we address some of the shortcomings that have held us back in
fulfilling the expectations of our communities.

Chairperson, these debates provide an opportunity to address some of the
fundamental constraints hampering our institutions, and particularly the
local sphere in its quest to effect development, so that the third
generation of councillors stepping into the fray in 2011 and beyond have a
more stable, sound, equitable policy and legislative framework to deliver
on the developmental state.

In the spirit of Women’s Month we would like to call on Salga and political
parties to ensure that 50:50 representation is achieved when drawing up
party lists. Even where those party leaders are women, please ensure that
not only men are elected! [Applause.]

The role of Salga in the NCOP must be reviewed and, where necessary,
revisited to further strengthen this House to ensure that the voices from
below are heard, and particularly that those voices from below are heard in
this House, and the national debate is considered meaningfully.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member.

Cllr C JOHNSON: Salga looks forward to playing a meaningful role in the
NCOP and appeals to the House to support it. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Conclude, conclude, you
have only few minutes left.

Cllr C JOHNSON: Yes, I am finished. Thank you. [Laughter.]

Mr T E CHAANE: Hon Deputy Chairperson, intergovernmental relations in the
South African context are concerned with interaction between the different
spheres of government. The Constitution provides that government comprises
national, provincial and local spheres of government which are distinctive,
interdependent and interrelated. According to the Constitution, an Act of
Parliament must establish or provide structures and institutions to promote
and facilitate intergovernmental relations and provide for appropriate
mechanisms and procedures to facilitate settlements of intergovernmental
disputes.

The Constitution further provides that an Act of Parliament must provide
for the equitable division of revenue raised nationally among the national,
provincial and local spheres of government. For this reason Parliament has
passed the following pieces of legislation: the Intergovernmental Relations
Framework Act and the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, as well as
many others that other colleagues referred to.

The purpose of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act is to
establish a framework for national, provincial and local governments to
promote and facilitate intergovernmental relations and to provide for
mechanisms and procedures. The Act provides mechanisms for these spheres to
talk to each other, co-operate, support and to assist one another. Nothing
in the Act stops any of the forums established in terms of the Acts to
refer any matter discussed in those forums to the NCOP or to any of its
committees, especially if such matters have policy or budgetary
implications.

For that reason, Deputy Chairperson, I do not agree with the narrow
interpretation of the Constitution by hon Harris. I am surprised that hon
Harris chose to self-promote, self-place and lobby for a federal state,
instead of sharing the good ideas he has on this particular subject.
Perhaps we need to remind each other, Deputy Chairperson, that the fact
that we all fly for two hours to Cape Town from our provinces does not make
the Western Cape a federal state separate from South Africa; it remains a
province in South Africa and it will remain so. [Applause.]

It is also not surprising that he chose that particular route because, as a
Member of the NCOP, I have never heard any leader of the DA in this House
saying anything good about the ruling party. They are best at mastering
criticism on every good thing the ANC and its government does.

As for the comments, I was listening with interest to hear the solutions
that hon Bloem provided from Cope, but I could not pick up even a single
one, except to hear from media clips and what he said in the media. But
perhaps I need to share with hon Bloem that he was unable to share with us
those matters because Cope has of late mastered the art of using the courts
to run its own affairs. Perhaps at some point we will have to debate those
issues.

Our oversight visits to different provinces in the past weeks exposed us to
the harsh reality that there seem to be no connected relations between the
three spheres of government, despite the existence of the structures.
[Interjections.]

O ntšela nako, monna. [You are wasting my time.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, would the hon member take a question from
me?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Chaane, would you
like to take a question?

Mr T E CHAANE: Deputy Chair, I’ll dedicate one hour of my time tomorrow to
engage with hon Bloem; not today.

Mr D V BLOEM: You are not brave enough to take my question. [Laughter.]

Mr T E CHAANE: We found that some provincial departments operate in silos
away from municipalities to the extent that they cannot detect problems at
an early stage. A classic example is the current intervention by the
national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs in
municipalities on matters that, in our view, could have been detected
earlier by provincial departments if they were playing that role in terms
of intergovernmental relations.

In most instances, integrated development plans, IDPs, in municipalities
are not properly aligned with the provincial plans. One area of concern is
the tendency that we have detected in municipalities of compromising
service delivery by choosing to invest huge sums of money. For what
purpose, we don’t know. I hope that the Ministry for Co-operative
Governance and Traditional affairs as well as the Ministry of Finance will
have an interest in pursuing this matter further.

The NCOP is strategically placed to drive the process and encourage
intergovernmental relations between the three spheres of government,
particularly on matters aimed at fast-tracking service delivery. In simple
terms, intergovernmental relations, in my understanding, means working
together to do more, and that is the call the ruling party has made and it
is a call that we should all respect.

Communication between spheres of government should be improved and properly
co-ordinated at all stages - from planning to implementation. Whatever
decision is taken in any of the forums created by the relevant Acts or
interaction forums should also be communicated speedily to the recipients
of such services. Perhaps this should be communicated at a faster speed
than one would normally see used to report negative occurrences.

It is important to note that municipalities are assigned key service
delivery functions such as housing, roads, provision of electricity, water
and municipal infrastructure. They have significant autonomy to allocate
resources to meet basic needs and respond to local priorities, while at the
same time giving effect to nationally agreed upon priorities. For these
reasons one wishes to commend the NCOP on adopting an approach of seeking
to solve problems on the spot through the programme of “Taking Parliament
to the People”. This approach, if adopted by all communities during
oversight visits, will yield much more fruit - as seen during the oversight
visits in Limpopo, North West and the Eastern Cape.

The approach seems to be working wonders, given the reports we are
receiving from all those visited so far. We are also beginning to see a lot
of improvements in the spending of conditional grants, particularly those
that are aimed at improving services at local municipalities.

Over and above that, the NCOP has the very important role of facilitating
stakeholder engagement through its public hearings on the Financial and
Fiscal Commission, FFC, recommendations for the division of revenue for the
next financial year. The NCOP again, through its involvement within the
Budget Council, as represented by the chairpersons of the Select Committees
on Appropriations and Finance, has a role to ensure that inputs from
stakeholders are seriously considered by the Budget Council. In terms of
the Money Bills Amendment Procedures and Related Matters Act of 2009, it
has a role to play by ensuring that, when considering the Budget, the
issues that arise through the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act
structures and forums are taken into consideration.

We appreciate the fact that the government is accelerating its efforts to
better assist municipalities to improve planning and financial capacity; to
achieve greater efficiency in delivery and expand service access to
households in predominantly rural and/or lower-capacity areas. In the
context of these efforts, the equitable share, excluding the Regional
Services Council, RSC, levy replacement and special support for councillor
remuneration, has been growing and will still grow by an annual average of
12%.

We are, however, noting the challenges that remain key in the local
equitable share of some of the municipalities. To state a few: the need for
a differentiated approach for funding the different types of
municipalities, whilst considering the unique expenditure needs, fiscal
capacity and long-term planning and population dynamics; the broader
objective of the local government fiscal framework, which is linking the
local equitable share to conditional grants, especially infrastructure
grants, so that any additional operating costs for municipalities are
factored into the formula; increased operating costs associated with new
social infrastructure funded by the municipal infrastructure grant, where
there is no return on the infrastructure; the large maintenance backlogs
and the continued difficulties in addressing these backlogs; sufficient
flexibility to incorporate changes to current free basic services;
cognisance of the other services that local government provides and the
effect these expenditure items have on the respective budgets; and the
cross-subsidisation ability of certain municipalities to provide services
and account for fiscal capacity more accurately.

We appreciate the role that the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs is playing together with the Development Bank of
Southern Africa as well as Treasury in assisting and ensuring co-operation
between the provincial departments and local government. We are beginning
to see, through such interventions, some progress in most parts of our
country.

I wish to say, Deputy Chairperson, that it would be appreciated if Mr
Johnson could provide the consistent presence of Salga in this House, so
that they enrich our debates to assist in all the challenges cited at local
government. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Madam Chairperson, NCOP Chair, MECs, comrades and friends, this debate is
particularly welcome and I congratulate you on organising it. I bring to
you the very good wishes of Minister Shiceka. As most of you will know, he
was a member of this House not so long ago, and so the NCOP is very close
to his heart.

Indeed, the NCOP is very close to the Department of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs, Cogta, because if we are going to work on the new,
emerging model of co-operative governance, the NCOP is a very, very crucial
partner for us, more so than the National Assembly. And it seems to me that
this debate should not just be about the NCOP, of course. It should also be
about the NA. The NA should be looking at and reviewing its role, so that
it is more effective and efficient in accelerating service delivery and
development, to which we are all committed. In fact, Parliament as a whole
should be doing this sort of introspection, and I congratulate you once
again.

Parliament is ultimately the tribune of the people. It is the organ of
people’s power. It is Parliament that holds the executive to account. It is
Parliament that represents the people to the executive. It is Parliament
that puts pressure on the executive to ensure that we deliver on our
mandate, as it does on both Houses –not least the NCOP – to ensure that the
work we do contributes to service delivery and development.
A crucial measure of the quality of a democracy is the vibrancy and
effectiveness of its Parliament. In our case, we have two equally important
Houses and we have huge developmental tasks, which means that these two
Houses also have to work together and engage with the executive much more
stridently than what I, for what it is worth, think is currently the case.

When it comes to co-operative government and intergovernmental relations,
friends, the NCOP has a very, very crucial role to play. After all, as has
been said repeatedly today, you are the legislature in which all three
spheres converge. You are unique, in fact. If I am correct, NCOP Chair, I
think this is one of the only national legislatures anywhere in the world
in which local government is represented.

While I am on the subject, I think it is about time we considered looking
into the possibility of the SA Local Government Association, Salga,
actually having a vote in the National Council of Provinces. It is
something we need to debate. In the same way, we need to consider what
Councillor Johnson just said, which is that when the NCOP is deciding on
interventions, Salga should be allowed to address the House. Why not, in my
view? Let us look into those sorts of things.

It strikes me that Mr Harris is actually remarkably narrow-minded.
Presumably it reflects the party he comes from. It is a minority party and
it is difficult for them to go beyond a minority perspective. However, it
is a remarkably technocratic, elitist, and narrow understanding of the
Constitution. Indeed, the references he makes to the Constitution are
abysmally crude. This is out of context with the overall system of the need
for co-operative governance that is conveyed in the Constitution as a
whole.

And for a member of the legislature, it is remarkable, too, that he would
want to say that the role of intergovernmental relations and co-operative
governance resides primarily in the executive. Why? Why should Parliament
not take responsibility? If you like, there are two dimensions to
intergovernmental relations and co-operative governance, if he has not
worked it out yet. One is an executive and the other is the legislature,
and really, the power should reside in the legislature.

None of the structures we have – Minmecs, Munimecs, the President’s Co-
ordinating Council and the premiers’ co-ordinating forums - can substitute
for the role of the NCOP; by no means. In fact, your very rationale for
existing, surely, is partly the role you play in co-operative governance
and intergovernmental relations. Partly, if not, substantially, the reason
Salga is here is precisely because you have a crucial role to play in co-
operative governance.

I could reply, if there was time. The whole 15 minutes would be consumed by
it, but there are three quick things I want to say: firstly, he essentially
conflates the role of the executive in Parliament; secondly, he does not
seem to understand that Parliament is located in the people, and whatever
the executive does is irrelevant to the extent that you represent the
people more than we in the executive do; and thirdly, he is offering
technical solutions. I will skip that. It will take me too long to explain.

I think I will move on to say that if you look at the topic, in fact,
maybe, just maybe, it should have been the role of the NCOP in co-operative
governance, not just government. So, that links both the sense in which you
represent the people and civil society out there and the sense in which you
relate to the other two spheres in so far as we are speaking of the NCOP as
a national sphere.

You will be pleased to know that I will not be repeating what has been said
many, many times today – what the role in the Constitution is for the NCOP.
I will skip that, for which I hope I will get some applause, because you
have heard it so many times. [Applause.] And if you do not applaud me, I
will read it word for word and that will really bore you. And there is
nothing wrong with being bored in Parliament. What is wrong with that? We
are all human, and in a three-hour debate, obviously one’s mind drifts, and
so, really ...

Coming back to the point, though, I think there is a sense in which we must
understand too, that since 1996, there has been no major intergovernmental
dispute that has been taken to a court for settlement. It is partly because
the NCOP is here, and partly that the three spheres have some scope to
address those issues through a structure like this and fulfil what Chapter
3 of the Constitution requires of us in the three spheres – that we do not
use the courts and we settle disputes through intergovernmental mechanisms
and processes, one of which is, of course, the NCOP.

Chairperson of the NCOP, I welcome your proposal that the NCOP should set
up specific committees, as I understood you to say, to have scrutiny and
oversight over how intergovernmental relations and co-operative governance
is working. We think that is a wonderful idea. We also think that with the
National Planning Commission and the developmental role that we all have to
play, the NCOP is again reinforced in the need for it to play an active
role in intergovernmental relations and co-operative governance.

I will skip some of these very ... I want to quote to you how we should
never write in government. What does this actually mean? The person who
helped me with the speech – and I have taken only chunks of it, mercifully
– reminds us that the 2007 guide says that “IGR is all about complex and
interdependent relations amongst three spheres of government as well as the
co-ordination of public policies amongst national, provincial and local
government”. This is very wordy. Basically, it was far more clearly set
out, I think, by many members of the House.

In the 1999 audit we speak of the following:

   ... an interacting network of institutions at national, provincial and
   local levels, created and refined to enable the various parts of
   government to cohere in a manner which is appropriate to its
   institutional arrangements... It is an evolving system of institutional
   co-operation that seeks to address the relations and quality ...

These are many words, actually. It can be easily simplified by explaining –
and especially to our friend, Mr Harris - that intergovernmental relations
are evolving all the time. I think the NCOP is poised now, more than ever
before, to play a very effective role. [Interjections.] Has my time
expired?

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, on a point of order: Will the Deputy Minister
take a question? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: I
will take question providing it is precise.

Mr T D HARRIS: It is very concise. In the light of your harsh criticism of
your own speech writer, will you consider firing the person, and writing
your own speeches?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: If
you listened carefully, I said that the speech writer took texts out of two
documents, and yes, I think government officials should not write like
that. So, at least we agree on one thing, though you misunderstand, because
you did not pay keen enough attention to what I actually said. It is not
the speech writer, it is the person who drew notes from government
documents. We should not write like this. I have gone on record saying it
repeatedly. It can actually be simplified in five or six words, and the
members of the House – not you, though – were much clearer in what they
said than what the government officials are saying.

So, yes, I have no doubt that in your provincial government and in your
municipality they are actually even worse. However, the point is that civil
servants the world over ... I will not take your question, if that is what
you are asking, because I want to deal with issues that are more relevant.
Thank you. But he is entitled to ... Yes.

Mr R A LEES: Madam Chair, would you please ask the speaker to speak through
you and not speak directly to the members of the House?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Indeed, I will do exactly that. Thank you very much, that is no problem.

I would like to draw your attention to what the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs is actually doing, because we think you
are playing, and will play, a crucial role in this regard. We are
processing the first drafts of legislation dealing with interventions -
national intervention in the provinces in terms of section 100, and
provincial intervention in terms of section 139 in the municipalities. We
are engaging with the SA Local Government Association. We will engage even
before we bring the Bill to Parliament, maybe with senior officials of the
NCOP, and look at this Bill ...

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I just want to ask the hon Deputy Minister if
it is true that the leader of the ANC Youth League does not agree with his
policy position on what he has just stated?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Thank you. That is a facile question. It is incoherent, as well. You can
speak to me after this meeting. [Laughter.]

As one or two speakers in this House said, the issue, quite simply, is that
we are seeking to ensure that we do not intervene in municipalities, Madam
Chair, when the municipalities are almost on the brink of disaster. We need
early warning signals, and so on, and we need intervention that is more pre-
emptive. The intention of the Bill is not to disempower municipalities, not
to take away any powers and functions, but precisely to empower
municipalities by ensuring that the national and provincial spheres
intervene more actively.

If you look at the community protests that have been spreading throughout
the country this year, they are not the failure of local government alone.
They are ultimately the failure of the co-operative governance system as a
whole and, to some extent, it reflects on the NCOP, too. We are pleading
with the NCOP to play a more active role in that regard. You do, in fact,
play that role, but we are saying you should do so even more actively than
you have been doing. I know the chair of the committee that has oversight
over us has been visiting the municipalities, and we are very grateful for
that. However, between the committee and ourselves, we need to be more like
activists – both you as Parliament, and we, as the executive - in seeing
early signs, also, of municipalities that are about to dissolve, as it
were.

So, we will be introducing this Bill. We are very keen to engage with you.
In fact, before the Bill is formally channelled through the parliamentary
process, we will have started that discussion, as we have done with your
chairperson in a certain structure of your committee that does oversight
over us. We hope to bring such legislation before the end of the year
which, I am sure you will be very keen to know, enhances your co-operative
governance and intergovernmental role.

We also have a process under way at the moment, a Green Paper on co-
operative governance, that will hopefully be completed by the end of this
year or early next year. And there again, the role of the NCOP is
quintessentially important. Without you, this system of co-operative
governance and intergovernmental relations will not work.

We know there are criticisms of the role of the NCOP. Councillor Johnson
referred to them, and so on. There are people who argue that the NCOP is
subordinate to the NA. In fact, there are members of the NA who also see
the NCOP as inferior. I think these issues should be challenged.

Ultimately, the NCOP’s credibility will reside not in this or that
interpretation of the law or the Constitution, but in its activism. And in
this term, one has noticed that the NCOP is being more active. Obviously,
the more active the NCOP is, the more the NA, the people and civil society
out there will take it seriously. But we, as the co-operative governance
Ministry, are especially keen that you play the role that the Constitution
and legislation provide for you. Of course, we have passed the
Intergovernmental Relations Act, but there are weaknesses in it and we need
to review it. As part of the co-operative governance Green Paper, that is
one of the things we will seek to do.

We want to be very clear, though. Part of the aim of fine-tuning,
entrenching, and consolidating the system of co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations is to simplify the system and to ensure that we
do not, with the changes we mean to make in consultation with you and other
stakeholders, bureaucratise it. We want an activist system of
intergovernmental relations, which requires both the executive and the
legislature - and not least the NCOP - to acknowledge that, ultimately, it
is the people that decide their own destiny. We are merely their
representatives, and those of us who are deployed in the executive also
need to understand that very clearly.

Therefore we need to engage more with the NCOP than we might have been
doing until now, and, as the executive, to take it more seriously than we
have been doing. It works both ways, as I said earlier, comrades and
friends. If the NCOP plays a more activist role, we, as the executive, are
obliged to take it more seriously.

So, as has been raised in this meeting, in this discussion, and having
moved on, I also want to stress the crucial role that you have in
intergovernmental fiscal relations.

My time is fast running out and I have less than two and a half minutes
left, so I will focus very quickly on one further aspect which I think is
crucial. It is to say that the reason why we, too, are forced to entrench
our co-operative governance system and intergovernmental relations is
precisely that we are committed to a developmental state. The two are
mutually related. For those of you who might be sensitive to it, they are
dialectically interrelated, not in a crude sense, but the one feeds into
the other. If we have a stronger co-operative governance system, it creates
the conditions for a developmental state, and the more we forge a
developmental state, the more the conditions are created for a strengthened
co-operative governance system.

Securing co-ordination and co-operation across the spheres is actually a
challenge all over the world, not just in South Africa. We are a young,
emerging democracy. But if you look at some of the works that I have
sometimes browsed through about how governments elsewhere in the world work
in the established democracies of the United States - the biggest democracy
you can think of – or India, and so on, it is very difficult to secure co-
operation with the silo mentality.

So, we must not be too hard on ourselves. On the other hand, we cannot be
complacent. We have challenges the USA and other countries in the developed
world do not have. We are simply saying that these five years are do-or-die
years. If we do not develop our country substantially, if we do not
significantly advance service delivery and development, the people out
there are going to become increasingly cynical about government and all of
us, whichever political party we come from.

We have had this debate now. So what? Where do we go from here? As the co-
operative governance Ministry, we are especially keen to see what the
outcomes are. The NCOP Chair suggested in his initial input - and I
apologise that I was a few minutes late, but if I tell you why after this
meeting, you will understand fully – that we are very keen to see what the
outcomes are.

Let us not just have this debate, as government and Parliament often do,
and have nothing come of it. Two years from now, we may have yet another
debate but there is no movement forward. If, indeed, we have another
debate, I suggest it might be in 18 months’ time or a year from now,
although it is only a broad suggestion I can make. And then we can review
how far we have come between this debate now and the next debate. But there
should be some outcomes.

There are some practical issues that have arisen today, like the sort of
things Councillor Johnson raised. There are other issues, like the NCOP
Chair raising this committee idea which I think the NCOP should actually
apply its mind to.

There is a certain party whose name I will not mention, which is turning
100 very shortly and which is having a major conference of over 2 000
delegates in late September. There is an issue there. These issues can be
taken there to get some mandate in a democracy. It is the majority party
that guides government. So, hopefully, some of these issues will be taken
up there.
Finally, I can say that we have now reached a critical juncture and we must
deliver. I thank you very much for a very interesting debate. Thank you,
indeed.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you very much to
all the people who took part in this debate.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 17:39.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 26 August 2010:

          a) South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 26 August 2010:


        (a)      Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 13 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


        (b)      Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 14 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


         The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

