---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-03
---

WEDNESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____
The House met at 15:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

             PASSING AWAY OF MRS MACHEJANE ALINA RANTSOLASE, MP

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we commence with the proceedings, it is
with deep sadness that I have to announce the passing away at eleven
o’clock today of one of our members, Mrs Alina Rantsolase, who was the
chairperson of the ANC caucus. Mrs Rantsolase died after a long illness. I
now ask hon members to rise in memory of our colleague.

Thank you, hon members. A formal motion of condolence will be adopted by
the House within the next few days.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

     Development of programmes to capacitate and empower households and
                                 communities

    13. Ms F E Khumalo (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      To what extent has the Government developed programmes that capacitate
      and empower households and communities to take themselves out of
      poverty?                                NO3705E

Ms F E KHUMALO: Hon Deputy President, to what extent has the government
developed programmes that capacitate ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I asked the Deputy President. [Laughter.] Hon
Deputy President ... [Laughter.] Order, hon members! Order!

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon speaker, hon members, there are a number of
government programmes aimed at capacitating and empowering households and
communities to take themselves out of poverty. Our programme relating to
education is one example.

However, as a co-ordinated programme in the fight against poverty,
government has developed the War on Poverty Campaign, as well as a
comprehensive antipoverty strategy. The former is being scaled up to cover
1 128 of the most deprived municipal wards of the country by 2014, whilst
the latter is currently undergoing consultation in the National Economic
Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, after receiving support from the
National Antipoverty Civil Society Colloquium held in December 2009.

The antipoverty strategy focuses on the following nine pillars that seek to
capacitate and empower households and communities to take themselves out of
poverty with the help of government and its social partners: one, the
creation of economic opportunities; two, investment in human resources;
three, the provision of income security to the most vulnerable members of
society; four, the provision of social and individual asset accumulation,
such as housing, land, working capital and infrastructure; five,
environmental sustainability; six, the provision of a social wage, such as
subsidised electricity, water and sanitation services; seven, the provision
of preventative and curative health care; eight, social inclusion; and
nine, good governance.

It can be seen from the nine pillars that the antipoverty strategy uses
most of the existing government programmes as key instruments. What is
different about the antipoverty strategy is that it identifies the most
deprived wards in the country using the Provincial Indices of Multiple
Deprivation which have mapped all poverty areas in each province.
The strategy profiles the communities and households that live in those
deprived wards; collects and stores such community and household profiles
in the national database; develops referrals that it sends to national and
provincial departments and social partners to address the needs of those
households and communities; advises national and provincial departments to
develop service delivery plans that should be included in the municipal
integrated development plans; and monitors and verifies the impact of
service delivery performed by departments on the progress and graduation of
households and communities out of poverty.

The War on Poverty programme was piloted in 2008 to 2009 by covering a ward
in each province. Cabinet in May 2009 called for the scaling up of the
programme to cover a total of 1 128 of the most deprived wards or a third
of all the wards in the country by 2014, with an estimated three million
households and an estimated 15 million people who live in extreme poverty.
I thank you for your attention. [Applause.]

Ms F E KHUMALO: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, is progress
being made in forging integration between the state, private capital and
other forms of social ownership in order to eliminate poverty and foster
shared growth? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, hon member, part of the approach is to funnel a
co-ordinated menu of services to empower communities and families who are
indeed in affected wards. This programme was debated and discussed
extensively and endorsed at the civil society colloquium and, as I have
stated, is now been processed through Nedlac. Thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Hon Speaker, for a moment, when the hon Khumalo stood up, I
thought there had been another Cabinet reshuffle, but I’m glad that there
hasn’t been a reshuffle. [Laughter.]

Mr Deputy President, thank you very much for the response. Mr Deputy
President, we currently have roughly 14 million people who claim some sort
of social benefit or welfare in this country. I’m sure you would agree with
me, sir, when I say that this number is both extremely high and possibly
not economically sustainable in the medium to long term.

You have, sir, enumerated some examples of how government develops
programmes and is assisting the poor, but I would like to know, hon Deputy
President, if what we are doing – if I may use the old adage – is teaching
our citizens to fish rather than giving them fish? Because, as we drive
through rural areas in particular, Mr Deputy President, you would note that
even subsistence agricultural activity is becoming something of the past.
We don’t see it.

We urgently need to see more self-help and self-reliant communities
developed. I’m sure, Mr Deputy President, Mr Speaker and members, that we
hosted a very successful Fifa World Cup, which was the result of a
concerted effort. We need a similar resolve now. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker, I would very much like to thank the hon
Singh. Yes, indeed, the 13 million people who depend on welfare grants are
too many. I think the aim of the antipoverty approach is to reduce that
number by getting more people to eke out a living on their own without
being dependent on social grants. I could mention many examples of people
whose lives were changed through this programme but, on a much larger
scale, the rural development Ministry is also attending to those
communities, particularly in the rural areas, who need assistance in how to
till the soil, who need tractors, seeds, and so on.

In this way, we believe, we will be able to not only reduce the number of
those who are dependent on social grants, but also improve food security.
That’s the main thrust of all of these co-ordinated efforts. Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Speaker. Deputy President, while we appreciate
what government has done to capacitate our people through the development
programmes to which you have alluded, we nevertheless believe that
government can do more.

An area which government needs to give attention to is the facilitation of
access to microfinance in the form of small loans to those who need some
capital to start their own businesses. So, what I want to know from the
Deputy President is whether government can help to facilitate these small
loans without collateral and at subsidised interest rates on behalf of
qualifying poor people. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Meshoe. I
agree that government can do more and we are indeed pulling out all stops
to try to do more.

Concerning access to micro finance, I can say that there are a number of
funding agencies that address precisely this need for microfinance loans
that can be accessed by communities and households without the collateral
that is demanded by commercial banks. There are such dedicated agencies. As
you know, in most communities people have stokvels, burial societies and so
on. On a small scale, they are already, in a way, practising the management
of loans and repayments. So, indeed, the Mzansi account was opened
precisely to cater for these kinds of people.

The fourth chamber in Nedlac, the community chamber, pushed very hard for
the opening of the Mzansi account to ensure that even those who can save
very little should be able to do so.

Therefore, they are already participating in the money economy and the
microfinancing of whatever projects. In fact, the agencies to which I have
alluded also take care of assisting with training and the putting together
of proposals if people want to engage or improve their small-scale business
activities and so on. Thank you.

Mrs S P KOPANE: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, thank you for
the response that you have just given us.

Do you agree that the National Development Agency, the NDA, is not
fulfilling its mandate to eradicate poverty and its causes? The 77 projects
funded by the NDA only managed to create 2 444 direct job opportunities for
poor household families and 8 005 indirect opportunities within
communities, with a value of R95 million, when we are faced with six
million unemployed people in our country.

According to the Polokwane resolutions, the ANC would make sure that poor
people graduated out of poverty. When will this government start to realise
that only quality education and the creation of sustainable jobs will
enable people to graduate out of poverty? [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Kopane very
much. No, indeed, as government we agree with you that quality education is
the main equaliser in society. But, of course, given the fact that
education itself is acquired over an extended period of time, we can’t take
a view that is, in a sense, sequential, meaning that we start off with
education and leave everything else. We can’t do so because the needy are
needy here and now and today.

Therefore, whatever intervention is required has to be made to sustain
those who are no longer trainable and no longer able to go back to school,
and so on.

On Saturday, I was in Nkomazi in Mpumalanga, in a very poor area that is
also a catchment area for people who live in Mozambique and Swaziland and
who walk in and out of that area, and so on. I came across the mayor who
shared with me an account of one gentleman who lives all by himself in a
house. The roof and the walls of this house have collapsed. This gentleman,
instead of doing something about the collapsed shelter, dug a hole like a
chicken. At night he creeps underneath this roof without walls that is
almost resting on the ground, and in the morning he creeps out and goes
drinking.

So, there are those kinds of cases that are, in a sense, real welfare
cases. They are beyond repair. That gentleman can’t be taken to any
training institution; he can’t be assisted in that fashion. But we agree
with you that quality education is the main equaliser. Whilst we are doing
everything else to ensure that quality education is accessible, we also, in
the interim unfortunately, have to take care of even those hopeless cases.
Thank you.

      Government’s position on demands by Tibetans for greater autonomy

14.   Mr K S Mubu (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   What is the Government’s position on the demands by Tibetans for
           greater autonomy from Chinese rule;

      (2)   whether the Government will support Tibet’s demand in the spirit
           of ubuntu; if not,  why  not;  if  so,  what  are  the  relevant
           details?                                     NO3712E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker and hon Mubu, South Africa adopted the
“One China” policy in 1998. This position was formalised through the
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of South Africa and the
Government of the People’s Republic of China on the Establishment of
Diplomatic Relations, signed on 30 December 1998. This position is also
consistent with international law and diplomatic practice.

The “One China” policy is an international principle, namely that there is
one China and that mainland China, Tibet, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan are
all part of China. [Applause.] This position is also recognised by the
United Nations. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Mr Speaker, the hon Mubu is ill and I am asking the follow-
up question.
The SPEAKER: Yes, please go ahead, hon member.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Thank you. Mr Deputy President, the November 2008
Memorandum on Genuine Autonomy for the Tibetan People is the basis on which
the people of Tibet are basing their request for autonomy. It is not a call
for independence or separation, but rather a middle-way approach to secure
autonomy for the Tibetan people within the scope of the Constitution of the
People’s Republic of China.

Deputy President, given that this memorandum has been presented to South
Africa’s Department of International Relations and Co-operation in that the
People’s Republic of China has recognised the Tibetan nationality as one of
the 55 minority nationalities in China, would South Africa not consider
following the resolution of the European parliament, the codes of the
United Nations and the United States of America to encourage both sides to
engage in substantive discussions in an effort to secure genuine autonomy
for the Tibetan people within the scope of the Constitution of the People’s
Republic of China? If yes, what would your intended plan of action be, and
if not, why not?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, the position of South Africa is that
wherever there are national conflicts, we encourage people of those
countries to engage in dialogue in order to find a resolution to their
challenges. This also applies to China. China has 56 nationalities. As I
understand the facts, so far the Dalai Lama has been in contact with the
government of China more than 10 times. We are quite confident that a
resolution will be found within the understanding that China is one
integrated country and that Tibet is an integral part of China. It is not
for us to support the separation of Tibet from China, because, as I said in
my initial response, China includes Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan as part of
one integrated China.

Within that context, our position is that, indeed, the Chinese government
and Tibet, as an autonomous authority, must continue to have dialogue and
engage with each other until they find a solution. Thank you.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Deputy President, through you, Mr Speaker, this
issue is not about the “One China” policy. It is about human rights and
human rights violations. There have been extensive human rights violations
in Tibet. There was the kidnapping of the Panchen Lama, which is the most
famous child kidnapping case in history. There have been extensive
violations throughout the world, and the ANC government is not responding.
And now, Mr Deputy President, there are no negotiations and there have not
been negotiations. There is no statement from the South African government
that I or anyone else is aware of that encourages China to negotiate. The
negotiations broke down right after the Olympic Games. Before then, they
were set up as a showcase.

The question, Mr Deputy President, through you, Mr Speaker, is that when we
say never, never again, do we mean never, never again in South Africa or
anywhere else in the world? If we mean the latter, where are the
condemnations of the human rights abuses in Tibet, in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, in Iran, in East Timor to which the South African
government sold weapons, and everywhere else where human rights violations
take place?

I urge, through your leadership, Mr Deputy President, the government to
rise to the challenge to become the human rights conscience of Africa and
perhaps the world. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Hon Ambrosini,
basically you were not asking a follow-up question, but referring to a
different issue of human rights all over the world. I don’t know what is
expected of me, hon Speaker.

The SPEAKER: You are correct, hon Deputy President.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, we regard ourselves as a country that has a
Bill of Rights and a Constitution which enjoin us to respect and promote
human rights. Now, I don’t understand what the hon Ambrosini expects of us
beyond that.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Speaker. Arising from your response, hon Deputy
President, will the government be using South Africa’s seat on the United
Nation Security Council to address human rights violations, particularly
the issue of human rights aggressions that occurred or are alleged to have
occurred in Tibet, as well as support ...? Well, you have already mentioned
the issue of autonomy.

Secondly, hon Deputy President, did the South African government in any way
recognise the Nobel Peace Prize award to imprisoned writer Liu Xiaobo, who
stands out for his support for Tibet and the Tibetan government in exile
and who has been described as China’s conscience and a courageous advocate
for democracy and human rights in China? Will the government be joining
other governments in calling for his immediate release? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Swart. Regarding the role of South
Africa on the UN Security Council, as I understand it, there is a Human
Rights Commission of the United Nations which is where human rights issues
are dealt with. The Security Council deals with security issues that
confront the world. I think we will proceed within that understanding in
participating and making a meaningful contribution within the UN Security
Council.

With regard to the question on the Chinese prisoner who has been conferred
the Nobel Peace Prize, that is a reality. He has been conferred that prize
and the whole world recognises that, because all human rights laureates are
recognised by the entire world, including South Africa. We can’t be the
ones who undermine that honour. It is an honour that is accorded to all
across the world, but the selection committee in Oslo follows its own
criteria and honours those who it believes are deserving.

The actual issues of the gentleman’s imprisonment and so on is a matter I
will not go into. Thank you. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Thank you, Deputy President. Please take
your seat.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Deputy President, I wish to
reiterate that the Tibetans are not seeking independence or separation;
they are looking for genuine autonomy which is compatible with the
principles of autonomy in the Constitution of the People’s Republic of
China. The Tibetan nationality lives in one contiguous area on the Tibetan
plateau. They have lived there for years and are therefore indigenous. The
main aim is to preserve culture and language. I have the Memorandum of
Understanding which I would like to forward to you.

I would like to go on to the second part of the question posed to you in
the spirit of ubuntu, sir. The Dalai Lama was denied a visa in 2008 when he
was requested to attend a meeting of the Nobel Peace Prize laureates. Will
you, sir, assure this House that he will be granted a visa should he wish
to visit this country at any time - perhaps next year when the City of Cape
Town offers him the key of freedom to the city?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Kalyan. As I understand the
point of impasse in the negotiations between the Dalai Lama and the
government of China, it centres not so much on the issue of autonomy, but
on the issue that the government of China is expected to withdraw all its
law enforcement and troops from Tibet, and all known Tibetan natives who
have lived there for centuries should be relocated. The government of China
says that won’t happen.

However, Tibet is recognised as an autonomous, integral part of China. That
is why we say that they must continue with discussions until they have a
common understanding. This is not a case of secession, as it were, but a
case of autonomy. And we believe that they can very easily find a
resolution to that dispute.

As I understand the spirit of ubuntu, by definition it simply means “You
are because I am”. That’s what it means. I don’t know how it becomes a
factor in how applications for passports are processed. [Laughter.] I
really don’t understand how the connection comes in, because anybody who
seeks to travel to any country applies for a visa and, in our country, Home
Affairs processes that application. I don’t see how that must be influenced
by the spirit of ubuntu. Thank you. [Applause.]

    Government’s position regarding preparations for referendum in Sudan

15.   Dr G W Koornhof (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What is the Government’s position with regard to the preparations  for
      the     referendum     in     Sudan     on     9     January     2011?
                                              NO3707E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Hon Koornhof, we
are reasonably satisfied that preparations for the referendum are
progressing fairly well.

As the hon member is aware, Sudan was mired in conflict for many years.
Through mediation efforts, mainly by the African Union, the main political
parties signed the historic Comprehensive Peace Agreement on 9 January
2005.

In terms of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the National Congress Party
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement agreed to work together to
address the causes of conflict in different parts of the country. Indeed,
the two parties have formed a government of national unity to govern the
Sudan as a whole, whilst the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement also
governs Southern Sudan.
Part of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement is that a referendum be held to
give the people of Southern Sudan the opportunity to decide whether to
remain part of the Sudan or to secede. Thank you.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Deputy President, for
your answer. My question is: Will the President consider appointing a
special envoy to Sudan to enable South Africa to contribute towards
achieving a peaceful Sudanese referendum, reflecting the will of the people
of Sudan? Secondly, could the Deputy President indicate what is the role of
the African Union panel on Sudan in this regard?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Koornhof. The President has
already appointed a special envoy in the person of former Minister Charles
Nqakula, who has already been dispatched to Sudan.

The role of the African Union panel is to facilitate peace, particularly in
the area of Darfur, which is not quite part of the South. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Deputy President, I was
just wondering exactly what South Africa’s involvement will be in the
preparations, logistically and otherwise. Does it mean we will send members
of the Independent Electoral Commission, the IEC, personnel or soldiers
there or will it be in the form of other logistical assistance? Are we
going to have to pay? What is it going to cost South Africa? If you do
consider a second envoy, I suggest you send Dr Koornhof. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. As we all know,
Sudan has just held elections and, therefore, the machinery that was set in
motion to conduct the elections will also take charge of the referendum in
the South. So, most of the logistical questions have already been
addressed.

As a country, we would indeed assist if approached. In the past the
Sudanese Electoral Commission had extensive discussions with our IEC and
they drew a lot from the experience of the South African IEC. But, because
this is a referendum, at best we can send observers to ensure that it is
conducted in the spirit of peace. Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President,
will the South African government support the will of the people in the
government to organise the Sudanese referendum, where the Sudanese people
will in peace, it is hoped, be able to decide for themselves whether they
want to be part of one Sudan or not?

If their will is disregarded, what steps will the South African government
take to ensure that their right to self-determination and to live and let
live in the spirit of ubuntu is protected in accordance with the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement proposed by the United Nations on this
matter?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Trollip. This referendum is provided
for in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and the understanding of all
parties is that the outcomes of this referendum must not ever lead to
conflict, because they are part of the peace agreement and the operative
word here is peace. Whatever the outcomes are, for instance if the South
decides to secede, it is not going to be possible to take that part of the
country and locate it elsewhere. They still have to live together as
neighbours, at peace with each other, because there are still a number of
outstanding issues that they will have to address. The possibility exists
that, perhaps in the next hundred or two hundred years, they may want to
reunite and form one country, if they do vote for secession. So, the
outcomes, regardless, must serve to buttress peace in the region.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Thank you, hon Deputy President. If, by some chance, a
country could implement the prosecution of President al-Bashir, that would
have an impact, one way or the other, on the process of the referendum.
What is the position of South Africa on the prosecution of al-Bashir, and
what should be the articulation by Members of Parliament, internally and
externally, on this issue?

I also want to ask the Deputy President whether the government will be in a
position to support a delegation from this Parliament to Sudan to assist in
the process of the referendum. I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Ngonyama. The position of the South
African government is that we are part and parcel of the International
Criminal Court, the ICC, and are therefore bound by the decisions of the
ICC. We are also part of the African Union, and in this regard the AU asked
for deferment of the prosecution of President al-Bashir in order to allow
time for the AU panel, amongst other challenges, to find a resolution to
the conflicts in the Darfur region. The AU’s position was premised on the
understanding that it does not condone or promote impunity and that those
who must face charges must face charges.

The only request that the AU made, which we subscribed to, was that time
must be allowed for peace and stability to be obtained in the Darfur
region. Whoever the ICC wishes to charge and whoever is identified as
suspect for having perpetrated atrocities must face those charges.

I am not quite qualified to respond to the question of sending
parliamentary committees and so on. I think the Members of Parliament and
the Speaker can deal with that issue, and ours will be to facilitate. If
the parliamentary team has been selected, we will issue you with passports
and ensure that you travel safely to Sudan. Thank you.

    Position regarding Government’s endeavour to create a nonracial South
                                   Africa

16.   Dr G W Koornhof (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether the Government remains on course in its endeavour to create  a
      nonracial South Africa which is premised on the principle  that  South
      Africa     belongs     to      all      who      live      in      it?
                                        NO3708E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker and hon members, we must continually
reiterate that South Africa comprises people who originate from many parts
of the world who have brought with them values and cultures that over the
intervening years have been blended into one rich tapestry of diversity.

Perhaps our greatest challenge in this country is not merely striving to be
tolerant of this diversity, but to actively explore it, engage with it, and
ultimately to understand and harness it.

In this way, a central vision that defines the parameters of progressive
and critical discourse is one that says we as South Africans are one people
with one destiny. And, it is this galvanising vision that will sustain our
spirit in the course of fighting poverty and inequality, and that will keep
us as a people focused on building a nonracial future for all.

It, therefore, remains our collective responsibility to keep championing
the vision of building a united, nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and
prosperous South Africa. I thank you.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Deputy President, this will be
the last question. Thank you, Deputy President, for your reply. I agree
with you and I think so should every member of this House – that is, agree
with your reply.

In your address during the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation lecture on 1 October
2010, you identified a few developments which are accountable for the
dimming of our nonracial aspiration. My question, Deputy President, is: How
do we redirect or reverse such developments to make our nonracial
aspiration a flame that burns in every heart, so that we live out the
wording on our national coat of arms of “unity in diversity”? I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Koornhof. There are a number of
efforts that would have to be made in order for us to ensure that this
vision of creating a nonracial society in our country is realised. Key
among these are improving the education system -ensuring that we give
access to education institutions, and ensuring that all of our messages,
including the secondary messages, do not undermine this effort of attaining
a nonracial society.

Through word and deed we must always be communicating the message that it
is important for all of us to contribute towards the creation of a
nonracial society. This is because many people in our country tend to
emphasise points of difference, rather than the areas that bring us
together as a people.

The richness in our diverse backgrounds and cultures is a strength that we
must all appreciate and build on, rather than emphasise that we are
different groups, we are different people with different interests, and so
on. I think this requires an all-round ongoing effort because those who are
conservative, and want to hang on to the past, will also latch on to
opportunities, from time to time, to try to divide. But if those of us who
have access to public platforms can utilise these platforms to communicate
this message, I believe we will be able to succeed or to lay down a
foundation, at least, for a truly nonracial society to be created in our
country. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Mr Deputy President. Mr Deputy
President, one of the laws that fundamentally underpinned the apartheid
government was the Population Registration Act. Now that had many
consequences: we had to declare our race and that led to a divided society
and a racialised society – and we know what the consequences are of that.
Notwithstanding the fact that that law was repealed in 1991, why - if you
really want unity, if you really want nonracialism - does government still
insist that we declare our race on many applications that have to be made
on official documents?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much for that point. I think it’s a
rather vexed question in the sense that we are in the early days of
transition. Sixteen years is nothing; it will take 100 years for us to
bridge this divide, because the material basis for discrimination was the
expropriation of the land. That was the basis, and the consequences thereof
we will live with for some time. That is why it is important that we strike
the right balance, because we can very easily start on a new footing and
pretend that all historical factors must be forgotten and that we are now
this wonderful rainbow nation, and we move forward.

However, our Constitution is a transformative Constitution. It directs and
inspires us to build this nonracial society on an ongoing basis, taking
along everybody. We mustn’t steam far ahead of our people. You know, it
would be very simple for government to declare, but we know now that social
engineering doesn’t work like that. We know now that people have to create
and grow to become a united people, and they must have a sense of
belonging.

I want to cite one example. Recently, just before the Fifa World Cup
tournament, the Blue Bulls qualified to play in the semi-finals and the
finals of the Super 14. And because Loftus, which is their home base, had
already been handed over to Fifa, they had to search for an alternative
home ground. Orlando Stadium, which has been upgraded, met their demands,
their requirements, and they saw that as an opportunity to go to Orlando
Stadium. The provision of the physical infrastructure enabled them –
because some of them had never been in a township - to integrate.

If we had addressed, for instance, the social and economic infrastructure
needs in the underdeveloped and depressed parts of the country, we would
have achieved provision of the physical infrastructure for integration,
because then people would settle and move anywhere, enrol in schools
anywhere, and so on. So there are these limitations that we have to take
into account.

This was a bit of a peroration. Now, coming to the specific question, why
is there insistence on race in registers? Why is that still the case? I
suppose it is the easiest way of finding or getting the data that would
speak to the demographics. The existence of different people or races is in
itself not a problem; the problem is when it is used for chauvinism. The
existence of tribes and so on is not a problem. It is when tribalism is
elevated to policy that it then becomes a problem. That is why we say we
appreciate the rich diversity of nationalities in South Africa as they are
a strength of this country.

Many other nations look to South Africa to solve problems of racism because
we are better positioned to do so. I believe that if it serves no useful
purpose, we must discard it. If the underlying rationale is that it only
serves to maintain the division and separation of people, then we must
discard it. But I don’t think that’s the intention. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon Deputy President, we have to agree
that we require an all-round and an ongoing effort to ensure and promote
the principles of nonracialism in our country. Certainly, the Constitution
and other pieces of legislation provide the broad framework and principles
for us to achieve that.

However, Mr Deputy President, speaking as one who comes from the ground and
links up with people when I’m in my constituency, we know very well that
amongst the affluent and wealthy in this country we have little cause for
racial tension as money is truly a great leveller of the playing field. A
rich person of whatever colour who wants to buy a particular service will
go and buy that service. However, we have a problem with the lower-level
income groups where the causes of racial tension are the limited supplies
in terms of employment and government assistance to the poor.

Whilst in health, education and social welfare arenas there is equality in
the provision of services, my observation is that in the area of government-
promoted job-creation opportunities and, in particular, the provision of
state-assisted housing – the Minister of Housing is here – there is a
reality which leads to tensions as only certain groups of our society
qualify in the main for state-assisted housing.

Now, Mr Deputy President, this happens with those that live in informal
settlements who get priority over the backyard dwellers and those who live
under a joint family system in crowded ... [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Singh. As I understand it,
the Ministry of Human Settlements is no longer in charge of the
Reconstruction and Development Programme. It provides human settlements and
therefore anybody who falls within a particular category can apply and they
do qualify to access these houses. It’s no longer the case that the poorest
of the poor found in informal settlements are black people only.

As I said in my last response here: I gave an example of what happened in
Kroonstad where 70 white families moved into Marabastad – there were houses
that were provided. They applied like everybody else, precisely because in
terms of the means test they qualified and they were able to move into
those houses.

The issue of people who move into informal settlements, jumping the queue
ahead of the backyard dwellers, is a problem that the Ministry of Human
Settlements is attending to, because they are also concerned with this
phenomenon. I hope that a solution will be found. These are some of the
problems that come with democracy and the removal of legal restrictions on
the movements of people, because today people can move to the Western Cape
and occupy a piece of land and before you know it they have applied, they
are on the list, and so on. It may very well be that the same people have
applied for a house in Mpumalanga and actually received it. These are some
of the challenges that the Ministry of Human Settlements is attending to,
and I hope that we will be able to find a solution to them. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Deputy President, I’m sure you will agree that the
building of a nonracial South Africa is a task that is not limited to
government alone. It is something which we all need to be involved in, and
we will be judged by our words and actions - not just by society at large –
and, most importantly, by our political leaders.

In that regard, I was extremely shocked to hear over the weekend that the
President of the ANC Youth League referred to the leader of the opposition
as a cockroach that needs to be driven from her office. Surely, you would
know, hon Deputy President, that this term is a weapon and is reminiscent
of genocide and has absolutely no place in our political discourse. Given
that, as we go into the election period, what measures will you be putting
in place to ensure that such words and actions are not used to divide our
population even further? I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Greyling. I do agree with
you. In fact, I really don’t like the fact that, even though human beings
are part of the animal kingdom, we tend to use other animals to insult each
other. [Laughter.] I don’t like that because some of these animals are
really good animals, although nobody takes offence when it is said you are
a lion or a blue bull. [Laughter.]

So, in a manner of speaking, we should, of course – and I know that the
Independent Electoral Commission does monitor this from time to time - not
be disrespectful when we campaign and we must not use insulting language.
We must put our points across without trying to demean each other. I also
think the fact that the gentleman you alluded to referred to a good lady as
a cockroach is a bad thing. I think it’s simply downright bad manners.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                                 GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

 Position regarding noncompliance of Strategic Plan for the Presidency with
                        Treasury Regulation 5.2.3(d)

225.   The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (DA)  asked  the  Minister  in  the
      Presidency - Performance Monitoring, Evaluation and Administration:

      (1)   With reference to the comments made by  the  Auditor-General  in
           the  Presidency’s 2009-10 Annual Report, why did  the  Strategic
           Plan for  the  Presidency  not  include  measurable  objectives,
           expected outcomes, programme outputs, indicators (measures)  and
           targets for all of his department’s programmes, as  required  by
           Treasury Regulation 5.2.3(d);


      (2)   (a) why was the strategic plan signed off if it did  not  comply
           with Treasury Regulation 5.2.3(d) and (b)  who  was  responsible
           for signing off on the strategic plan;


      (3)   whether any steps will be taken against the persons responsible;
           if not, why not; if so, (a) what steps  and  (b)  what  are  the
           further relevant details;


      (4)   whether any steps have been taken to remedy these defects in the
           Presidency’s strategic plan; if not, why not; if so, what steps?
                                             NO3688E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION AND
ADMINISTRATION: Thank you, hon Speaker. In response to the first part of
the question, the matter of inadequate content for the strategic plan was
noted. In order to correct and remedy this inadequacy, plans were developed
and approved in October 2009 using the same process that was adopted for
the 2010-13 period.

In response to part (a) of the second part of the question, the strategic
plan for 2009-12 was not signed off. A letter which was sent to Parliament,
by the accounting officer, informed Parliament that there were no changes
made to the strategic plan for 2008-09 to 2011-12. The letter further
informed the House that a new plan would be submitted after the revised
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, of the Presidency which
incorporates the new electoral mandate.

With regard to part three of the question, no steps were taken. The
accounting officer is no longer in the employ of government. Secondly, with
regard to the weaknesses which we have observed within the administration,
processes are under way to build the capacity of our human resources to
ensure that we are able to deal with the issues that we are supposed to
deal with.

With regard to part four of the question, yes, steps have been taken to
remedy the noted defects. Firstly, the Presidency has tabled a strategic
plan for 2010-13, in Parliament, in compliance with Treasury Regulation
5(1)(1). The current strategic plan for 2010 to 2013 contains measurable
objectives, expected outcomes, programme outputs, indicators and
performance targets for the organisation in compliance with Treasury
Regulation 5(2)(3)(d). Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Minister, the
Presidency’s core responsibility is the implementation of government’s
strategic agenda through planning, co-ordination, oversight and support. It
is deeply ironic that the body tasked with driving government’s strategic
objectives has failed, as per the Auditor-General, to develop a coherent
strategic plan of its own. Your explanation of a strategic plan straddling
one year to the next displays a serious paucity of ideas about what you
need to do. It also exposes fundamental deficiencies in government’s most
powerful department, and highlights a need for greater oversight of the
Presidency.

The Presidency should be setting an example for the rest of government.
However, despite the Presidency’s alleged numerous initiatives to improve
accountability and oversight of government, it has not applied the same
measures to itself.

My question to you, hon Minister, is this: What steps are being taken to
ensure that the Presidency is held to account and is subject to the same
degree of oversight as all the other government departments? How far has
the proposal tabled by the DA to establish a Presidency portfolio oversight
committee progressed?
The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION AND
ADMINISTRATION: As we said, we are in the process of improving governance,
and not only in the Presidency, in order to fulfil the responsibility to
provide support to government administration, and we are doing that. As for
progress with regard to the proposal by the DA to establish an oversight
committee, that cannot be an issue of the Presidency; it is an issue of
Parliament. I think that question should be posed to the Speaker.

Mr T BOTHA: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Is government annually issuing
an updated checklist of the Public Finance Management Act requirements,
Treasury Regulations and Public Service Regulations to ensure that those
who sign off on the strategic plans, and other similar documents,
acknowledge, in writing, that all the essential requirements listed on the
checklist were fully complied with and ticked off accordingly? This would
mean, therefore, that the person who signs off could be held personally
liable if the Auditor-General found otherwise. Alternatively, are
government annual review issues updated per PFMA requirements, Treasury
Regulations and Public Service Regulations?

What systems are being followed to ensure that those who sign or sign off
on strategic plans and other similar documents comply fully with these laws
and are accordingly held personally liable if found out by any audit being
undertaken by the Auditor-General? Thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION AND
ADMINISTRATION: Hon Botha, as a former director-general yourself, I think
you are quite aware of the challenges that the administration is facing. I
am sure that even you, when you were still a director-general, might have
contravened that area. Nevertheless, as you would see in the audit reports
of various institutions in government, there are challenges with regard to
compliance with the various regulations and laws which we are supposed to
comply with in the work that we do.

We are working closely with the Auditor-General and other institutions to
improve the systems in government. We have indicated that, after the
performance delivery agreements have been agreed upon and signed off, our
next task is to team up with institutions that are relevant to provide
support to government to ensure that we improve government systems and
service delivery outputs as quickly as we can.

That process has commenced and, it is hoped, we should be able to begin to
implement it, if everything goes well, by the beginning of the next
financial year. Obviously, it is going to take a bit of time, but we hope
that we will be able to make an impact in the shortest possible time. Thank
you.

      Position regarding mechanism to measure impact made by municipal
                        infrastructure grant spending
223.  Mr A J Williams (ANC) asked the Minister for  Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs:

        1) Whether his department has any mechanism to measure  the  impact
           made by the municipal infrastructure grant  (MIG)  spending;  if
           not, why not; if so, (a) what mechanism and (b) what is the form
           of this impact;


      (2)   (a) how much money has not  been  spent  by  municipalities  who
           received MIG funds and (b)  what  is  his  department  doing  to
           ensure that this does not occur in the 2011-12  financial  year?
                                             NO3686E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Speaker, yes, we do have the mechanisms and instruments regarding what has
been raised in terms of the municipal infrastructure grant, the MIG.

The other question is about how we measure the impact. There are two things
that we look at. One, we go to the people on the ground and check whether -
as intended beneficiaries - they see a difference, and whether the quality
of their lives has been improving. That’s the first thing that we do. The
second thing is to look at whether the backlogs that are there, in terms of
infrastructure development, are being dealt with and addressed. Those are
the two things that we look at.

The second question raises an issue around how much money was not spent on
the MIG. As of June 2010, R926 million was not spent. Now, the question
that is being raised is: What interventions are we undertaking as a
department? The first intervention is to give support to municipalities.
The second intervention is to ensure that we deploy experts to assist where
there is a shortage of skills, particularly of engineers. However, what we
find a challenge is the lack of forward planning. People don’t plan
projects on time so that when the money comes - the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework is for three years – the projects aren’t ready. People don’t do
that. Therefore we are dealing with that issue; we are addressing it.

However, we believe that we are supposed to look at the long-term
solutions. Something we are coming up with is a special purpose vehicle: a
centralised structure at the national level that is going to ensure that
whether you are in Messina or Johannesburg, you can get the same services
at the basic level. We will be able to assist struggling municipalities
that are not able to do that.

We believe that in the coming years the issue of the unspent MIG will be
something of the past. But we are going beyond that. We are saying that the
grants that are given to municipalities in South Africa are too many, unco-
ordinated and disorganised. Therefore we will be co-ordinating the grants
in the way they are supposed to be done to ensure that there is a single
window where things will be undertaken. That is what we are doing as a way
of addressing this issue. Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.

Mr A J WILLIAMS: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, the ANC is asking
these questions because we are concerned not only about the money that is
being spent but also about the quality of the spend. It is important that
MIG funds are spent on the actual infrastructure on the ground. Therefore,
Minister, what is going to happen to the unspent MIG funds? Are they going
to be channelled to the poorest municipalities?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Speaker, the first thing we agreed not to change relates to when a
municipality has not spent, and you take that money and give it to another
municipality. It means the people of that area will remain perpetually poor
and underdeveloped. Our view is that we must deal with the problem, roll up
our sleeves and ensure that we remove the obstacles and blockages there.
Therefore, in that respect, we do not want to shift funds. We want to
ensure that the people who were intended to benefit do benefit.

Quality spend is what we are talking about when we talk about the impact.
That is: Is it doing what it is supposed to be doing? We have found that in
some areas people are using the money for operational costs, and we are
dealing with those things. In some areas you find that the quality that is
there is not satisfactory and we are intervening in those areas. In some
areas you find that people are doing extremely well. In fact, in the
majority of areas people are doing very well. Therefore all those areas and
issues are being dealt with and addressed. Thank you very much, Deputy
Speaker.

Mr J R B LORIMER: Deputy Speaker, would the Minister agree that when
municipalities fail to spend any of their municipal infrastructure grants,
it is the poor who suffer the most, and that the 10 ANC-run municipalities
which failed to spend even 1% of their grant have failed the poor?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Well, I
don’t want to politicise development because there are DA-led
municipalities that are performing very poorly ... [Interjections.] ...
extremely poorly. Therefore I want us to talk about development. Anybody
who is not spending what has been given is not assisting the poor,
irrespective of political parties. I am saying: Let’s agree that
development must not be politicised. Let us focus on what has to be done.
Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr T BOTHA: Hon Minister, the special purpose vehicle that you referred to
seems not to have a budget and the SA Local Government Association, Salga,
believes that this is actually encroaching on the role of the district
councils. How are you going to proceed with this body if you have
opposition from Salga and do not have the budget for it to implement its
task?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Speaker, on 2 December 2009 Cabinet approved the Local Government
Turnaround Strategy which includes, amongst other things, the special
purpose vehicle. Salga has been part of that. I do not understand why
people suffer when there is money that, at times, is not spent, and
sometimes when people build infrastructure, you find that they build
“Bermudas”. A Bermuda is trousers that do not reach where it is supposed
to. [Laughter.]

When government is trying to assist the poor by intervening and ensuring
that infrastructure everywhere in South Africa is at the same level and
Salga says that it is wrong – something which I don’t believe they said -
that is not helping the country. Government and Cabinet have taken a
decision, and all of us must toe the line and implement it. Even Salga is
going to implement what government has taken a decision on. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Prof C T MSIMANG: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the reason – in most cases
– that the MIG funds are not used is the lack of capacity. As a result,
many of the municipalities then engage consultants. A lot of money that
should go towards making an impact on the project then ends up in the
pockets of these consultants. What is the department doing to capacitate
the municipalities so that they can spend better? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, I hope that the same message is going to be conveyed to the
IFP-led municipalities because when the national or provincial government
comes, they resist. They say: “This is our territory and we can’t allow the
ANC to come here; we want to run these things on our own.” We would be
happy if the same issues that are raised at this level are taken to the
ground so that your message sinks in with your members in municipalities.

However, having said that, the issue of building capacity is what we are
focusing on. We have been involved in an audit of skills across South
Africa so that we know where to intervene and where not to. We have taken a
decision through the Local Government Turnaround Strategy that
municipalities must have at least six positions: the municipal manager, the
chief financial officer, the town planner, the town engineer, a person who
deals with communication, and a person who deals with human resources. The
intention is to ensure that we address these ills and shortage of skills in
municipalities so that delivery can happen and there is an improvement in
our people’s lives. Thank you very much.

  Position regarding inclusion of terms of turnaround strategy in municipal
                                   budgets
  79. Mr S L Tsenoli (ANC) asked the Minister  for  Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs: [Standing over in terms of Rule 115]

      Whether his department has assessed if municipal budgets included  the
      terms of the turnaround strategy; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                       NO2513E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, on the issue of the turnaround strategies being adopted by
municipalities, I can assure you that many municipalities, if not all, have
adopted the issues of turnaround strategies that are specific to their
areas, integrated with the Integrated Development Plan, IDPs, because we
said municipalities must have their own specific turnaround strategies as
from the beginning of the year. Therefore, from our point of view, we
believe that the budgets that were implemented from 1 July were based on
the turnaround strategies.

However, the area that is still very weak, which we believe must be
addressed in years to come, is the consciousness of our communities. They
must know that they must ensure that municipalities are turned around and
that the municipalities are their own entities. They must ensure that they
have an interest in whatever happens at that level and they must make a
contribution. That is what is happening in relation to that. We hope to
deepen that consciousness as we go forward. Thank you.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, thank you very
much for that response. How much co-operation is received from provincial
departments who have a contribution to make to those specific municipal
turnaround strategies, especially the provincial departments of public
works who pay rentals to municipalities?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Madam Deputy Speaker, on the issue of provincial departments, I must say
that the bag is varied and mixed. Mpumalanga, for example, has already
signed the delivery agreement and performance agreement between the MEC and
all municipalities in Mpumalanga - between the MEC, the mayors and also the
municipal managers. That tells you what happens, but it is not the same in
other provinces.

Therefore, provinces play a supporting role in these issues because they
are supposed to be driven by them at that level. Our task at a national
level is to give support to provinces and to municipalities.

In relation to co-operation of these departments, particularly the
Department of Public Works, with the payment of municipalities, I must say
that it is still a challenge. Municipalities are being owed by provincial
governments and national government, particularly the departments that are
involved.

What we are finalising, which I hope will be finalised before the end of
this month, is to disaggregate the debt. We want to establish who owes who,
so that we can ask provincial departments, provincial government, national
departments, and national government to pay. You cannot afford to say you
are supporting yourselves as government through municipalities and
undermine yourself at the same time by not paying the bills that are
supposed to be paid to municipalities. Therefore, the situation of payments
is still a big challenge. Thank you.

Mrs M WENGER: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Would you agree, Minister,
that the turnaround strategy can only succeed if the necessary funding and
skills are made available? Unfortunately, district municipalities in
provinces have failed ailing municipalities in the past. Where is the
Minister going to find the additional competence and skills to assist these
ailing municipalities, and what steps are being taken to source these
scarce skills?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Madam Deputy Speaker, we are very glad that you are raising that question
about the skills. We are concluding the auditing of the shortage of skills
in municipalities because the information and the data that were there were
not too reliable. What is going to happen thereafter? We have engaged and
we are engaging with the Department of the Public Service and
Administration, the DPSA, to look at what they have done and where their
engineers that they utilise are. Similarly, we are talking to engineering
organisations and doing all that we think is important to be done.

We are looking at and engaging with the planning fraternity. We are also
speaking to the Auditor-General. We were shocked and dismayed when we found
that the Auditor-General had the capacity of over 900 finance people, who
could be deployed in municipalities. These are people who are graduating
and who are doing their final internships in the Auditor-General’s office
that we can use. I believe that in the short term, we have the skills. The
issue is the deployment of skills and the utilisation of those skills going
forward.

We are categorising municipalities because municipalities in South Africa
are not on the same level, have not developed the same way, and their
needs, conditions and objectives on the ground are not the same. Therefore,
we must know which ones require extensive support and assistance, which
ones require less support and so on. Having done that, we will then be able
to say which ones we must deploy and what capacity is required. We believe
that we are equal to the task. We will be able to do that and ensure that
it is undertaken.

Provinces and districts might not have helped a lot or the help might have
been varied and different, but we are doing these interventions at a
national level as a short-term measure. We believe that provinces, in terms
of the Constitution and the laws, are supposed to play the supportive role,
the monitoring role and the intervention role when things are not going
well. For now, we believe that we are going to address the issues that are
being raised. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Minister, you are public record as stating that 95% of
the 283 municipalities had developed municipal turnaround strategies.
Furthermore, you indicated that these municipal turnaround strategies will
ensure optimal co-operation among the different spheres of government. If
that is so, has the provincial government, on the one hand, and the
national government, on the other, closely interrogated these plans to
ensure sound planning in the co-ordination of action at all levels of
government, effectiveness of budgeting and legitimacy of procurement
processes that are to be utilised? If not, why not; if so, what are the
details?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, I will forgive my colleague there for raising issues of
procurement now, which are not supposed to be asked here, but you could
hear that somebody said: Ask these questions. I will be able to respond to
those issues.
What is happening is that it is true that we have raised issues, as you put
them across. With the development of these turnaround strategies, we
deployed across the country our own officials, working with the officials
of provinces, so that they can assist, in each and every municipality, with
the development of these strategies. When they were developed, there was no
need to double check whether they are speaking to our needs, because the
three spheres of government, at a conceptual initial stage in the
development, were part of the process. Therefore, when these matters were
developed, we were happy about them.

However, the issue of procurement is a big challenge and a big issue
because that is where corruption happens – at the procurement level. We
have agreed with the National Treasury that we are working on amending the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act and also on ensuring
that the procurement process of supply chain is addressed. At times, people
take even the policies that are there, put them aside, take the law, put it
aside and decide ngendlela yesintu ukuthi [in an African way] that we are
now going to do this thing in this way. We want to ensure that all those
practices are uprooted and dealt with. Thank you.

Prof C T MSIMANG: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, we are happy
that members of your department went to the municipalities to help them in
drafting these turnaround strategies. However, we still want to know
whether these strategies are credible. We ask these questions because
municipalities did get help in drawing up their IDPs, but these were still
found not to be credible. As a result, they were never implemented.
Therefore, we would like to know whether there has been any assessment with
regard to credibility. Thank you.


The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, the colleague heard when I was responding to hon Ngonyama
umphumela [with the results]. When we were developing these municipal
turnaround strategies, they were done by the three spheres of government in
each and every municipality. Therefore, we are satisfied with the
credibility.

The issue that is still a concern is the involvement of the people and the
ownership of these turnaround strategies by the people. If a municipality
veers off, in terms of what is expected, people can intervene and say: Come
back into line in terms of what we are doing. That is the only concern.
But, in relation to credibility, we are happy. We hope that in the
intervening years we will be able to ensure that the people are part of it.
We deepen democracy in a real sense. Thank you.

   Position regarding aims of Clean Audit Campaign and achievement thereof

89.   Mr W P Doman (DA) asked the Minister for Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs: [Standing over in terms of Rule 115]

      (a)   What were the aims of the Clean Audit  Campaign  for  its  first
           year since its inception and (b) which of these aims  have  been
           achieved?                                    NO2523E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, I will mention things that we said we want to achieve. One
of them is to ensure that provinces and municipalities receive a clean
audit by 2014. As a provincial government, we are very happy to say that
the Western Cape is our first achievement in ensuring that it is possible
to receive a clean audit. Yes, your Western Cape has received a clean audit
as a province.

However, there are still challenges in municipalities even in the Western
Cape, and we are working on that. That is the first thing we are happy
about. When we set the targets for clean audits we said that we wanted to
launch the programme nationally and provincially in all provinces, which
was successfully achieved.

At the same time, we wanted to create provincial co-ordinating committees
that will continue to drive these processes, even when we are gone, so that
they are owned by these provincial structures in which the Auditor-General,
provincial treasuries, provincial co-operative governance and traditional
affairs departments, the premiers’ offices, the SA Local Government
Association, Salga, and the Development Bank of Southern Africa are
supposed to participate. The ambassadors of Operation Clean Audit, people
who have achieved clean audits, must be able to share their own experiences
in those structures so that we are able to ensure that best practices are
emulated by other municipalities.

The other thing we want to achieve is to ensure that from now onwards we
avoid the issue of municipalities which don’t submit their financial
statements to the Auditor-General three months after the financial year has
ended. We believe that to a certain degree about 95% have been received
from the municipalities. Thank you.

Mr W P DOMAN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Minister, the three Cs are the
problem with audits: cadre deployment, capacity and corruption. The human
resources manager in Nelson Mandela Bay was dismissed after the
controversial purchase of golf shirts at R560 apiece, but left with a
golden handshake and later emerged as municipal manager at the Sundays
River Valley Municipality. He was again dismissed after multiple charges of
tender irregularities, but was later reinstated by the province. However,
the dismissal was confirmed by the courts. Now the Eastern Cape has
appointed him to lead Operation Clean Audit. [Interjections.] How can
Operation Clean Audit succeed with people like this leading it, Minister?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, the first thing is that we have taken a decision as a
department that any person who is about to be charged cannot be allowed to
resign. It means one must face the consequences of one’s actions. Secondly,
we have taken a decision that when there are allegations against one, one
must not be paid a golden handshake. We have stopped that in many
municipalities.

Therefore, what we are raising is that those two practices have been
eliminated. The person who is leading Operation Clean Audit in the Eastern
Cape will check the facts. We will be able to look at that and begin to
deal with it.

However, on the matter of cadre deployment, that is done by all parties,
including your party, hon Doman. I have the minutes of when people
campaigned for your elections and you said you wanted to compensate them;
you wanted to pay them by deploying them here in this municipality. Now,
because they were campaigners - we are going to give you the information if
you want it - we are saying it is not correct when you argue that cadre
deployment is done by only one party.

I think we must agree that all of us, as parties - who are governing and
who might have the potential to govern - don’t accept the issue of cadre
deployment. However, cadre deployment in a way is a concept and there is
nothing wrong with it, as long as you deploy capable people and on merit.

We must discuss and agree upon governance principles, and they must be
followed by everyone, irrespective of party, when one governs a particular
institution of the state. Thank you. [Applause.]

Nkosi Z M D MANDELA: Camagu, ndiyabulela Somlomo kakhulu ngeli thuba
endilifumanayo. Le nto ibuzwa lilungu elibekekileyo, ubawo uDoman icace
okwekati emhlophe ehlungwini. Uyibuza njani ibhasi ibhaliwe? (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Nkosi Z M D MANDELA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, for this opportunity. What
the hon Doman is asking is crystal clear. How could you ask such an obvious
question?]

This is an obvious question, a campaign which is intended to create clean
governance and which the ANC fully supports. Deputy Speaker, through you to
the hon Minister, my question is therefore: What other additional measures
are in place to make the Clean Audit Campaign a success and sustainable?
Camagu. [Thank you.]

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, the most important thing when one does anything is to allow
the users, the operators, to own the campaign. That means that
municipalities must be able to own it. The first thing we believe must done
by the municipalities is to establish municipal public accounts committees
so that politicians can be empowered and able to ensure that they ask the
right questions of the administration in terms of accountability.

The second thing is to ensure that capable and competent people in the
finance section are employed. Thirdly, the audit committees, which are
structures of people coming from outside, must be established to be able to
do their work in municipalities. The audits and risk units must be in
place. From our point of view, we believe that those things will assist in
ensuring that all municipalities deal with the issues.

The question we are faced with is: Can we establish municipal public
accounts committees now, on the eve of the elections, or do we wait for the
elections to take place next year and then establish these structures? It
is a vexing question. We are still dealing with it, but we believe that we
will be able to find the answer and be able to take a particular view on
what has to be done. In that way we believe that these matters are going to
be dealt with and that the additional managers I have been requested to
employ will be in their positions. Thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, the whole concept of a
clean audit campaign was one which was wholly and heartily supported by
everybody who listened to you. You have mentioned the question of municipal
public accounts committees, MPACs. I know I can ask you how many of these
have been established and you may say, “Put it in writing and I’ll give you
an answer.” However, I also know, hon Minister, that you have a hands-on
approach in your department and that you will be able to answer the
question.

What do you think about the establishment of MPACs? And, maybe, hon
Minister, we shouldn’t wait. Local government elections may be in May or
June, but circumstances could postpone them. I think we should expedite the
establishment of municipal public accounts committees so that monitoring
and evaluation can take place in these municipalities before the term of
office expires. I would like your comment on that. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, I will be able to tell the officials and the Deputy
Minister that the matter has been raised; we have been asked and there have
been pleadings that we establish these municipal public accounts committees
before the elections, and we will take your views forward. Thank you.

Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy Speaker, I think a big problem is that a lot of
municipalities have paid no regard to competence. They have a lot of power
and appoint just who they want to. I want to ask the hon Minister: How far
is his department in issuing regulations so that we at least have minimum
requirements for financial positions so that we can get clean audits in the
end?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Doman, you will recall that a party in a
province - I don’t want to mention names - when regulations were developed
in 2006, employed a person who had only passed Standard 4 to be a municipal
manager. This person was a taxi driver and had no experience in municipal
issues. When the MEC challenged this, the party went to court and the
regulations were found to be unlawful.

Now what we are doing to address that problem is to introduce the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Amendment Bill in which we will be able to
address the weaknesses that were raised by the court. This means if there
are managers who employ unskilled people, the MEC can intervene. If the MEC
doesn’t intervene within 14 days, the Minister will intervene. The Bill was
in Parliament with the portfolio committee, which took it to Nedlac, and
Nedlac was supposed to give a report at the end of last month.

Therefore, we have done our part. We have introduced the Bill and we are
ready to roll out the regulations once the law is passed to ensure that we
address this very same question. Hon Doman, you can ask yourself as a
parliamentarian. Thank you.

        Position regarding formulation and implementation of national
                           anticorruption strategy

 234. Mr L Ramatlakane (Cope) asked the Minister for the Public Service  and
      Administration:

      Whether his department has (a) formulated  a  national  anticorruption
      strategy and (b) begun to implement this  strategy  across  the  whole
      spectrum of government; if not, why not; if so, what are the  relevant
      details?                          NO3698E

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Deputy Speaker,
the answer to the first part of the question is that there is a Public
Service Anticorruption Strategy that provides a mechanism for fighting
corruption in the Public Service, which was approved by Cabinet in 2002.
The strategy encourages an integrated and coherent approach in the fight
against corruption with elements of prevention, detection and combating.

The strategy contains nine considerations, which are: review and
consolidation of the legislative framework; increased institutional
capacity; improved access to reporting wrongdoing and protection of whistle-
blowers and witnesses; the prohibition of corrupt individuals and
businesses; improved management policies and practices; managing
professional ethics; partnerships with stakeholders; social analysis
research and policy advocacy; and awareness training and education.

With regard to the implementation, the answer is yes. The process of
implementation across the spectrum has actually commenced. I want to stress
that this is actually so in all three key sectors that are party to the
development of the strategy, which are the government, business and civil
society. Thank you very much.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Thank you very much, Minister, for the reply. I want to
know if out of that the strategy has been implemented. You will remember
that the Public Service Commission report cited that over R600 million was
appropriated by officials in various departments, including those that were
in state employment.

With regard to the implementation, what is it that we can say tangibly on
the recovery rate, with respect to the money we have found that has been
siphoned off by officials? Can we say that we’ve recovered that money, or
how many cases can we say we have already referred to the police? Are they
now in the process of recovering this money in terms of the strategy?

How many officials from local government are beginning to report, in terms
of the Treasury regulations, those who have been at least confirmed to have
been involved in corruption or corrupt practices at a local level? What are
the statistics that can be shown in those categories or areas in terms of
real implementation and results? We all support the strategy. I thank you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you, Deputy
Speaker. What you said is true, hon Ramatlakane; the Public Service
Commission submitted a report which talks to quite a number of areas. It is
clear that one thing we must do is take steps to deal with all those
issues. If I were to come to the issue of statistics - I wish this question
was based on that - I would have provided statistics.

However, the reality is that, in different departments, there are actions
and cases that are being taken in terms of which public servants, who find
themselves in violation of the code of conduct and who have committed acts
of misconduct, are being dealt with across the three spheres and in all
government departments. It is just that the question of statistics requires
one to raise only those things. If the question was based on that, one
would be in a position to deal decisively with that.

It is very clear, as we as government indicated, that whereas we note what
we do in all sectors and all the departments, we are not complacent and we
do not say it’s enough to do that; hence we bring about ways of making sure
that there is a co-ordinated effort in as far as the question of dealing
with such acts of corruption is concerned. We have policies and strategies,
but we have indicated that that is not enough. What is actually called for
is action. Thank you very much.

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Minister, as expected, mentioned
the various anticorruption strategies that have been announced over the
years and anticorruption units that have been instituted. But what did the
Public Service Commission find?

Firstly, they found that offenders do not have to pay the money back and
that criminal charges are not laid. In other words, offenders get away with
misdemeanours. Moreover, according to the Public Service Commission, over
the past two financial years the cost of financial misconduct has risen by
78%. Minister, why don’t you insist that criminal charges be laid against
offenders and that they pay the stolen money back?

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Deputy Speaker,
hon Dreyer is very clear, of course, in that today the Public Service
Commission gave the report to the portfolio committee on the investigation
it conducted and the findings it made and so on. We will actually subject
that report to discussion and it is then that we will go into details
because there are recommendations that are in the report. With regard to
the point of taking action, that’s exactly what we are insisting on. We are
working closely with the Special Investigating Unit and law-enforcement
agencies to make it a point that where violations and corrupt acts are
actually committed that action must be taken.

We are not saying that we are waiting for that stage. At government level,
that corruption is the highest level of a situation in which public
servants find themselves on the other side of the disciplinary code, but it
starts right from the question of ethics.

That is why we then say that we need to nip it in the bud, so we don’t have
to wait for that. We appreciate that the law-enforcement agencies are
actually doing their best. However, we also say that at the public service
level, in terms of implementation, we need to make sure that we use the
strategy to deal with issues related to various forms of manifestations of
corruption as they arise and also prevent the corruption. Thank you very
much.

Mrs J C MOLOI-MOROPA: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, in
line with the anticorruption outline that you have already given and the
practical implementation of the anticorruption strategy campaigned by
government and all other institutions, is there any practical
implementation that you can outline to this House, with a specific
indication of how you are dealing with Sector Education and Training
Authorities, Setas, in areas that show wrongdoing? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Deputy Speaker,
the question by the hon Moloi indicates specific actions that we are
taking, with specific reference to Setas, if I heard the question clearly.
What we do is clearly as instructed - as you would remember – in that that
area is one of the areas where talk of corruption is rife and high.

We have instructed the board to deal with issues related to investigating
the environment to find out what is going on and for action to be taken. As
we speak now, there are disciplinary hearings going on, where we have even
senior managers from that area being brought to book and having to account
for the actions they have taken.

This is one of the practical ways of showing our zero tolerance of
corruption, and it is not just rhetorical, but a commitment in that we are
actually prepared to walk the talk. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

 Position regarding challenges identified by demarcation process with regard
                     to 2011 local government elections

  80.  Ms  D  G  Nhlengethwa  (ANC)  asked  the  Minister  for  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs: [Standing over in  terms  of  Rule
      115]

      With  regard  to  the  2011  local  government  elections,  (a)   what
      challenges have been identified by the demarcation process and (b) how
      are these challenges being dealt with by  the  relevant  stakeholders?
                                              NO2514E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, I would like to respond regarding the issues of
demarcations, in relation to inner and outer boundaries in preparation for
elections, in many areas we addressed. There were two late requests in the
North West, Matlosana, in which the area called Molopo raised the issue
that it was not happy with the merger of those municipalities. One
municipality has a population of about 6 000 people. It is called a
municipality because of the past. Kagisano and Molopo are very small areas.
They raised these issues very late in terms of the preparations for
elections.

The other area was Mangaung in the Free State where it was felt that they
were not ready to be made a metro because there were areas that must be
addressed. Even at that level - in August when the wards were supposed to
be submitted by 1 September to the Independent Electoral Commission, the
IEC, for the IEC to do its work submitted by the Demarcation Board - it
became clear that it couldn’t happen because that condition could not be
met.

Areas that we believe are not related to local government elections, but
that can destabilise if they are not handled, are cross-boundary areas or
areas where people want to move from one province to the other: Ga-Mothibi,
Balfour, Moutse and Matatiele. Those are the areas that we believe need to
be attended to and be addressed soonest, so that when we go to the
elections, there won’t be challenges and problems. Thank you very much,
Madam Deputy Speaker.

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Hon Minister, thank you for your response. With all the
processes undergone that you have mentioned and the stakeholders’
involvement through the continual communication with the affected
communities, could the Minister assure the House that people now understand
all those processes, that there is stability, and that people are ready to
register in preparation for the 2010 local government elections? I thank
you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Deputy Speaker, I must say that to me there is an issue when you deal with
demarcation, because that affects people’s lives. The consciousness of the
communities is supposed to be built so that they are able to contribute in
terms of which area they want to fall under and for what reasons. Public
representatives, parliamentarians, members of provincial legislatures and
councillors must be mobilised because they have constituencies where they
are able to assist in the building of consciousness.

I cannot stand here and say that everybody in South Africa is happy where
these demarcations have been made and that the process went very well. I
would be misleading this House if I said so. What I can say is that from
our point of view, reasonable work has been done, and the wards have
increased from 3 895 to 4 277 and have been handed over to the IEC. Today
the IEC handed over the maps to the leaders of parties.

Therefore, we are on course, providing we can address a few areas. However,
I don’t think that the South African nation has managed to be on board in
dealing with the issues of demarcation. I think it is an area that we must
address, that we must ensure we improve on in years to come. Thank you very
much, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr J R B LORIMER: Madam Deputy Speaker, during the demarcation process
there was an admirable degree of consensus and consultation, but this
stopped when the first maps came out in July, and thereafter there was no
consultation with all affected parties on changes brought about by
objections. Could the Minister tell us why there was no consultation
between July and September?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS:
Madam Deputy Speaker, the member, my colleague, knows very well that the
Demarcation Board is independent and I cannot tell them what to do and what
not to do. My task is to ensure that we give support and that we are able
to perform our oversight role. However, I must say that we, as the
department, are not happy with the way some areas have conducted
themselves.
We are raising an issue of demarcation. Why should South Africa be
demarcated every five years? It changes everything because things must be
realigned all the time; even the political parties get affected when they
must change their structures and so on. We believe that the issue of
demarcation is something that this nation must debate, but not only that.
Do we need a structure so big with a board to deal with the issue of
demarcation?

That question is an issue that has to be debated and looked at. Now I can
say to you, colleague, that on the issue of consultation, the Demarcation
Board says it has done that, but there are areas where we believe they are
not happy. We cannot tell them what to do because they are independent. I
think that all of us must agree that we have to review the issue of
demarcation in South Africa and ensure that it assists with planning,
service delivery, stability, and the credibility of what we do. Thank you
very much, Madam Deputy Speaker.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M M SWATHE: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the role of the private security industry in South
   Africa and comes up with measures to ensure that this industry is
   appropriately regulated to ensure that it contributes to the overall goal
   of providing safety and security to all South Africans.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:


   That the House debates the reasons why Transnet Rail Freight should fall
   under the Department of Transport and the advantages of doing so.

Mrs L E YENGENI: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the challenges surrounding employment equity,
   particularly with regard to the fishing industry.

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the establishment of the national youth radio
   stations according to the Triple Inquiry Report adopted by this House.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Deputy Speaker, I herby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the tenders, corruption, irregularities and the
   role of Bosasa within the Department of Correctional Services.

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the expansion of school feeding schemes to all
   deserving high schools and improving the implementation of the feeding
   schemes to all deserving primary schools.

Mr A M FIGLAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the underspending of the budget of the Department
   of Human Settlements, its effect on service delivery and the need to
   improve capacity in the provincial governments with regard to the
   provision of housing.

Mr G LEKGETHO: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the upgrading of police stations, especially in
   rural communities, and aligning the demarcation of police stations with
   local government demarcations.

             DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN JAPAN AND SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that Japan/South Africa centennial celebrations are taking
         place this year;

   (2)      further notes that these celebrations mark 100 years of
         diplomatic relations between Japan and South Africa;

   (3)      recognises that Japan and South Africa interact through various
         bilateral and multilateral forums and that there are regular
         ministerial level discussions on issues of trade, investment,
         economic co-operation and cultural matters; and

   (4)      conveys its gratitude to the government of Japan for 100 years
         of excellent bilateral relations.
Agreed to.

                SOUTH AFRICA’S SUCCESS IN ASTRONOMICAL FIELD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


   (1)      notes that the South African Astronomical Observatory has
         successfully modified the Southern African Large Telescope (SALT),
         the largest optical telescope in the southern hemisphere, ahead of
         its recommissioning early in 2011;

   (2)      further notes that SALT is South Africa’s trailblazer in large-
         scale international astronomical partnerships and will be the
         testing ground for best practice in cost-efficient collaborations
         and leading-edge astronomical research;

   (3)      acknowledges that SALT will complement the ground-breaking radio
         astronomy expected from MeerKAT, near Carnarvon in the Northern
         Cape, which is the demonstrator project so essential to South
         Africa’s bid to host the world’s largest telescope, the Square
         Kilometre Array;
   (4)      congratulates the South African Astronomical Observatory’s staff
         at SALT on repairing, onsite, the telescope’s unique and highly
         specialized spherical aberration corrector, thus proving that South
         Africa has a wealth of exceptional technical skills that are equal
         to the best in the world; and


   (5)      further congratulates SALT and MeerKAT and the HESS gamma-ray
         telescope in Namibia for giving South Africa an outstanding
         opportunity to establish its international reputation in the field
         of multiwavelength astronomy.

Agreed to.

            MAKHAYA NTINI’S RETIREMENT FROM INTERNATIONAL CRICKET

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes the announcement by South African cricketer Makhaya Ntini
         of his retirement from international cricket;

   (2)      recognises that Ntini holds the South African records for the
         best bowling figures in test cricket, a match return of 13/132
         versus the West Indies in Trinidad in 2005, in ODI cricket and of
         the most 10-wicket hauls in tests and that he is also the only
         South African bowler to take 10 wickets in a test match at the
         Mecca of cricket, the famous Lord’s cricket grounds in London; and


   (3)      wishes Makhaya Ntini well in his future endeavours.

Agreed to.

 INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR PREVENTING THE EXPLOITATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT IN WAR
                             AND ARMED CONFLICT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that Saturday, 6 November, marks the International Day for
         Preventing the Exploitation of the Environment in War and Armed
         Conflict;

   (2)      further notes that this day was initiated by the United Nations
         in 2001 to raise global awareness of the effects of armed conflict
         on ecosystems and natural resources;


   (3)      acknowledges the efforts by the United Nations, its member
         states and all other role-players that strive to include the plight
         of the environment in measures to prevent conflict; and


   (4)      calls upon all nations to do their part in furthering this
         cause.

Agreed to.

              ACADEMY OF SCIENCE FOR SOUTH AFRICA ANNUAL AWARDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that the Academy of Science for South Africa (ASSAf)
         annually awards up to two ASSAf Science-for-Society Gold Medals for
         outstanding achievement in science that benefits society and that
         ASSAf is the official national Academy of Science which represents
         the country in the international community of science academies;

   (2)      further notes that Professor Hildebrandt from Wits University
         received the Science-for-Society Gold Medal, was the recipient of
         the 2009 African Union Scientific Award, winner of the 2009 Woman
         Scientist of the Year Award and the co-recipient of the ASSAf award
         along with Professor Eugene Cloete; and

   (3)      congratulates Professor Diane Hildebrandt on receiving the
         highest honour awarded by ASSAf for her exceptional contribution to
         the field of science.

Agreed to.

     SOUTH AFRICAN GOLFER LEE-ANNE PACE WINS FITH LADIES EUROPEAN TITLE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that on Sunday, South African golfer Lee-Anne Pace won the
         2010 Ladies European title, her fith such title, by being
         victorious in the Suzhou Taihu Ladies Open in China;

   (2)      further notes that with victories in Switzerland, Wales, Finland
         and the recently held Sanya Open in China, Pace now tops the
         renowned Henderson Money List;

   (3)      acknowledges that Pace is not only one of the greatest icons of
         South African women’s golf, but is also internationally respected
         as an acclaimed professional golfer; and


   (4)      congratulates Pace on her astounding performance and wishes her
         the best of luck for all upcoming events.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:19.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
         Communication-related Information Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted
         by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
             Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 33719 of 29 October 2010.]


          b) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 39 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33619 of 7 October 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
             and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Withdrawal of letter on vacancy in Public Service Commission (PSC)

     The letter dated 25 October 2010 from the President of the Republic,
    informing the National Assembly of the expiry of the term of office of
    the chairperson of the Public Service Commission (PSC) and requesting
    the House to proceed to fill the vacancy, is hereby withdrawn. (See
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 3360)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Amendments to Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Control
        Regulation, 2002 in terms of section 77 of the Financial
        Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No. 38 of 2001).


     b) Amendments to Schedule 1 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act,
        2001 (Act No. 38 of 2001).


     c) Amendments to Schedule 2 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act,
        2001 (Act No. 38 of 2001).


    2. The Minister of Police


     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Cyprus on Police Cooperation,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    Report in pursuance of a House resolution on 26 May 2010 on the
    implementation of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
    Matters Act, No 9 of 2009:

    On 26 May 2010 the National Assembly adopted the Report of Standing
    Committee on Appropriations on the Appropriation Bill (Announcements,
    Tablings and Committee Reports, 21 May 2010, p 1615). The report
    recommended that: “A detailed project plan (schedule) for the
    implementation of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
    Matters Act… be tabled in the House within 30 days by the Office of the
    Speaker”.

    In accordance with the resolution, this report outlines what has been
    done to date to implement the Act, but also sets out planned activities
    and processes moving forward. It is necessary to note that a decision
    was made to extend the date by which this report would be tabled in
    order to allow for the necessary deliberations.

    1.      Introduction

    The South African Constitution grants Parliament the power of the purse
    and stipulates that executive revenue and spending plans must be
    approved by the legislature. The Constitution nevertheless limited
    Parliament’s role in state finances in so far as it was unable to amend
    money bills without a procedure set out in law. To give effect to the
    Constitution, Parliament passed the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
    Related Matters Act, 2009 (Act No 9 of 2009), which was promulgated by
    the President on 16 April 2009. The Act provides for a procedure to
    amend money Bills before Parliament and for norms and standards for
    amending money Bills before provincial legislatures.

    The Act itself was designed on the basis of a number of constitutional
    principles. First was the understanding that Parliament’s power to
    amend to money bills would have to be exercised responsibly. The Act
    therefore safeguards fiscal discipline in different ways, including
    providing for the introduction, and for the first time adoption, of a
    Fiscal Framework which sets key budgetary parameters for a particular
    financial year. Second, the Act had to give effect to the separation of
    powers in a parliamentary system of government. Accordingly, Parliament
    should not attempt to introduce new policy – the prerogative of the
    government. Amendments to money bills should rather be, under normal
    circumstances, motivated by concerns identified and documented during
    the legislatures oversight work. Third, any procedure should not unduly
    comprise the functioning of the state. Stringent timeframes were
    therefore set down for deliberations on the different bills. Fourth,
    the legislation should respond to the constitutional imperative of
    public involvement. Finally, for Parliament to amend budgets it would
    have to have sufficient institutional capacity. The Act therefore sets
    the foundation for a Parliamentary Budget Office with a mandate to
    undertake research and analysis and provide technical support and
    advice.

    Given the above, it was clear that the Act would have a wide-range of
    implications for Parliament – for the passage of money Bills and other
    instruments, the capacity of the institution, and the roles and
    responsibilities of both the political and administrative spheres.
    Indeed, as many members have since observed, the Act represents a new
    chapter in the life of Parliament.

    In August 2009, the Speaker of the National Assembly (NA) and the
    Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) established a
    Political Task Team with a mandate to develop a strategy for the
    implementation of the Act and report to the Presiding Officers who
    would, in turn, report to the appropriate parliamentary structures.
    This Task Team was led by the House Chairpersons for Committees and
    included the chairpersons of the committees on finance and
    appropriations in both Houses, the chairpersons of the subcommittees on
    the review of rules and a programming whip from each House. The
    Secretary to Parliament also appointed a Technical Support Team. This
    team was led by the Deputy Secretary and consisted of representatives
    from the relevant divisions and sections within Parliament. As key
    stakeholders, the Office of the Leader of Government Business and
    National Treasury were also invited to contribute.
    The Political Task Team identified various areas that needed to be
    developed and brought in line with the Act. These included:


         • Development of Regulatory Framework: Parliamentary Rules and
           Procedures;
         • Design of an Orientation and Training Programme; and
         • Establishment of a Parliamentary Budget Office.


    This report conveys progress made in each of these areas and, where
    possible, sets out how activities are expected to proceed. It should be
    borne in mind that some of these measures are subject to the input of
    various parliamentary forums.

    2.      Development of regulatory framework: Parliamentary rules and
           procedures

    The full implementation of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
    Related Matters Act will necessitate extensive regulatory reforms and
    enabling rules and protocols. In the absence of transitional
    arrangements and the required rules, however, interim measures will be
    considered from time to time to ensure that legislative prescripts can
    be met.

    After an initial appraisal, the Political Task Team identified a number
    of procedural challenges with the Act, specifically with some of the
    timeframes and sequencing, such as those pertaining to the Division of
    Revenue Bill and the national adjustments budget. Preliminary proposals
    have been drafted in this regard to deal with these challenges in the
    rules and through legislative amendments. The National Assembly has
    referred the Act to the National Assembly Rules Committee, who in turn
    referred it to the Subcommittee on the Review of Rules. The
    Subcommittee will need to identify the rules, draft and agree to
    specific amendments and report to the Rules Committee in due course. At
    present the Subcommittee is considering rules relating to the
    establishment of the committees established by the Act.

    In terms of the statutory requirements, the National Assembly has set
    up standing committees on finance and appropriations – and disbanded
    the former Portfolio Committee of Finance and the Joint Budget
    Committee. Section 4 of the Act stipulates that each House must create
    committees on finance and appropriations, with specific powers and
    functions as conferred by the Constitution, legislation and standing
    rules. The responsibilities of the committee on finance are broadly to
    review macro-economic and tax proposals contained in the Fiscal
    Framework, the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) and other
    documents; whereas the committee on appropriations is tasked with
    considering appropriation Bills and the division of revenue between the
    spheres of government. This committee also monitors government
    expenditure. The National Assembly has also processed various bills and
    instruments in accordance with the legislation, most notably the MTBPS
    2009 and the budget 2010/11.

    Importantly, the Act prescribes certain preparatory procedures for
    Parliament, and the Assembly in particular, should it wish to consider
    amendments to a specific budget. These include a structured review of
    departmental budgets to be carried out by portfolio committees and an
    overall assessment of budget projections by the respective standing
    committees.

    Section 5 of the Act provides that the National Assembly, through its
    committees, must annually assess the performance of each national
    department. The section therefore requires that committees must
    annually submit budgetary review and recommendation reports (BRRR) to
    the Assembly – after the adoption of the budget but prior to the
    adoption of the report on the MTBPS. As these BRRRs may include
    recommendations on the forward use of resources, they form one critical
    part of Parliament’s engagement with budget the following year.

    Another critical part is the reports on the MTBPS which may make
    recommendations on the fiscal framework and the proposed division of
    revenue of the following year. When the budget is introduced, together
    with the fiscal framework, the Division of Revenue Bill and the
    Appropriation Bill, the Minister of Finance must report on how previous
    resolutions in respect of the BRRR and the MTBPS have or have not been
    taken into account. National Treasury has also added a new annexure in
    the Budget Review, published with the budget each year, entitled
    “Report of the Minister to Parliament” which presents the Minister’s
    responses. While the procedures relating to the BRRRs could not be
    fully implemented during the previous year the intention is to put them
    into practice in 2010.

    With the new mechanisms and procedures, the Act has also led to changes
    both to the Parliamentary Programme Framework generally, in terms of
    session and committee periods etc, and the National Assembly Programme.
    These changes have been documented and will be implemented by the
    programming structures as the need arises. To assist with long-term
    planning and co-ordination the option of a five-year programming
    framework has also received attention.


        3. Orientation and training

    As noted in the introduction to this report, the implementation of the
    Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act will involve a
    range of actors in the political, administrative and public spheres,
    actors within but also well beyond the precincts of the legislature. It
    was therefore recognised that these actors would have to sensitised and
    trained on the provisions of the legislation.

    As an initial measure, the Political Task Team initiated orientation
    workshops on the Act, first for committee chairpersons and whips in
    2009 and then all members of Parliament in May 2010. For the purposes
    of information dissemination, a detailed manual and a leaflet on the
    Act were produced. The Office of the Leader of Government Business also
    conducted a number of workshops, initially for the Parliamentary
    Liaison Officers but later for other relevant staff in the different
    departments. These interventions are ongoing. While these workshops
    were relatively successful in so far as they served to introduce
    members and other role-players to the legislation and associated
    procedures, there remains a patent need to conduct more intensive
    training – a fact highlighted by members during the workshops. A
    proposal for a comprehensive training programming has been developed in
    this regard. In addition, Parliament has resolved to arrange training
    on budget analysis.

    4.      Establishment of a Parliamentary Budget Office

    It is clear that for Parliament to engage meaningfully with and amend
    budgets it must have sufficient institutional capacity and specialised
    personnel, including procedural and administrative staff, researchers
    and economists. The Act therefore requires Parliament to create a new
    agency, a Budget Office, with a mandate to undertake research and
    analysis of all budget proposals and provide independent advice,
    principally but not only, to the standing committees. The Act also
    stipulates that there must be a cooperative relationship between the
    Budget Office and other structures in Parliament.

    The establishment of the Budget Office is a priority for the
    institution. Despite this, it remains a relatively complex undertaking
    and involves, inter alia, the appointment of the Director, the study of
    international best practice, and administrative and budgetary planning.
    To ensure that the Budget Office will operate efficiently and meet the
    expectations of members and the public, the work of the office must be
    underpinned by a common understanding between different actors within
    Parliament – an understanding reinforced through appropriate
    institutional policies and protocols. Consultations on this matter have
    taken place although these must be broadened.

    The appointment of a Director will be fundamental, as he or she will be
    responsible for the design of the office, the recruitment of staff and
    all other administrative affairs. In terms of the Act, the Director
    must be appointed by a resolution of Parliament on the recommendation
    of the standing committees. However, the Act does not detail the
    relationship between the Director and the Executive Authority of
    Parliament, namely the Speaker and the Chairperson of the National
    Council of Provinces, nor does it specify the relationship between the
    Director and the Secretary to Parliament as the Accounting Officer.
    While it is envisaged that the Director will be appointed on the basis
    of a performance contract, the details of this contract should address
    such issues.

    Based on these and other concerns, the Presiding Officers have agreed
    to a study tour of relevant countries to explore the role and capacity
    of legislatures in budget proceedings. This study tour will comprise
    representatives from different political parties and take place this
    year, if Parliament’s programme permits. The intended outcomes include
    consensus amongst parties on the role of the Budget Office within
    Parliament and the responsibilities of the Director.

    5.      Concluding comments

    In conclusion, it should be highlighted that the Money Bills Amendment
    Procedure and Related Matters Act has been in operation for a year. It
    is indeed a powerful tool, one that will allow Parliament to perform
    its oversight role more effectively. This report noted some of the
    procedures and mechanisms contained in the Act that are complex and
    will require careful implementation moving forward. As was emphasised
    during the debate on Parliament’s budget, the challenge will now be for
    committees and members to put their shoulders to the wheel to turn
    theory into practice and potential into concrete results.

    M V Sisulu MP
    Speaker of the National Assembly

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


CREDA INSERT - T101103e-insert1 – PAGESE 3623-3633

CREDA INSERT - T101103e-insert2 – PAGES 3634-3651

3. Report of the Standing Committee on Appropriations  on  the  Division  of
   Revenue Amendment Bill, dated 02 November 2010

   HAVING CONSIDERED THE DIVISION OF REVENUE AMENDMENT BILL [B35-2010],  THE
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, REPORTS AS FOLLOWS:

   1. BACKGROUND


Section 12 of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related  Matters  Act,
No. 9 of 2009 (the Act) requires  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  table  the
Division  of  Revenue  Amendment  Bill  together  with  the  revised  Fiscal
Framework if the adjustments budget  effects  changes  to  the  Division  of
Revenue Act (DoRA) for the 2010/11  financial  year.  This  is  intended  to
foster transparency  and  ensure  smooth  intergovernmental  relations.  The
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act (1997)  prescribes  the  process  for
determining  the  equitable  sharing  and  allocation  of   revenue   raised
nationally. Sections 9 and 10 (4)  of  the  Act  set  out  the  consultation
process to be followed with  the  Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission  (FFC),
including the process of considering recommendations  made  with  regard  to
the equitable division of nationally raised revenue.

In enforcing section 77 of  the  Constitution,  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedures and Related Matters Act, No. 9 of 2009 was enacted.  This  budget
reform empowers Parliament to amend  the  government  budget  and  therefore
plays a greater role in  ensuring  that  the  most  urgent  needs  of  South
Africans are addressed. It provides Parliament  with  necessary  instruments
to oversee government actions and monitor its fiscal discipline. While  this
reform is widely welcomed, the Standing  Committee  on  Appropriations  (the
Committee) is mindful that this legislation  will  be  phased  in  over  the
years. The Committee’s concern and focus is  on  the  establishment  of  the
Parliamentary Budget Office that will provide more  support  to  enable  the
Committees  on  Finance  and  Appropriations  to  fulfil  their  legislative
responsibilities.

The Division of Revenue Amendment  Bill  was  tabled  in  Parliament  on  27
October 2010 by the Minister  of  Finance  during  the  submission  of  2010
Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS).

Clause  1  (the  focus  of  this  brief)  of  the  Bill  provides  for   the
substitution of Schedules 1 to 8 of  the  Division  of  Revenue  (DoRA)  for
Schedules 1 to 8 of  the  Bill.  The  Schedules  to  the  Bill  address  the
following matters:
    • Additional unconditional and conditional allocations to provinces  and
      municipalities;
    • The allocation of unallocated conditional allocations to provinces and
      municipalities;
    • The re-allocation of conditional allocations in terms of section 18 of
      the DoRA;
    • Roll-overs of conditional allocations to provinces and  municipalities
      not transferred by national departments during the  2009/10  financial
      year;
    • Increases to a conditional allocation to a  province  or  municipality
      through virements under section 43 of the  Public  Finance  Management
      Act, 1999 (Act No. 1  of  1999)  or  section  28(2)(d)  of  the  Local
      Government: Municipal Finance Management Act,  2003  (Act  No.  56  of
      2003), as the case may be; and
    • The re-allocation of conditional allocations that were  not  correctly
      reflected in the Schedules to the DoRA.

2. Equitable division of revenue raised  nationally  among  the  spheres  of
government
Table 1: Schedule 1
|               |Column A         |Column B        |Column C    |
|Sphere of      |                 |                |            |
|Government     |                 |                |            |
|               |2010/11          |2010/11         |Amount      |
|               |allocation       |adjustments     |adjusted    |
|               |                 |                |            |
|               |R’000            |R’000           |R’000       |
|               |                 |                |            |
|National       |                 |                |            |
|               |                 |                |            |
|               |527 001 492      |519 980 624     |7020868     |
|Provincial     |260973745        |265139448       |-4165703    |
|Local          |30167706         |30558566        |-390860     |
|Total          |818142943        |815678638       |2464305     |


 National Treasury (2010) [adapted]

The adjustments ended  up  in  a  net  reduction  of  R2.4  billion  whereby
expenditure  estimates  levels  decreased  from  R818.1  billion  to  R815.7
billion. The total allocations to national  departments  decreased  by  R7.0
billion, allocation to provinces increased by R4.1 billion  and  allocations
to local government  increased  by  R0.3  billion.  In  effect  the  general
decrease will not impact on provincial and local spheres of government  like
on the national sphere of government where allocations were reduced.  It  is
clear the reduced allocations are due to shortfall in expected  revenue.  In
terms of section 6(1) of the DoRA if actual  revenue  raised  nationally  in
respect of the financial year falls short of  the  anticipated  revenue  set
out in Schedule 1, the national government bears the shortfall and in  terms
of section 6(2) of the DoRA if actual revenue raised nationally  in  respect
of the financial year exceeds the anticipated revenue set  out  in  Schedule
1, the excess accrues to the  national  government,  subject  to  subsection
(3).

3. Determination of  each  province’s  equitable  share  of  the  provincial
sphere’s share of revenue raised nationally

Table 2: Schedule 2
|           |Column A        |Column B         |Column C      |
|Province   |                |                 |              |
|           |2010/11         |2010/11          |Amount        |
|           |allocation      |adjustments      |adjusted      |
|           |                |                 |              |
|           |R’000           |R’000            |R’000         |
|           |                |                 |              |
|Eastern    |                |                 |              |
|Cape       |                |                 |              |
|           |40134424        |40789918         |-655494       |
|Free State |15959310        |16217212         |-257902       |
|Gauteng    |45134335        |45869090         |-734755       |
|KwaZulu    |56742834        |57632201         |-889367       |
|Natal      |                |                 |              |
|Limpopo    |33237814        |33766574         |-528760       |
|Mpumalanga |21323198        |21640037         |-316839       |
|Northern   |7101615         |7201470          |-99855        |
|Cape       |                |                 |              |
|North West |17314124        |17567122         |-252998       |
|Western    |24026091        |24455824         |-429733       |
|Cape       |                |                 |              |
|Total      |260973745       |265139448        |-4165703      |


  National Treasury (2010) [adapted]

The current adjustments resulted  in  the  expenditure  level  estimates  in
provinces increasing  from  R260.9  billion  to  R265.1  billion  with  each
province,  KwaZulu  Natal  increased  by  R0.889  billion,  Gauteng   R0.734
billion, Eastern Cape by R0.655 billion, Limpopo by R0.528 billion,  Western
Cape by R0.429 billion, Mpumalanga by R0.316 billion, North West  by  R0.252
billion and Northern Cape by R0.099 billion respectively. There are  however
no changes in forward estimates expenditures for the outer financial years.

4. Determination  of  each  municipality’s  equitable  share  of  the  local
government sphere of revenue raised nationally

Table 3: Schedule 3
|               |Column A        |Column B         |Column C      |
|Province       |                |                 |              |
|               |2010/11         |2010/11          |Amount        |
|               |allocation      |adjustments      |adjusted      |
|               |                |                 |              |
|               |R’000           |R’000            |R’000         |
|Eastern Cape   |4450185         |4453126          |-2941         |
|Free State     |2805978         |2831056          |-25078        |
|Gauteng        |5445197         |5445197          |0             |
|KwaZulu-Natal  |5533344         |5712667          |-179323       |
|Limpopo        |3666434         |3678434          |-12000        |
|Mpumalanga     |2803310         |2909548          |-106238       |
|Northern Cape  |909198          |929810           |-20612        |
|North West     |2563886         |2599921          |-36035        |
|Western Cape   |30167706        |30558566         |-390860       |
|Total          |58345238        |59118325         |-773087       |


National Treasury (2010) [adapted]

Except  for  Gauteng,  all  provinces   experienced   total   increases   in
allocations to municipalities even though not  all  municipalities  received
additional allocations.  Although  the  Committee  welcomes  this  level  of
increase; there is still a need for more  clarity  to  further  explain  the
circumstances leading to such selective additions especially with regard  to
equitable share that is supposed to support extension of free basic  service
to the indigents. On the other hand,  the  Committee  need  to  ensure  that
additional allocations target critical needs such as indigents, repairs  and
maintenance of ageing infrastructure.
In  Eastern  Cape,  four  municipalities  received  increased   allocations-
Sunday’s River  Valley  Municipality  received  increased  allocations  from
R25.7 million to R26.1 million,  Nxuba  Municipality  increased  allocations
from R16.2 million to R16.3 million, Inxuba Yethemba  Municipality  received
increased  allocations  from  R32.8  million   to   R34.2   million,   Senqu
Municipality received increased allocations  from  R66.4  million  to  R66.8
million.

In  Free  State,  five  municipalities  received  increased  allocations   –
Kopanong an increase from  R72.7  million  to  R78.0  million,  Mantsopa  an
increase from R53.9 million to R55.1 million, Motheo  District  an  increase
from R 152.3 million to R152.7 million, Phumelela  an  increase  from  R44.2
million to R45.1 million and Metsimaholo an increase from R79.0  million  to
R143.9 million.

In KwaZulu-Natal, seven municipalities  received  additional  allocations  –
Vulamehlo an increase from R24.5 million to R25.6 million,  uMuziwabantu  an
increase from R30.3 million to R31.3 million, Zululand District an  increase
from R198.6 million  to  R215.4  million,  Jozini  an  increase  from  R48.5
million to R54.1 million, Hlabisa  from  R39.2  million  to  R43.7  million,
KwaDukuza an increase from R50.9 million, and Ubuhlebezwe an  increase  from
R35.4 million to R42.3 million.

Limpopo’s total allocations increased from  R3.6  billion  to  R3.7  billion
where three municipalities received additional allocations –  Makhuduthamaga
received an increase from R107.3 million  to  R111.8  million,  Molemole  an
increase from R57.0 million to R61.3  million  and  Thabazimbi  an  increase
from R45.1 million to R48.2 million.

In Mpumalanga, municipalities  received  additional  allocations  from  R2.8
billion to R2.9 billion  whereby  four  municipalities  received  additional
allocations as follows – Mkhondo an increase from  R73.3  million  to  R80.8
million, Thabachweu  an  increase  from  R59.5  million  to  R62.6  million,
Mbombela  an  increase  from  R247.6   million   to   R295.9   million   and
Bushbuckridge an increase from R339.7 million to R387.1 million.

Northern  Cape  received   an   additional   R612   million   whereby   five
municipalities  received  additional  allocations  –  Hantam   received   an
increase from R15.6 million to R17.4 million,  Karoo  Hoogland  received  an
increase from R10.1 million to R12.1 million, Ubuntu  received  an  increase
from R13.9 million to R16.7 million, //Khara Hais received an increase  from
R40.5 million to R45.4 million, and Sol Plaatjie received an  increase  from
R121.7 million to R130.9 million.
North  West   received   an   additional   R360.3   million   whereby   five
municipalities received additional allocations – Moses  Kotane  received  an
increase from  R179.2  million  to  R186.4  million,  Mafikeng  received  an
increase  from  R96.3  million  to  R102.4  million,  Kagisano  received  an
increase from R42.8  million  to  R49.4  million,  Ventersdorp  received  an
increase from  R35.2  million  to  R37.6  million  and  Tlokwe  received  an
increase from R69.0 million to R82.8 million.

Western  Cape  received  an   additional   R390.8   million   whereby   four
municipalities received  additional  allocations  –  Matzikama  received  an
increase from  R27.1  million  to  R31.3  million,  Bergrivier  received  an
increase from  R18.7  million  to  R20.9  million,  Overstrand  received  an
increase from  R26.9  million  to  R28.0  million  and  George  received  an
increase from R58.2 million to R59.3 million.

5. Allocations to provinces to  supplement  the  funding  of  programmes  or
functions funded from provincial budgets

This Schedule comprises of a number  of  conditional  grants  and  the  only
grant that has changed is the Further Education and Training Colleges  Grant
which received an additional R31.2 million  during  the  adjustment  period.
According to the National Treasury 2010/11 First  Quarterly  Reports,  there
was no spending for Further Education and Training  grants  as  at  30  June
2010. While the Committee welcomes the increase, the  Committee  is  concern
that less expenditure in the first quarter would negatively  impact  on  the
second quarter expenditure projections.

6. Specific purpose allocations to provinces: Schedule 5 Grants

Out of approximately nineteen grants in this  category,  only  three  grants
received additional allocations – Comprehensive HIV and  Aids  Grant,  Human
Settlements Development Grant, and Devolution of Property Rate Funds Grant.

The purpose of the Comprehensive HIV and Aids Grant is to enable the  health
sector to develop an effective response to HIV  and  Aids,  to  support  the
implementation of the National Operational Plan for  Comprehensive  HIV  and
Aids  treatment  and  care,  and  to  subsidise  in-part  funding  for   the
antiretroviral treatment programme. This Grant was  allocated  R6.0  billion
for the baseline, during the adjustment the  grant  received  an  additional
amount of R40 million.

The purpose of  the  Human  Settlements  Development  Grant  is  to  provide
funding for the creation of  sustainable  human  settlements.  Although,  in
total, this Grant received additional allocations of R15  000  million  only
Gauteng received an increase from R3.7 billion to R3.8 billion  while  North
West had its allocations reduced from R1.2 billion to  R1.1  billion.  There
were no changes in allocations to other provinces.

The purpose of the Devolution of Property Rate Fund Grant is  to  facilitate
the transfer of property rates expenditure responsibility to provinces,  and
to enable provincial accounting officers to be fully accountable  for  their
expenditure and payment of provincial property rates. The grant received  an
increase from R1.0 billion to R1.8 billion. The  Public  Work  report  shows
that 49 per cent of the allocation was spent as at the  30  August  2010  in
this regard. This grant could be the main source of revenue  generation  for
municipalities  and  can  also  reduce  the  current  debt   by   government
departments to municipalities. While the Committee welcomes the increase  in
this  grant,  there  is  a  need  for  the  relevant  Committees  and  other
stakeholders to ensure that there are systems and plans in place  that  will
enable  provinces  to  spend  the  additional  allocations  efficiently  and
economically. This will assist the government to be able achieve  value  for
money in such expenditure and required outcomes.

7. Schedule 6 Grants: Specific purpose allocations to municipalities

Two grants in this category received additional  allocations  and  they  are
the Water Services Operating Subsidy  Grant  and  Municipal  Drought  Relief
Grant.

 The purpose of the Water Services Operating Subsidy Grant is  to  subsidise
water schemes owned and/or operated by the Department of  Water  Affairs  or
by  other  agencies  on  behalf  of  the  Department.  The  grant   received
additional allocations amounting  to  R8.3  million.  However,  it  will  be
important to provide a detailed  explanation  for  allocations  to  specific
projects to the Committee so that the expenditure of these additional  funds
can be effectively monitored.

The purpose of the Municipal Drought Relief  Grant  is  to  provide  capital
finance for basic water supply  in  municipal  infrastructure  for  affected
households, micro enterprises and social institutions.  The  grant  received
an additional allocation of R92 million which is specifically  allocated  to
the Mossel Bay Municipality for drought relief.

8. Conclusion
In conclusion, the Standing Committee on  Appropriations  will  monitor  the
utilisation of  these  additional  grant  allocations  through  the  in-year
monitoring process which forms part of Parliamentary  oversight.  This  will
enable the Committee to be able  to  check  whether  financial  legislations
such as Division of  Revenue  Act  (DoRA),  Public  Finance  Management  Act
(PFMA) and Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) are  adhered  to  by  the
spheres of government. The Committee will also  monitor  the  efficiency  of
administration  in  compiling  and  spending  various  schedules   so   that
schedules are not incorrectly  recorded,  classified  or  misplaced  in  the
process. This will assist the Committee to identify challenges and,  enhance
the level of accuracy and compliance in all  levels  of  government  through
making relevant recommendations during the in-year monitoring process.

9. Sources
The following source documents were used by the Committee  when  considering
the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill:
    • National Treasury (2010). Division of Revenue Bill [B4 – 2010]
    • National Treasury (2010). Division of Revenue Amendment  Bill  [B35  –
      2010]
    • National Treasury (2010). Press Release. Provincial  Budgets:  2010/11
      Financial Year.  First  Quarter  Provincial  Budgets  and  Expenditure
      Report. 11 August 2010

10. Recommendation
The Standing Committee on Appropriations, having considered the Division  of
Revenue Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec  76),
 recommends to the House that it be adopted.

Report to be considered.

