---
title: 'National Assembly - 02 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-02
---

TUESDAY, 02 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 9519.

                       APPOINTMENT OF MR S P MASHATILE

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that the vacancy which
occurred owing to the resignation of Mr M Gungubele has been filled, with
effect from today, 02 November 2010, by the nomination of Mr S P Mashatile.
The member has made and subscribed the oath in my office. [Applause.] You
are welcomed, hon member.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA the following motion:

   That the House debates the high number of minibus taxi-related accidents
   on our roads and the necessary steps that should be taken to curb this
   problem.

Thank you.

Ms N P KHUNOU: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates how to improve the means test for beneficiaries of
   government grants.

Thank you.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Speaker, on behalf of Cope I give notice that I shall
move on the next sitting day of the House:

   That the House debates South Africa being a signatory to the United
   Nations Convention against Torture of 1998, to determine when South
   Africa will comply to criminalise torture in our South African law.

Thank you.

Mr M MNQASELA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the effects that the theft of identity documents
   and passports has on the economy, security and the National Population
   Register of the country.


Thank you.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates Parliament’s roles in and contributions to the Pan-
   African Parliament.


I thank you.

Mr P D MBHELE: Speaker, on behalf of Cope I give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the responsibility of air carriers to ensure that
   their employees are adequately trained to ensure the safety of passengers
   in emergency situations.
I thank you.

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the introduction of community service for law
   graduates to ensure that basic legal services are afforded to poorest of
   the poor and ensure that new graduates gather the requisite experience.

I thank you.

Mr G R MORGAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the R113 billion infrastructure backlog for the
   provision of water infrastructure in South Africa, and solutions to
   ensure that all South Africans have access to potable water sooner rather
   than later.

I thank you.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, on behalf of Cope I hereby give notice that I will
move on the next sitting day of the House:

   That the House debates the demeaning of women to satisfy the appetites of
   the rich ANC and ANC Youth League members feasting on sushi served on
   their naked bodies.

Thank you.

Mr D A KGANARE: Speaker, I give notice on behalf of Cope that I shall move
on the next sitting day of the House:

   That the House debates the benefits or disadvantages of using private
   security to guard state institutions, especially police stations and
   state hospitals.

Thank you.

Ms A MDA: Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of Cope that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the cadre development in the National Youth
   Development Agency, which does not represent and serve the interests of
   South African youth.

I thank you.

                    ANNOUNCEMENT OF SPRINGBOK RUGBY SQUAD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes the announcement last Saturday of the Springbok  rugby  squad
        to tour Europe;

     2)  congratulates  the  six  new  caps  in  the  squad  who  will   be
        representing our country for the first time;

     3) believes that the team will prove  once  again  why  they  are  the
        number one team in the world; and

     4) wishes Peter de Villiers, the team and  the  management  good  luck
        with maintaining our country’s dominance of world rugby.

Agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: Certainly, it is not an objection, but I have great pleasure
in proposing another motion without notice.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, it is just that the Chief Whip of the ANC made me so
excited when he talked about rugby, and that as a very proud person from
KwaZulu-Natal I have great pleasure in proposing this motion without notice
to the House.

         CONGRATULATIONS TO SHARKS ON WINNING CURRIE CUP COMPETITION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS:  Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that the Sharks won the Currie Cup competition  by  beating  a
        spirited Western Province side  30-10  in  Durban  on  Saturday,  29
        October 2010;


     2) further notes that the Currie Cup, which has  been  contested  since
        1889, is South Africa’s premier domestic rugby  competition  and  is
        widely considered as the ultimate prize to be won  by  a  provincial
        union;

     3) congratulates the Sharks players and management  on  their  victory;
        and

     4) further congratulates Western Province for reaching  the  final  and
        being worthy opponents.

Agreed to.

              EFFORTS TO COMBAT RHINO POACHING IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes the increasing number of rhinos being  poached,  on  a  daily
        basis, for their horns;


     2) acknowledges the relentless efforts of  the  South  African  Police
        Service and related role-players in protecting wildlife for  future
        generations;

     3) recognises the success of  the  South  African  Police  Service  in
        exposing and prosecuting some of the  syndicates  operating  within
        the country’s borders; and

     4) wishes them all the  best  in  combating  the  destruction  of  the
        wildlife of South Africa.

Agreed to.

  FREEDOM OF LONDON AWARD BESTOWED ON BAFANA BAFANA CAPTAIN, AARON “MBAZO”
                                   MOKOENA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A NHANHA: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


   (1)      notes that Bafana Bafana captain, Aaron ``Mbazo’’ Mokoena,  will
        have the Freedom of London Award bestowed on him by the  Lord  Mayor
        Boris Johnson on 10 November 2010 for his services to  football  and
        his charitable foundation;


   (2)      acknowledges the inspiration that Aaron Mokoena has been to many
        aspiring young football players both in South Africa and abroad;

   (3)      further acknowledges his active participation in charity through
        the Aaron Mokoena Foundation, which uses football to engage children
        in education and health programmes;

   (4)      recognises Aaron Mokoena’s career achievements as the  youngest-
        ever South African to play for  the  national  team,  who  has  also
        achieved the accolade of being the most capped captain for the  team
        and achieved his 100th cap during the Fifa World Cup  on  home  soil
        and also is the captain of Portsmouth FC;

     5) further recognises that he was the youngest player ever to represent
        South Africa in an international event, having played  in  1999  for
        the 2000 Olympic qualifiers; and


     6) congratulates Mr Mokoena for his great achievement and his admirable
        commitment to football and society.

Agreed to.

                     CONGRATULATIONS TO BANYANA BANYANA

                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House —


     1) notes that the  Confederation  of  African  Football  (CAF)  African
        Women’s Championship kicked off on Sunday, 31 October 2010;


     2) congratulates Banyana Banyana on winning their first  game  in  this
        competition against Tanzania;

     3) wishes Banyana Banyana well for the rest of this tournament; and

     4) urges South Africa to rally behind Banyana Banyana and give them the
        support they need to win this tournament.

Agreed to.

               PRAISE FOR CABINET RESHUFFLE BY PRESIDENT ZUMA

                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr S L TSENOLI (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the Cabinet reshuffle by
President Jacob Zuma. The intervention follows continuous monitoring and
evaluation of the performance of all ANC cadres deployed in Cabinet.

It was guided by the need to speed up effective service delivery in
education and health, crime fighting, rural development and land reform and
job creation, as mandated by our 2009 election manifesto.

The ANC further wishes to congratulate the newly appointed Ministers and
their deputies and pays tribute to outgoing Ministers and deputies who have
served the ANC-led government, confident that they will continue to make
meaningful contributions in areas where they will find themselves or be
redeployed to. I thank you. [Applause.]

                      CHARGE LAID AGAINST TONY YENGENI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T D HARRIS (DA): Speaker, yesterday I laid a charge against the head of
the ANC’s political school and former Chief Whip of this House, Tony
Yengeni, who has allegedly breached the Companies Act.

Section 218 of the Act states that any person who has been convicted of
corruption, shall be disqualified from acting as a director of a company,
but Companies and Intellectual Properties Registration Office, Cipro,
records indicate that, despite his corruption conviction, Mr Yengeni is a
director of six companies.

One of these companies has mining rights for 200 sites in the North West
province. Mr Yengeni is already a convicted fraudster and now it appears he
has fallen foul of the law again. We await the results of the SAPS inquiry
into Mr Yengeni’s affairs with interest.

Yesterday the Daily Dispatch wrote, and I quote:

  Asked about his lavish lifestyle and ownership of three luxury cars,
  among them a 2009 Maserati Gran Turismo, costing about R1,75 million, the
  Gucci-socialist said: “How many cars I drive is a private matter.”

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Speaker, on a point of
order: I am under the impression that according to the Rules of Parliament,
members’ statements should have a bearing on Parliament, to be answered by
members of the executive. [Interjections.]

No, it isn’t. Could you please ... [Interjections.] You are talking
rubbish. Could you please advise me on this because if that is the case, I
do not understand what bearing that question has on us.

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, on a point of order: There is nothing in the Rules
whatsoever that suggests anything like the hon Sisulu is saying. You can
make a statement on any issue that you wish to. That is your right as a
Member of Parliament.

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon member.

The MINISTER OF TOURISM: On a point of order: What is in the Rules of the
House is that no attack can be launched on the integrity of any other
member of this House without a substantive motion. That is in the Rules of
this House.

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, on a point of order: I suspect the hon Van Schalkwyk
should listen to what is being said because I don’t think any member of
this House was being attacked by the hon Harris. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Conclude, hon member.

Mr T D HARRIS (DA): Speaker, Mr Yengeni was not able to become a member of
this House because of the jail term he served. He allegedly breached an Act
of this House. A cloud of corruption and criminality hangs over his
excessive wealth, but he continues to flash it around with no regard for
the persistent poverty that is the lived reality of most South Africans.

If the ANC continues to tolerate and support leaders like Mr Yengeni, then
voters will make their disapproval known at the ballot box. [Applause.]

               BLOATED CABINET TO PRECIPITATE ENORMOUS CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M G P LEKOTA (Cope): Speaker, last week the Minister of Finance
encouraged the executive to focus on employment on the frontline where
services are delivered to the communities.

With the changes that have now been made, we have one of the biggest
governments in the world, relative to the size of the population and the
economy. The executive now consists of 68 members, including the President.
The accelerated use of state resources in accommodating this bloated
Cabinet is going to precipitate an enormous crisis.

The new executive, with four new deputy posts created, will push the cost
of running Cabinet, already at R1 billion, even higher. South Africa has
just emerged from being sapped by a public sector strike about state
employee salaries. The government said then that the envelope was empty.

Now suddenly, this government that pleaded poverty then, can splurge as it
is doing now. The government is spending an ever-increasing portion of the
national income on itself. This is neither desirable nor sustainable.

To set things in perspective, the Cabinet of the United States includes the
President, Vice-President and 15 Cabinet Ministers. Nigeria, with more than
triple South Africa’s population, has 38 Cabinet Ministers. I thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

                    ANC PAYS TRIBUTE TO ANC YOUTH LEAGUE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N R MABEDLA (ANC): Speaker, the ANC pays tribute to the ANC Youth League
on its 66 years of existence in the struggle for a democratic, nonracial,
nonsexist and prosperous South Africa.

The ANC applauds the role played by young people under the leadership of
the youth league which has always been at the forefront of the struggle for
a better life, particularly for the poor majority. Again, the ANC
encourages the youth to be ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker!

The SPEAKER: Hon member, is that a point of order? What point are you
rising on?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I think it might be a point of order. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: What point are you rising on?

Mr M J ELLIS: I just wanted to say that although the hon member is not
talking about anything to do with Parliament, we are quite happy to let it
go. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, take your seat. [Laughter.] Hon member, you may
continue.

Ms N R MABEDLA (ANC): Again, the ANC is encouraging the youth to be at the
forefront of the current struggles, in order to change the quality of life
of our people, including through the attainment of economic liberation for
the poor.

Government programmes should be geared around education, skills development
and job creation for our youth. The ANC congratulates the ANC Youth League
on the milestone of celebrating 66 years in 2010 and believes that the
league has the critical responsibility of taking forward the wonderful work
of the founding fathers and mothers. I thank you. [Applause.]

             EMPTY PROMISES MADE TO TEACHERS BY THE RULING PARTY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Speaker, during the state of the nation address
earlier this year, President Zuma promised to assist teachers nationwide to
do their jobs more efficiently by equipping them with computers or laptops.


Whilst the IFP appreciates that promises to the electorate are part of any
political party’s campaign, our role as the opposition is to ensure that
promises made by the ruling party are indeed acted on and implemented.

The IFP would, therefore, like to bring to the attention of the House that
nothing came of that promise. As the year draws to an end, many teachers
have been told that the department will assist them with buying computers,
but only through a subsidy. This leaves teachers with the extra burden of
having to pay for the equipment themselves. That is a financial burden they
would not be able to carry with their meagre salaries.

The IFP believes that this is yet another classic example of the ruling
party’s empty promises. Our teachers are already struggling to cope with an
almost dysfunctional education system on a daily basis. I thank you. [Time
expired.]

                              CABINET RESHUFFLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Speaker, my statement does have something to
do with Parliament!

Die VF Plus verwelkom die kabinetskommeling. Die boodskap wat die
skommeling aan kabinetslede stuur, is dat hulle moet presteer anders word
hulle vervang.

Die algemene indruk is dat die rede vir die skommeling nie net die
prestasie van Ministers was nie, maar dat taktiese ANC-oorwegings die
hoofrol gespeel het. Die aanstelling van twee voormalige jeugleiers, Fikile
Mbalula en Malusi Gigaba, as Ministers, is strategies om die ANC jeug te
akkommodeer voor die munisipale verkiesings volgende jaar, waar die jeug ’n
belangrike stem sal verteenwoordig.

Goeie presteerders soos Barbara Hogan en Geoff Doidge se afdanking kan nie
weens swak prestasie wees nie, maar was waarskynlik eerder om plek te maak
vir ander. Siphiwe Nyanda kon nie die mas opkom nie, en sy afdanking was
daarom nodig en word verwelkom.

Die skommeling het wel nie een van die politieke faksies binne die ANC
gebaat nie, aangesien mnr Trevor Manuel en die ekonomiese groepering nie
geskommel is nie.

Of die kabinetskommeling tot beter dienslewering sal lei, sal nog eers
bewys moet word. Die VF Plus wil egter maan dat die oorsigrol van die
Parlement nie deur hierdie kabinetskommeling benadeel moet word nie. Die
ANC moet deeglik oorweging skenk aan geskikte kandidate wat die poste van
portefeuljekomiteevoorsitters kan vul, eerder as om oorhaastig aanstellings
te maak wat op die lange duur die werk van die Parlement sal benadeel.
Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The FF Plus welcomes the reshuffling of Cabinet. The message the
reshuffling sends to Cabinet members is that they must perform or else they
will be replaced.

The general impression is that the reason for the reshuffling was not only
because of Ministers’ performance, but that tactical ANC considerations
played the main role. The appointment of two former youth leaders, Fikile
Mbalula and Malusi Gigaba, as Ministers, is strategic in order to
accommodate the ANC youth before the municipal elections next year, where
the youth will represent an important vote.

The dismissal of Ministers who have performed well, like Barbara Hogan and
Geoff Doidge, cannot be due to poor performance, but was probably rather to
make way for others. Siphiwe Nyanda could not cope, and his dismissal was
therefore necessary and is welcomed.

The reshuffling did, however, not favour any of the political factions
within the ANC, since Mr Trevor Manuel and the economic grouping was not
reshuffled.

Whether the reshuffling of Cabinet will lead to better service delivery,
still needs to be proven. The FF Plus would, however, like to caution that
Parliament’s oversight role should not be impaired by this reshuffling of
Cabinet. The ANC should seriously consider suitable candidates who can fill
the positions of portfolio committee chairpersons, rather than make hasty
appointments that could, in the long run, impair the work of Parliament.
Thank you.]

                 DESTRUCTION OF STATE PROPERTY BY OFFENDERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M N PHALISO (ANC): Speaker, at the beginning of this calendar year, the
Department of Correctional Services unveiled a state-of-the-art prison in
Kimberley.

The Kimberley Correctional Centre boasts some of the most up-to-date
facilities so that the successful rehabilitation of inmates is made
possible. This is in line with the primary objective of the White Paper on
Corrections.

Having said this, we are very concerned by the report of yet another
incident of destruction of state property by six offenders who are accused
of setting mattresses on fire in one of the cells this past Saturday.

It is unacceptable that this brand-new facility has witnessed two incidents
of destruction of property by ill-disciplined prisoners, possibly with the
collusion of prison officials.

We urge the Minister and the department to get to the bottom of the causes
of this latest incident, with harsh corrective steps to be meted out to all
individuals found guilty of negligent and/or criminal behaviour.

This should include the dismissal of the departmental officials involved
and the transfer of the guilty inmates to maximum security facilities. I
thank you.

                          BRUTAL WITCHCRAFT MURDERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M MPHAHLELE (PAC): Speaker, the PAC is gravely concerned about the
barbaric killing of innocent people who are accused of witchcraft. Most of
the victims are rural, poverty-stricken old women.
In August this year, 85-year-old Babusiba and her four grandchildren, the
youngest aged five years, were brutally hacked to death in the Transkei.

Our society is guilty of betraying the victims of witch-hunts. In a killing
fuelled by racism, society rightly condemns both the act of killing and the
ideology of racism. However, when the so-called witches are butchered,
society slams the killing only.

We never go far enough and denounce the antiquated ideology of witchcraft,
thus implicitly arming the criminals — at least with the ammunition of
superstition.

The rainy season is upon us. A lot of rural old women are going to be
killed for using lightning to settle scores with their enemies.

Here are the striking facts about lightning: Within millionths of a second
the temperature of lightning may reach almost five times that of the sun’s
surface. It is sheer madness to accuse an old granny of generating such
intense heat.

Witch-hunts are a form of self-hate. An indigenous African seen among a
troop of baboons is labelled a witch. A white person in a similar situation
is hailed as a researcher. Africans always think badly of themselves.
Poverty eradication and mass education can go a long way towards sparing
the lives of our elderly people and their grandchildren. [Time expired.]

     POOR SERVICE DELIVERY BY MADIBENG MUNICIPALITY, NORTH WEST PROVINCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W RABOTAPI (DA): Speaker, service delivery in the Madibeng
Municipality in the North West province has reached an all-time low.

Last week, DA public representatives visited the water purification plant
after numerous complaints about water quality. There was green foam and
blue algae on the water. The DA insisted that the water be tested and it
was found that the water from this plant was not fit for human consumption.


The previous Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs, who was fired by
the President on Sunday, also visited last week. She had the audacity to
say that her department would provide the residents with a Christmas
present by helping to fix the plant within three months. The provision of
clean water is a right, not a privilege. It is not a Christmas present!
This situation should never have happened in the first place, but it did
because of corrupt and incompetent ANC municipal officials.

HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!
Mr M W RABOTAPI (DA): Madibeng is a perfect example of a municipality where
endemic corruption affects service delivery to the poor. There is no money
for maintaining water purification plants because of fraud. The Special
Investigating Unit has found that 341 Madibeng officials have interests in
eight municipal contracts valued at R21,7 million. [Interjections.]

The previous municipal manager has been arrested. Essential after-hours
services have ground to a halt as the overtime budget has been overspent by
R3 million. Corruption makes poor people poorer and in this ANC-run
municipality, this is exactly what is happening. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

                DA MEMBER ALLEGEDLY GUILTY OF FRAUD AND CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (ANC): Speaker, the DA is slow to deal with its errant
representatives. One of their members is currently facing rape charges in
court and is still a public representative. [Applause.]

The latest is that the very same member was allegedly part of an illegal
house sale as a Cape councillor under then Mayor Helen Zille. It is averred
he got involved in a house grab and displaced an elderly beneficiary.

The RDP house was then sold to a third party. The member concerned went as
far as certifying this with his councillor’s stamp. The new owner of the
house declared under oath that the member, when he was still a councillor,
sold the home to her for R40 000 and has received ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: The issue has already been
raised this afternoon by the hon Van Schalkwyk about whether you can cast
aspersions about a sitting member of the House. Now the hon member from the
ANC speaking at the present time is doing just that, sir, and I urge that
you rule this particular statement out of order.

You cannot cast aspersions on a sitting member of this House without a
substantive motion.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, on a point of order:
I tried to listen to the member carefully, and I did not hear him refer to
the name of a member who sits in this House. So, I really do not know what
Mr Mike Ellis’s point of order is.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: With all due respect to my
colleague from the ANC Whippery, that is nonsense, sir. It is quite clear
that the hon member making the statement has referred to a member of this
House, and that, sir, is against the Rules of this House.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Can he perhaps name that
member for us? [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I will look at Hansard and come back with
a ruling on this matter. [Interjections.] Hon member, I said I would come
back with a ruling on the matter.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, on a point of order: I
seek your assistance in my rising to address you.

Speaker, if I could direct you to Rule 63 of this House in terms of conduct
of debate, it indicates that no member shall use offensive or unbecoming
language. We appear before South Africa and the world as we address matters
in this House.

Is it becoming for us to throw “rubbish”, “nonsense” at each other? And I
speak to all members of the House. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: I speak of all members of the House
in all parties represented in the House, as to whether such references by
any of us reflect “becoming language”.

The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member. This, sadly, is not becoming. It is
unbecoming language. I would like to make an appeal here. Please let us
respect the Rules of the House. That includes the language.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Speaker, on a point of
order: I rise on this matter, and I would like to withdraw my remarks in
response to those that came from the member and which he continues to make.
I would like to withdraw mine. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon member.

Hon member, do you wish to withdraw that unbecoming language of “rubbish”?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I think that as I have stood here over the years,
I have heard many unbecoming things from the ANC. Taking into account the
word that I might have said, namely “rubbish”, I actually do not believe
that I have any reason to withdraw anything at all, sir. So no, I won’t.

The SPEAKER: Thank you. I will again look at Hansard and I will come back
to that point with a ruling.
                         CABINET RESHUFFLE WELCOMED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B W DHLAMINI (IFP): Speaker, the IFP welcomes the President’s recent
Cabinet reshuffle as a sign of President Zuma’s commitment to efficiency
and accountability within government. Nonperforming departments must be
corrected in order to improve service delivery to the people of our
country.

All too often Ministers assume that they are beyond reproach and bigger
than the structures that have placed them in power. This leads to a mind-
set of unaccountability and inefficiency, which we have already experienced
here in Parliament during this year. An example of this is the notable
absence of a few Ministers from various scheduled parliamentary portfolio
committees.

We trust that the reshuffling will bring in an accountable executive that
is committed to both service and the delivery thereof. In this event the
IFP will wish all new Ministers and Deputy Ministers everything of the best
with their portfolios as they serve the citizens of South Africa. I thank
you. [Applause.]

      CORRUPTION AND ABUSE OF POWER IN GOVERNMENT AND ITS INSTITUTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Speaker, this Parliament owes South Africa an
explanation. How did two former SABC managers, Snuki Zikalala and Mvuso
Mbebe rack up R11 million in excessive petrol card expenses?

Is this government implementing the Public Finance Management Act, PFMA?
Since 1999 not one person has been convicted under this Act. Isn’t this
shocking? In these circumstances the serial abuse of credit and petrol
cards goes on without any consequence for the offenders.

People in government are the law. They don’t fear the law. In Gauteng’s
Kungwini municipality a staggering R147 million has simply been made to
disappear. There is so much that this government would really like to hide.
The media exposed nepotism in the Police Service. It also exposed Gen Cele
leasing a building without following the law. All these examples create
such bad publicity. It would be so convenient to hide such information!

There is clearly one law for the politically connected in South Africa; the
other is for the rest of us. Another case in point is Tony Yengeni’s many
transgressions, with a reluctance on the part of state agencies to do
anything about them.

There are now so many untouchables in South Africa, it is no wonder that
South Africa is a haven for the mafia! [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, order!

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Some of the world’s most wanted lawbreakers live
freely in South Africa. South Africa is, indeed, a predatory state and the
political hyenas roam the corridors of Parliament. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                 OPEN BUDGET INDEX RANKS SOUTH AFRICA FIRST

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M S MOTIMELE (ANC): Speaker, South Africa has been awarded first place
in the 2010 Open Budget Index, OBI, which is compiled by the Washington-
based International Budget Partnership.

This internationally recognised index analysed 94 countries worldwide this
year. South Africa came out on top, beating Britain out of the top place
into third, and placing New Zealand second. South Africa scored 92 out of a
possible 100 points.

The OBI is an independent, comparative measure of budget transparency and
accountability around the world. It was started in 2006 by the partnership
and is produced every two years. The latest index found only 7 of the 94
countries assessed had released extensive budget information. Up to 40
countries had released no meaningful budget information at all.
This makes it difficult for the public and oversight institutions in these
countries to hold government accountable or to have meaningful input into
decisions on how to use public resources.

South Africa, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, France, Norway, Sweden and
the United States scored in the top tier of transparency. This is yet
another confirmation that the country has, for the past 16 years of
constitutional democratic rule, been in capable hands under the ANC-led
government. I thank you. [Applause.]

                              BLUE FLAG BEACHES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R KRUMBOCK (DA): Speaker, the launching of the Blue Flag beaches for
2010 and 2011 by the Minister of Tourism on 28 October is a clear
indication of the successes and failures in different local government
administrations.

A total of 27 beaches countrywide received Blue Flag status, which is only
awarded to beaches that have achieved the highest quality in water,
facilities, safety and environmental management.

Fifteen of the 27 beaches awarded Blue Flag status are situated in the
Western Cape, of which six are in Cape Town. This success will enhance the
Western Cape’s international reputation as a world-class tourist
destination, which was already growing due to positive tourist experiences
during the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

By contrast, the city of Durban is needlessly missing out on potential
tourist growth because the city manager, Dr Michael Sutcliffe, continues to
deny the benefits of participation. Blue Flag beaches draw tourists, and if
Dr Sutcliffe believes the standards at Durban’s beaches are higher than
required by the Blue Flag scheme, why is Durban not allowed to participate?


It beggars belief that, despite a DA council motion — a decree supported by
all parties to rejoin the Blue Flag scheme — little has been done to make
this a reality.

The DA urges the Minister of Tourism to persuade all coastal municipalities
to address the slowly deteriorating sewerage management systems along our
coastline, and encourage all municipalities to push for Blue Flag status.
This will ensure that the goodwill generated by the World Cup does not slip
through our fingers like so many grains of sand on the flagless Durban
beach. Thank you. [Applause.]

                         EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr Z S MAKHUBELE (ANC): Speaker, the ANC firmly believes that every child
has a right to a good start in life, and that early childhood development
is critical in the development cycle of human beings. It also believes in
giving children a headstart in numeracy and literacy.

The ANC welcomes the North West government’s initiative of putting aside
R15 million for makeovers of early childhood development centres in rural
areas. This initiative is in line with and strengthens the ANC government’s
resolve and commitment to strengthen support for crèches and preschools in
rural areas and urban centres. Thank you. [Applause.]

             EMPTY PROMISES MADE TO TEACHERS BY THE RULING PARTY
                         EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Speaker, I would like to
respond to two of the statements, one in relation to early childhood
development, and the other in relation to the laptops for teachers.

Had the hon member from the IFP paid particular attention to the detail of
the allocation made by the state, he would have known that all the unions
had decided that the SA Council for Educators had been appointed by them to
negotiate with the service providers for the provision of computers. This
is a decision that was taken independently by the unions.

The Department of Education had prescribed in regulation the nature of the
expectations with regard to the ICT, its capacity and software. This was
made public, and now what is required is, basically, for the unions and the
SA Council for Educators to conclude the business.

There has been no delay whatsoever in terms of the funding of this
particular and important item. In fact, if the unions had been a little
more serious about what they ought to have done, then there would have been
delivery. The delivery is delayed only by them.

With regard to early childhood development, the hon member is, indeed,
correct: Early childhood development is central to success in education.

Social scientists have indicated that the period of gestation is already an
indication of the cognitive and other developments of a child. The first
two years of a child’s life are an indication of 70% of the cognitive
ability that the child will acquire over a lifetime. Therefore this
government has emphasised the importance of early childhood development.

With regard to Grade R classes, we have moved from 400 000 to beyond
650 000 in a period of two years, so these centres are integrated into our
schools. With regard to preschool, or pre-Grade R, the Department of
Education is working extremely closely with the Departments of Social
Development and Health to ensure that we expand and increase the number of
early childhood development centres.

We can also celebrate the fact that we now have a curriculum and uniform
training schedules for practitioners, and that resources are provided to
every child in a Grade R class in the country. Thank you very much.

               BLOATED CABINET TO PRECIPITATE ENORMOUS CRISIS
      CORRUPTION AND ABUSE OF POWER IN GOVERNMENT AND ITS INSTITUTIONS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY — PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND
ADMINISTRATION: Speaker, I will respond to two points which have been
raised. I will start with the one which was raised by the hon Lekota.

I think it is more important for hon Lekota to become concerned about the
number of supporters he has rather than what the number of executive
members is. [Interjections.] [Applause.] Nonetheless, hon Lekota should
know that the issue he is raising is not a Cabinet one. It is an issue for
the President as the head of state.

He cannot ask that question of any member, or make a statement expecting
responses from members of Cabinet who are not responsible for that. I think
that is a very simple thing which he should know.

With regard to the hon George, I am not sure whether he is authorised to
speak on behalf of Cope, but nonetheless, we will try to respond to what he
is saying as a member of the House. [Laughter.] However, it is not clear
whether he is speaking on behalf of Cope.

On the SABC issue, I think he should have provided the answer rather than
posed the question, because he was a member of the executive at the time
those things happened. So we expect an answer from you, sir!
[Interjections.]

With regard to the issue of criminals in the country, I would urge you to
go straight to the police station as we leave here. Inform them as to who
the criminals are, so the police can look for them. We cannot look for
something we do not know about. Because you know them, it is better for you
to go and inform the police. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN COMPETITION MATTERS
                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Hon Speaker and hon members, in the
New Growth Path adopted by Cabinet a week ago, government drew attention to
the high levels of economic concentration and price collusion that
characterise parts of the South African economy.

We committed to ensure greater competition as a means to draw new entrants
to the market and to grow employment in order to achieve the target of five
million new jobs within the next 10 years.

Over the past number of months, and in support of the new framework that
was emerging, the competition authorities have intensified their focus on
anticompetitive action in the local market. An important aspect of this is
the investigation into the food sector. Currently, the Competition
Commission is investigating several cases along the food value chain
ranging from inputs such as fertiliser and tin plate used for tinned foods;
to products such as vegetable oils and fats, wheat and maize, poultry and
fish; and to storage and retail, including silos and supermarkets. In
particular, the commission has investigated five areas of relevance to
today’s statement.

The first case involves an investigation of the milling industry; that
includes wheat flour and maize meal. During the probe into bread price-
fixing and the market allocation cartel in 2006, the commission received
information that the firms involved in the bread cartel were also involved
in price-fixing and market allocation for flour.

Two of the millers confessed their involvement and provided further
evidence of a cartel and were granted conditional immunity.

Investigations into the flour market revealed that the firms involved
agreed to fix prices of milled wheat products; to create uniform price
lists for wholesale, retail and general trade customers; to allocate
customers among themselves; and to agree on the timing of the price
increases and their implementation.

Similarly, the agreements were used to secure co-ordination at both
national and regional levels. The agreements were reached through meetings
and telephone discussions. The cases of price-fixing were referred to the
Competition Tribunal for adjudication by the commission in 2009.

In the second instance, the commission investigated and referred a case in
maize milling. The maize milling case was separated from the flour one
because the two cartels did not involve exactly the same members. Although
the main milling companies were involved in both cartels, the maize milling
cartel implicates a larger number of firms.
The investigation revealed that from 1999 to at least 2007, competitors
were involved in conduct that contravened the Competition Act by fixing
prices of white maize products; by creating uniform lists for wholesale,
retail and general trade customers; and by agreeing to the timing of the
price increases.

The third case centres around information exchanged in the wheat flour and
bread market. The commission initiated an investigation against current and
former members of the National Chamber of Milling and South African Chamber
of Baking. The complaint was initiated after the commission observed that,
although the prohibited practices that I cited earlier had apparently
ceased, the market had not become more competitive.

The commission’s investigation revealed that firms in the industry
submitted commercially sensitive information to the two chambers. In turn,
the firms received detailed, disaggregated information from the chambers.
This information exchange appears to have enabled members to sustain
collusive outcomes without the necessity of meeting. The detailed
information exchanges enabled the firms to align their behaviour in the
market and thus reduce competition.

A similar case was initiated in the maize industry when it was found that
competition outcomes were not observable despite the breaking up of the
cartel. This case also centres around the exchange of information between
the National Chamber of Milling and its current and former members. These
practices have now stopped after the intervention by the commission.

The fourth case involved exclusionary conduct against independent bakeries.
The commission received a complaint in December 2008 from an independent
bakery in Mossel Bay alleging that Pioneer Foods, through its Sasko
division, had threatened it with a price war if it did not adhere to the
fixed price. One of the means employed to exclude independent bakeries was
the introduction of Sasko’s so-called “fighting brands” to undermine
independent competitors who had entered such areas.

The commission found that Pioneer Foods is dominant in the relevant markets
and its aggressive behaviour prevented competitors from entering into or
expanding in the markets. The object of the price war was to force these
independent bakeries to charge prices similar to Pioneer Foods, at above
competitive levels or, failing which, to force them out of the market. This
is in contravention of section 8 of the Competition Act.

Finally, the competition authorities investigated four cases in the poultry
market. In April 2009, the commission initiated an investigation into
anticompetitive conduct in the market for poultry breeding stock and
broiler production, poultry products and poultry feed.

This followed initial research that pointed to the existence of
anticompetitive behaviour by firms and industry associations. In addition,
the commission is investigating allegations of collusion in the egg
industry after Pioneer Foods confessed its involvement in a cartel.

The main allegations against particular firms are as follows: They agreed
not to compete in an open market, but instead divided markets by allocating
territories and/or customers to each other. As a result of the collusion,
these companies charged significantly higher prices than the independent or
small manufacturers even though their cost bases are similar. These prices
were, in some instances, 25% higher than those of the smaller poultry feed
producers. This collusion also reinforced and was sustained through
extensive information sharing via industry associations.

Hon members, I have provided details of these different investigations to
contextualise a significant competition settlement that was reached earlier
today.

The Competition Act provides for parties to enter into settlement
agreements with the competition authorities. Following a few months of
negotiations, Pioneer Foods, one of South Africa’s largest food-processing
companies, and the Competition Commission signed a consent and settlement
agreement in regard to contraventions of various sections of the
Competition Act.
Pioneer Foods may not produce under brands such as Sasko Bakeries and Sasko
Flour, Duens Bakeries, Weetbix, Ceres Fruit Juices, and others. Not all
these products are implicated in the investigations.

The settlement reached today addresses Pioneer Foods’ cases in the wheat,
maize, poultry and eggs market and constitutes a resolution of all the
current investigations against the company. The agreement will be lodged
with the Competition Tribunal by 15:00 today, for its consideration and
confirmation in terms of section 49(d) read with sections 58(1)(b) and
59(1)(a) of the Competition Act.

It is expected that the Competition Tribunal will decide the matter within
the next two weeks and the terms are, of course, subject to the final
decision of the Competition Tribunal.

In view of its significance, I wish to provide the House with details of
the terms of the settlement and its intended impact.

Pioneer Foods undertakes to immediately desist from collusion and price-
fixing, not to participate in any activities of any cartel in the sector
and to comply fully with the Competition Act in future.

Pioneer Foods undertakes to co-operate fully with the authorities in the
prosecution of any other parties who are the subject of the current
investigation by the commission; and to provide evidence and testify
against members of any cartel it has been involved in.
The company will pay an administrative penalty of R250 million into the
National Revenue Fund. The aim of the administrative penalty is to serve as
a deterrent and disincentive against anticompetitive conduct.

Pioneer Foods will pay a further sum of R250 million towards a special
agroprocessing competitiveness fund that will be established and managed by
the Industrial Development Corporation. The aim of the fund is to promote
competition in the food value chain by supporting the entry and expansion
of enterprises, including small and medium enterprises. Pioneer Foods will
not be able to access any of the money in the fund for its own operations.
The rules applicable to the fund will be published by December this year.

Pioneer Foods will reduce the net selling prices of selected bread and
flour products by a total of R160 million, to benefit consumers who have
suffered as a result of anticompetitive behaviour. This will bring much-
needed relief to consumers who have paid above competitive prices for bread
and wheaten products. It is anticipated that this will stimulate price
competition in the bread and wheaten market; and the modalities of the
price reduction will be announced by the company and the Competition
Commission, and Pioneer Foods’ compliance with these undertakings will be
audited.

Pioneer Foods has undertaken to increase its planned capital expenditure by
an additional R150 million over a two-year period. This is over and above
the company’s planned capital expenditure of R1,2 billion. This commitment
is intended to focus efforts to improve the company’s competitiveness
through innovation, upgrading of equipment and expansion of operations,
instead of reliance on price-fixing and collusion with competitors.

Finally, Pioneer Foods agreed to drop its cross-appeal against the R195
million penalties levied against it by the Competition Tribunal, earlier
this year.

Hon members, the effect of this settlement, if confirmed by the Competition
Tribunal, is that the company would pay, inclusive of the fine levied
earlier this year, penalties totaling R445 million and it would transfer
R250 million to a competitiveness fund for the agroprocessing industry, and
it would commit to reducing the net selling prices of selected products by
a total of R160 million.

These three components amount to R855 million in commitments that are for
the benefit of the fiscus, competitors and consumers. Added to this is the
commitment to increase capital expenditure by a further R150 million above
the company’s previous decisions, bringing the total commitments as a
result of this settlement to slightly over R1 billion.

This constitutes the largest settlement in the history of the Competition
Commission involving any one company. Taken together with the bread
penalty, it amounts to the largest penalty ever imposed on a single
company, which is R445 million.

It contains provision for a novel mechanism to promote competition and new
enterprise development in the agroprocessing sector by committing funds
from the perpetrator of anticompetitive conduct, to finance new competition
in the sector. It also provides, for the first time, relief to consumers
through a commitment to reduce prices on specified products up to a total
of R160 million. These products are bread and flour, key staple products
that ordinary South Africans rely on.

I take this opportunity, subject to confirmation by the Competition
Tribunal of the settlement, to call on bakeries, supermarkets and the
retail trade to pass the price reduction on to consumers. Government wants
to see that bakeries and retailers do not divert price reductions into
higher margins.

I have asked the Competition Commission to monitor the actions of bakeries
and retailers to ensure that the benefit reaches the intended
beneficiaries. It must also provide me with a written report that I intend
to table in Parliament.

In the New Growth Path, government identified the agricultural value chain,
which includes agroprocessing, as a key driver of new job creation.
However, to achieve the jobs we expect, we need to get a number of policies
right in the sector, including reducing input costs and putting an end to
the cartels and price-fixing that keep new entrants, particularly small
businesses, out of the market.

This settlement shows the resolve of the competition authorities to act
swiftly and effectively to promote a competitive food-processing sector.
Vertically integrated firms in the milling and poultry markets leverage
their control of critical inputs like wheat or poultry feed to exclude
other firms or to sustain cartel arrangements.

For this reason, both structural and behavioural measures are important to
bring new players into the value chain. The new, proactive stance of the
competition authorities, coupled with a strong investigative capacity,
makes it harder for companies to escape with anticompetitive conduct.

The action I have highlighted today follows on a number of other recent
steps taken by the authorities, including actions to address monopoly
conduct in the fertiliser market, which resulted in a fine of R250 million
levied against Sasol; the selling off of five of Sasol’s six fertiliser
blending plants to new competitors; and action against Foskor that resulted
in price reductions in their fertiliser products.

In addition to these actions, the commission will continue its
investigations against other companies implicated in the cases that
involved Pioneer Foods. We call on other perpetrators to follow the example
of Pioneer Foods and come forward and settle with the competition
authorities.

The free ride that some companies had at the expense of consumers and jobs
in South Africa for many decades is over. Our resolve is firm to act
against contraventions of the Competition Act.

In the New Growth Path, government recognises the fact that anticompetitive
conduct is pervasive and entrenched in certain sectors of the economy.
Where this is the case, consumers, including downstream enterprises, face
high prices and limited product choices; and competitors are denied entry
to or forced out of the market. Firms focus less on innovative strategies
to compete than on co-ordinating their activities or abusing their
dominance.

Anticompetitive conduct seeks profits from narrow and backward-looking
strategies based on inherited positions of market power. Such conduct
ultimately implies lower levels of output, investment and employment.

For this reason, the commission’s investigations in the food sector go
beyond the scope of the cases that involve Pioneer Foods and the cartels in
which it was involved. The commission will accelerate existing
investigations into market conduct in supermarkets and in regard to
poultry, fish, vegetable oil, tin plate and storage.

Outside of the food sector the commission is now focusing on other key
priorities of government, including investigations into collusion and
unlawful behaviour in construction and infrastructure, inter-mediate
industrial products and finance and banking.

In conclusion, may I on behalf of government congratulate the competition
authorities for the excellent work they are doing. [Applause.]

A properly resourced, professional and effective competition authority is
critical to the achievement of the economic and employment goals of the New
Growth Path. We are committed to providing the competition authorities with
the support they require to undertake this important mandate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: I have no problem at all with the Minister’s statement — in fact,
vigorous competition is the very essence of the market system. I do,
however, want to draw the Deputy Speaker’s attention to Rule 106(3), which
says:

   Whenever possible, a copy of an executive statement must be delivered to
   the leader of each party, or that leader’s representative, at or before
   the time the statement is made in the Assembly.

That is there for a purpose: to encourage a coherent response to a very
important statement made by the Minister. I would draw your attention, the
Speaker’s attention and, indeed, the Chief Whip’s attention to this Rule of
the House so that we can, in fact, abide by the Rules in the future. Thank
you.

Adv T M MASUTHA: Deputy Speaker, may I address you on the same point of
order? The hon member has clearly read the Rule; it says, “whenever
possible”. It is clear that some of the elements of the statement are so
recent — a matter of hours — that I do not see how the hon Minister could
reasonably have complied fully with that Rule. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: I just have to respond to the hon member. We were given notice — in
fact, in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports — that indeed
there was going to be a statement on competition issues. We could have been
briefed at that stage about such a statement so the member’s statement is,
in fact, not a statement at all. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: May we move on and may I plead with members that we
definitely have Rule 63 on unbecoming language. I know that the Speaker is
looking at that, but I would really plead with you to refrain from using
language that is unparliamentary, please. I’ve just heard “rubbish”,
somewhere; unless we are saying “rubbish” and “nonsense” is not unbecoming
language.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, I really do appreciate
your ruling in that regard, but I would ask you to vent an opinion on the
point that I indeed raised ... [Interjections.] [Inaudible.] ... is a
matter of importance ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no! Hon Ellis, I don’t know if it was you who just
said “rubbish” as I was talking. I was talking generally about when
somebody is talking, let’s resist from using words that are unbecoming. I’m
not saying that the point of order was wrong.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I agree with you and I apologise for
having used the word again this afternoon, but sometimes certain members
provoke a response. [Interjections.] The important point is: You’ve not
made any ruling whatsoever with regard to what the hon Chief Whip of the
Opposition has said. Are we going to hear anything more about this?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I’ve noted the question. I’m not going to make a
ruling. It really does not require a ruling. I’ve noted it and I’m sure
members here have also noted that. Please, I’m not going to make a ruling
on that.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, we know that we need a more globally
competitive economy to improve our market position as a catalyst for
growing our domestic economic activities, including promoting local
entrepreneurship, especially small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs,
and improving our attractiveness as a preferred foreign investment
destination, especially for foreign direct investments, FDIs.

For our economy to grow and develop exponentially and to ensure that we
will have more South Africans earning salaries and wages, and thus paying
taxes, we need to strive towards creating more real and sustainable jobs in
a competitive environment.

However, to create five million jobs, as the Minister has indicated, by
2020, we need a 7% growth in GDP per year, which is unlikely if we look at
the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, just delivered last week. More
specific actions are needed from the Minister in that regard.

Government, however, has a very important role to play in developing such
an environment; not only to create the required jobs, but to also encourage
more businesses to enter the global market. This in turn will lead to
competition between suppliers of services and products, which will improve
consumer choices and result in more value for money.

Competition in every sector of our economy, especially those identified to
drive our economic recovery, should be encouraged and supported. Unfair
competitive activities and practices, however, like price collusion and
black economic empowerment, BEE, fronting, must be opposed fiercely. The
Competition Commission is best positioned to ensure that such a competitive
environment is maintained.

The settlement agreement by Pioneer Foods, as announced by the Minister,
must surely be complimented. I think that is a great step by Pioneer Foods,
and I am sure that they will again return to their previous position and
enormously add to the economic growth potential of South Africa.

The competition authorities must consider various actions in support of
competition. Allow mergers and acquisitions which lead to better choices
and value for money for consumers. In this regard, the possible merger
between Walmart and Massmart should be encouraged. This is an example of a
foreign direct investment transaction with economic development benefits
that our economy needs.

The authorities must also ensure that provisions of the Broad-Based Black
Economic Empowerment, Act are not misused with fronting as a practice that
benefits a few elite tenderpreneurs with mostly excellent political and
governmental connections. Any possibility of such transgressions should be
investigated and punitive action taken.

In this regard, the widely publicised transaction between ArcelorMittal and
Imperial Crown Trading, ICT, must be investigated. The perception from
reports and submissions is that this transaction is certainly not intended
to be beneficial to a broad base, but rather to enrich a few of the elite
with excellent political connections.

It also constitutes fronting as per the BBBEE Act, which in itself is a
punitive transgression. The impression is also that ICT has no knowledge of
or track record in iron ore mining activities and has no operational mining
assets. This certainly adds no value.

A strong message should be sent out by fighting illegal fronting
activities, especially as this is not only taking away benefits from
historically disadvantaged individuals, but it also places the eventual
funding burden on the consumers. It should be classified as anticompetitive
behaviour if the result is higher prices and not necessarily more choices
and better value for money for the consumers.

We need to develop appropriate strategies and competitive economic
development plans that will enjoy the full support of government, labour,
business and foreign investors. This will contribute not only to optimal
employment opportunities, but also to consumer beneficiation opportunities.
It will also improve strategic global competitiveness and sustainability,
and it will certainly promote an open opportunity society for all. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Madam Deputy Speaker, Cope commends the Competition
Commission. It has achieved outstanding results. The benefits of these
results for South African consumers and poor people, in particular, have
been considerable.

What is remarkable about this agency is that it works so efficiently with
such limited resources at its disposal. Its key managers are performance
oriented, and even though it has a budget of about R120 million, its output
is huge.

The commission has scored major successes against monopolies, oligopolies
and cartels. All of these distort market forces. Furthermore, they keep new
entrants from emerging on the scene. Their influence on marginalised people
has been as insidious as the apartheid-era politics. Therefore, we salute
the settlement by the Competition Commission with Pioneer Foods.

However, the key question that we want to put is: How much of the
settlement will cascade down to the Competition Commission? How much? We
are asking this because at the present moment we have a problem of capacity
with regard to the Competition Commission and the tribunal.

The second issue is with regard to the amount of money that the poor have
been robbed of by the very same companies. How much of that money will find
its way back to those communities?

Lastly, we would like to make a point about ArcelorMittal. Currently in
South Africa manufacturing is shrinking. We have serious problems with
regard to steel pricing. How much influence does the Industrial Development
Corporation, IDC, in particular, have together with the relevant
departments in ensuring that the price of steel is reduced?

Cope would like to salute the achievement of the Competition Commission. We
say that it has to be assisted — and in many ways. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you to the Minister
for giving us a piece of good news from the tip of the iceberg. I think,
however, that attention should be given to dealing with the rest of the
iceberg. South Africa is still a country characterised by cartels and
monopolies, and is still flying on the autopilot left by the National
Party.
If we are serious about dealing with these problems we cannot rely on the
Competition Commission alone. We must look at amending the law to introduce
private actions, triple damages and a strong motivation for private
companies to take on and break monopolies.

They are all over the place. The entire distribution of goods and services
in this country is a cartel; so are the fertiliser and insurance sectors,
the banks, the petrol and tyre industry, electricity and the other
utilities and the ports and harbours. Even the IDC itself is becoming an
industrial conglomerate with a very anticompetitive effect in its lending
practices. We received submissions in one of our committees on this matter.


Again, with regard to the issue of tariff barriers and what type of
competitive effect they have, we are facing a situation where the South
African marketplace could soon become a putrid pond within which there is
insufficient international competition to ensure proper pricing.

There are foundational problems, structural problems for market dynamics
and competition dynamics, which cannot be addressed exclusively through the
sluggish, lengthy processes of the Competition Commission. We need more
effective government action, especially to eliminate the many areas in
which anticompetitive practices are entrenched in existing legislation and
regulations.

We must enable the private sector to sue whenever it is necessary and be
rewarded for its capacity to sue and break monopolies. We need to open up
the market to international competition so that we stop paying twice as
much for goods sold internationally. Thank you very much.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the National Economic, Development and
Labour Council’s framework response to the international economic crisis
highlighted this aspect of food cartels and emphasised that one should act
against these cartels and any collusion that resulted in inflated food
prices.

This matter was also emphasised during the Minister’s first budget speech
earlier this year. Today we see the fruits that the strengthening of the
competition authorities has borne.

We, as the ACDP, welcome today’s announcement on the R855 million
settlement with Pioneer Foods: the largest such settlement in South
Africa’s history. Besides the large administrative fine, which Treasury
will no doubt welcome, we, as the ACDP, particularly support the innovation
of the agroprocessing competitiveness fund to improve competitiveness in
this food sector.

The reduction in the price of bread flour is to be welcomed. Bread is the
key staple food for many millions of South Africans. However, we as
parliamentarians, as the Minister indicated, must ensure that the benefits
are passed on to the consumer.

Lastly, we commend the competition authorities on this landmark historic
settlement. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Deputy Speaker, the picture the hon Minister has outlined
today is indeed a very sorry one and reveals the depths to which big
economic players in South Africa are prepared to sink in order to maximise
their profits. We have to call this exactly what it is: large-scale theft
from the poor!

The ID applauds the Competition Commission for exposing this kind of theft,
and we welcome the settlement that has been negotiated. Our only regret
though is that criminal charges do not seem to have been brought against
anyone for this crime against the poor.

In the future, the ID would hope that these unscrupulous actors will face
the full force of the law as opposed to simply punitive fines. The ID
supports all measures that aim to create a more competitive economy in
which new entrants can emerge and consumers can get a fair deal. Thank you.


Mr K B MANAMELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the first thing that we want to do,
as the ANC, is to express our excitement about the fact that all the
political parties that spoke here today agree that there is no such thing
as a free market and that, if left to its own devices, it proves to be
extremely dangerous. With its traits and characteristics of greed intended
mainly to benefit a few shareholders, it would use any opportunity to
ensure that it enriches only a few.

We agree that this statement made today is about a situation that
constitutes the gravest theft from the working and middle classes in terms
of the inflated prices or fixed prices with regard to fish, bread and
flour, as these are the basic foodstuffs that many households need.

We also believe that this exposes the notion and the mantra that corruption
only exists in the public sector, and that there is indeed corruption in
the private sector, which is almost a criminal activity, and that we have
to deal with it in the same way. There is no other name that we should call
it. We know that many will be saying it is white-collar crime and all of
those things. It is crime to the majority of our people, and those who are
responsible have to be brought to book.

We also want to emphasise, as the ANC, the need for more resources for the
Competition Commission and the Competition Tribunal in order for the two
institutions to be able to do their jobs more effectively. This is
precisely because these cartels are prepared to match the Competition
Commission and tribunal pound for pound when it comes to the courts. We
believe that this justifies the need for more resources.

We also believe that this had a huge impact on food security as millions
could not afford these basic foods. It has also destroyed small and medium
enterprises, and spaza shops which have supported the livelihoods of
millions of South Africans, and has obviously encroached on the commitment
of the ANC-led government to create jobs in our economy.

We have to emphasise that the announcement, by the Cabinet, of five million
jobs is possible, and it is not a thumb suck. It is the agendas of these
cartels that distract government’s programme of job creation. We also want
to emphasise the point that this had an effect on distorting the economy
and the market, and that it is important that both the Competition
Commission and the Competition Tribunal continue to deal with such
behaviour.

As part of the way forward, we believe that there needs to be a firm
commitment to exposing those who are left and are still resisting co-
operating with the institution. There are companies such as Foodcorp that
are still continuing with legal action. We also need to be firm in our
resolve to ensure that companies feel the impact on their profits and also
on their businesses.

We are quite happy that part of the commitment of this deal is to ensure
that it will facilitate new entrants into the market through the capital
investment that has been incorporated into this particular deal. There will
be benefits for those who have been robbed, that is the poor, the working
class and the middle class, through the R160 million that has been
committed and will go towards price reductions. We believe that that will
also have an impact on the other players in this particular section of the
market.

What is also important is that this establishes a norm. When Tiger Brands,
about three or four years ago, was fined more than R90 million there were
no visible returns to the consumers. This particular deal guarantees and
sets a trend for benefits for the consumers. We see this as a very
important development.

Finally, we believe that some of these actions for stopping cartels and
monopolistic behaviour are in line with the New Growth Path as announced,
and are also in line with employment creation. It also shows that the
regulatory framework that government has put in place and the policing
mechanisms of private companies are actually working and are actually
effective.

We also believe that this will strengthen the approach in terms of ensuring
that through agroprocessing we create more jobs and food security. It shows
we support small and medium enterprises and co-operatives, and also ensures
that millions of our people are taken out of poverty and unemployment.

We note what the hon member from the DA was saying about the merger between
Massmart and Walmart, and obviously the approach of the ANC-led government
would be to ensure that any mergers and acquisitions comply with the
Constitution of the Republic, including with regard to protection of
workers’ rights.

In conclusion, this sends a sign to those industries such as the
construction and infrastructure sector, the telecommunications sector —
including the mobile cellphone operators — and the financial institutions
that their days of fixing prices and maintaining a monopoly are coming to
an end.

The tribunal and the commission are growing some teeth. We would like to
take this opportunity to applaud those who played an important role and
those who pioneered this particular deal. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                          GEOSCIENCE AMENDMENT BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

Mr M F GONA: Hon Deputy Speaker, let me state from the outset that the
Portfolio Committee on Mining has adopted the report unanimously, and that
the ANC supports this Bill tabled before this Parliament. Our support is
based on the fact that the proposed amendments to the Bill, in our view,
are long overdue and necessary. Therefore we would propose that the report
be adopted. Thank you very much.

There was no debate.

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move:


   That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                          GEOSCIENCE AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF MINERAL RESOURCES: Deputy Speaker, chairperson of the
portfolio committee, members of the portfolio committee, Ministers present,
Members of Parliament, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
new Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources. Comrade Godfrey Oliphant, you are
welcome in the department. I’m looking forward to working with you.
[Applause.]

It gives me pleasure to introduce the Geoscience Amendment Bill. The
amendments are in response to the challenges that the country is facing,
which include, amongst other things, the need to ensure that infrastructure
development, especially on land underlain by dolomite, takes place in a
sustainable manner. Such land is prone to sinkhole formation, which often
destroys infrastructure. An example of such a situation is the Khutsong
township in Merafong, where sinkholes have destroyed property and as a
result government is faced with the situation of relocating people at huge
costs.

It also makes South Africa the most globally attractive country for mineral
exploration. I am certain that our mineral industry has and will have
tremendous potential for a host of new and exciting mineral discoveries,
which will continue to play a major role in eradicating poverty, creating
jobs and improving the welfare and equality of people of South Africa.

This Bill directly addresses the renewed push to increase investment in
mineral exploration by mandating the Council for Geoscience to proactively
participate in attracting investment into the exploration sector through
the production of key geoscience exploration information and data
assessment and interpretation. Therefore it will increase the role of
mining in development.

The main objectives of the Bill are to make provision for the following:
the Council for Geoscience to be a national advisory authority with regard
to geohazards that are related to infrastructure and development;
empowering the Council for Geoscience to be the custodian of all
geotechnical data with the purpose of compiling a complete geotechnical
risk profile; putting mechanisms in place to address the problems
associated with infrastructure and development on dolomitic land;
empowering the Council for Geoscience in the management and administration
of the national seismic network; enabling the Council for Geoscience to
execute its functions and responsibilities in promoting investment in the
mining industry through its research activities; enhancing administrative
processes of the Council for Geoscience to ensure effective implementation
of the proposed amendments; addressing references to legislation that is
obsolete in the Geoscience Act; and aligning the Geoscience Act with the
Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act.

Between December 2008 and September 2009 the Department of Mineral
Resources conducted consultations with various stakeholders, including
government. As stated earlier, the threat posed by dolomite-related
sinkholes has affected major human settlements such as Khutsong, Katlehong
and Tshwane, as well as major national infrastructure.

The dolomite rocks underlie major portions of at least four provinces, and
a potent risk of sinkhole development exists in the country.

It is for this government to address these infrastructure development
challenges that could be associated with building on potential geohazardous
land. It is government’s understanding that, in order to address all the
challenges associated with dolomite, it is necessary that the Council for
Geoscience takes the lead in the research on and monitoring of the impact
of development on land covered with dolomite.

The council will further advise all local government, provincial and
national state authorities when assessing applications for infrastructure
and development.

In conclusion, the necessity for these amendments cannot be overemphasised.
It will only be to the benefit of the country to have a geological
institution that serves and is responsive to the increasing needs of its
people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M F GONA: Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers present
here and hon members, let me state from the outset – in case I run out of
time – that the ANC supports this Bill. We believe that the transformation
of the South African economy should always be holistic and comprehensive,
covering all sectors of the economy. In this regard, we need to ensure
greater state involvement and control of strategic sectors of the economy
such as mining.

Key to this is the development of a mining sector strategy which must take
into account the country’s developmental needs. It should also help clarify
the state’s role in the sector. This will, of course, require consequential
amendments of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act in order
to support the objectives of our mineral sector strategy.

The Geoscience Act, Act 100 of 1993, was mainly introduced to establish the
Council for Geoscience, the purpose of which was to provide for the
promotion of research and the extension of knowledge in the field of
geoscience.

The purpose of the Geoscience Amendment Bill is, therefore, to extend the
mandate of the Council for Geoscience – as the Minister has pointed out
here - to enable it to become the custodian of geotechnological information
and an advisory authority in respect of geohazards related to
infrastructure development.

The Bill further seeks to put mechanisms in place to address problems which
are associated with infrastructure development in dolomitic areas. This
phenomenon resulted in the development of sinkholes that were initially
noticed way back in the 1950s, but the seriousness of the situation was
highlighted in the early 1960s when a sinkhole engulfed a three-storey
crusher plant at West Driefontein Mine.

In 2007, a three-bedroomed house in Khutsong, near Carletonville, caved in
as a result of a sinkhole. This incident led to the relocation of residents
from Khutsong to a safer area. It was initially planned that more than
25 000 housing units were to be relocated in three phases, and that such a
project would have cost an estimated R3,5 billion. That would have been the
cost to the state to relocate these communities!

Other incidents of damage caused by sinkholes include the following: the
evacuation and demolition of Bank village in the 1970s; major repairs to
the military airport by the Department of Public Works at Waterkloof Air
Force Base in 2008; damage to Vosloorus Police Station; the collapse of a
house in Hans Strydom Road in Tshwane; severe damage to a Basden Road
townhouse in Tshwane in 2008; ongoing repairs that are required by
Ekurhuleni Municipality to Kathorus suburbs; and the diversion of the
double-lane N14 highway leading into the south side of Tshwane in 2008.

Notwithstanding the above-mentioned details, we are further informed that
at least 39 people are known to have died over the past 50 years as a
result of sinkhole-related incidents. It has cost people their lives.
Research reveals that approximately 20% of Gauteng province, as well as
parts of Mpumalanga, Limpopo and the North West are also underlain by
dolomite. So the challenge in these provinces is not only acid mine
drainage, but also the sinkholes.

All these above-mentioned serious incidents occurred under the watch of the
private sector engineering companies — I think the DA must pay particular
attention to this paragraph — upon which the state relied for advice before
approving development plans. Through this Bill, therefore, we are also
redressing the legacy of apartheid spatial planning, which we are still
dealing with as we speak today.

Therefore this Bill empowers the Council for Geoscience to be the custodian
of all geotechnical data, with the purpose of compiling a complete
geotechnical risk profile of the entire country. The Bill further enables
the Council for Geoscience to become the custodian of technical information
related to exploration and mining.

There are some concerns that were raised during the process of the public
hearings. There have been some concerns with regard to the passage of the
Bill and I would like to address the House on the misconceptions that have
been raised with these concerns. The first are the functions, powers and
the role of the council that have come into question.

The state has the responsibility to ensure that the developmental
infrastructure, minerals, land and other activities are in a condition that
is best suited to deliver. Evaluation and assessment over a number of years
has led to a scientific analysis. In areas of deprivation, the lack of
penetration to turn around the material conditions of the people has been
affected by market-related considerations that superseded the need and
responsibility to address structural poverty.

Existing polices have proven not to be sufficient and, therefore,
necessitated intervention. We cannot continue with a situation where
development takes place under risky circumstances and the state,
ultimately, has to then deal with the fallout of risky business ventures.

The second concern is that of the powers of the Minister. This is normally
rolled out when it comes to amending Bills. In order to implement policies
dictated to them through legislation, the executive requires the powers.
The responsibility of the legislature, therefore, is to ensure oversight
over those powers that the executive has.

We should not try to weaken these powers to the extent that the
implementation of the policy becomes unworkable and also, because of broad
flexibility, the policy implementation becomes ineffective and does not
address the concerns that gave rise to it in the first place.

In this regard, the only semblance of powers conferred on the Minister by
this Bill is in section 23(7) where it is stated that -

   The Minister may issue a directive to authorise council officials to
   enter any land within the borders of the Republic of South Africa in
   order to execute the council’s mandate, save where there is prohibition
   under any other law.

Even with this light amendment, the portfolio committee has included
subsection 8 that provides for notification and consultation with the
landowner and/or lawful occupier. Therefore this power, weak as it is,
should be contained in the Bill.

Thirdly, there have been concerns that the council will have oversight over
professional ethics. The principal intention of the Bill is to ensure
ecological development and meeting socioeconomic needs, especially in poor
communities. At the same time it cannot close its eyes to conduct in the
exploration field that lacks professional ethics and therefore will
intervene only when it’s necessary.

Responding to some sectoral demands that were made during the public
hearings, the amending Bill must ensure that the Council for Geoscience is
well equipped and in a position to contribute to safety both at a
residential level, especially in poor, working-class communities, and at
the industrial base.

The Council for Geoscience must, therefore, be in a position to work with
related stakeholders to develop technologies that can detect and give early
signals of dangers. This would save many lives, especially in our mining
industry.

The amending Bill will ensure that the council has a role to play in
ensuring safety in the mines by mandating the mining industry to develop
systems that would assist to detect, for example, seismic activities in the
mines - as has been alluded to by the Minister. For this to happen, there
needs to be improved co-ordination between the Council for Geoscience, the
Mine Health and Safety Council and Mintek. This would ensure safety in
mines, strengthen government functions to explore minerals and ensure
information technology development.

The mining industry has been and remains a critical sector in our economy.
Its transformation, therefore, is vital for our national sociopolitical
objectives. The development of the Mining Charter in 2002 was informed by
transformation considerations that were consistent with the evolution of
the political landscape in the country. Accordingly, we recognise that the
development of the country’s mineral complex presents opportunities to
expand related industries that supply material or services for mining to be
effective.

To this extent, we have strengthened the notion of local content to support
local industries consistent with the government’s drive for local
industrialisation, creation of decent jobs and poverty alleviation. I thank
you very much. [Time expired.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Hon Chair, the DA wishes to congratulate the hon Godfrey
Oliphant on his appointment as the Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources. I
have not yet seen him serving as a member of the committee, but I trust
that he will be able to make a contribution. [Laughter.]

This Bill intends to amend the Geoscience Act of 1993. It provides, inter
alia, for the Council for Geoscience to act as a custodian of all
geotechnical data for the purpose of compiling a geotechnical risk profile
for the country.

More importantly, it ensures that the council will be the custodian — and I
stress the word “custodian” — of technical information relating to mining.
It, however, assumes the task of being a custodian with respect to mining.
This is a term that is used in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources
Development Act of 2002, when it placed the ownership of mineral resources
in the custodianship of the state.
Whilst the Geoscience Act currently provides for numerous representatives
on the Board from the private sector, such as a representative nominated by
the Chamber of Mines, as well as representatives nominated by the
Geological Society of South Africa and the Industrial Development
Corporation, IDC, the current Bill intends to provide the Minister with the
sole authority to determine who should represent the above institutions and
organisations on their behalf.

Representatives from at least six different government departments would
also be appointed by the Minister. The Council for Geoscience has provided
specialised services to both the private sector and government departments
for many years; at least since 1993 when it accommodated board members from
both the private and public sectors.

Accordingly, it could be expected that representatives from the private
sector nominated by the relevant institutions should be included. It also
appears that some recent board members from the private sector have
attended more meetings than certain members from the Public Service
represented on the board, creating some obscurity as to the real reasons
why private sector members are to be removed.

In the light of the recent developments relating to the intended state-
owned mining company, which is to be formed by government presumably by
June 2011, the above provides for a situation where no private sector
participation on the board could lead to a situation where services are
primarily directed to government functions – the state-owned mining company
- to the detriment of the private sector, as it will have no input or
participation in the affairs of the council.

An amendment that raises concern relates to the fact that the Bill proposes
to allow the council to conduct business in so far as any reconnaissance
operation and prospecting activities are concerned. This is a matter which
has primarily been the domain of the private sector.

The view of the DA in this regard is well known: Mining operations should
be undertaken by the private sector, whilst the task of government should
be aimed at providing the necessary stimuli and macroeconomic framework to
lure both local and international investments on a long-term basis — the
basic tenets on which the mining industry is based.

Apart from the fact that government does not have the necessary expertise
to run mines efficiently and cost-effectively, the state also does not have
the capital — neither does it have access thereto — to capitalise and
recapitalise mines considering the strong demand for socioeconomic rights
and disparities.

Both Alexkor and the latest government-controlled African Exploration
Mining and Finance Corporation, AEMFC, of which the state is the only
shareholder, are in dire financial straits, having shed thousands of jobs
and suffered a dramatic drop in production, in the instance of Alexkor, and
are in urgent need of capital and experienced management.

The Bill, if approved, will not only allow the Council for Geoscience, to
be in a position to act as a mandatory custodian of all knowledge relating
to geological and geotechnical data on a national scale, but will also
allow it to compete with the private sector in so far as exploration and
prospecting are concerned. This allows the government to act as both player
and referee with regard to its intended functions.

The CGS has been underfunded for many years. The intended extension of the
existing mandate will require more skilled personnel and an additional
budget. While the CGS is struggling to fulfil its current mandate with the
allocated resources, the capacity required to fulfil its new intended
mandate appears too ambitious if not impossible, as raised by various
geological-related entities.

The additional unfunded mandate will impact negatively on its current
commendable task, which relates to geophysics, seismology, mine safety, and
aspects relating to mine flooding, acid mine drainage, development of
databases and strategies on derelict and abandoned mines.

The most important reason for opposing this Bill is the conflict of
interest, which will arise if the CGS is to operate as a service provider
in addition to regulating the affairs to be prescribed by the Geoscience
Amendment Bill. The DA therefore opposes this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms C M P KOTSI: Chairperson, the delay in the Geoscience Amendment Bill is
of concern to us, as this is an important piece of legislation for South
Africans across the spectrum. One would have thought that, as a result of
the delays, problem areas raised by stakeholders would and should have been
addressed.

In this case I would like to raise some concerns. The Geological Society of
South Africa, GSSA, alluded to the fact that now the Minister has the sole
responsibility to appoint an individual representative of academic and
professional expertise. This responsibility has been taken away from the
GSSA.

This is a concern in the light of the fact that the present incumbent
nominated by the GSSA has attended all meetings held by the council and the
management board, while the representative from the department was nowhere
to be seen. Furthermore, no mention has been made as to how the department
arrived at the indicated budget figures or what the increase in the budget
will specifically be targeting. It must therefore be noted that the
increase in the budget is an ongoing commitment especially in view of the
current financial difficulties that the council is facing.

Lastly, the creation of the national databank of geotechnical information
is a noble idea, and is good in theory. History has, however, taught us
differently, and we are concerned about the breaches in confidentiality of
information, which, together with the possible conflict with the Copyright
Act, needed to be addressed first.

In the light of this and regardless of the concerns that we think needed to
be addressed, Cope still supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R N CEBEKHULU: Chairperson, I am standing here, not as a member of the
portfolio committee, but I am representing, on behalf of the party, the hon
member who should be here.

This Bill, besides updating terminology in respect of the various
government departments, addresses core issues surrounding safe
infrastructural development within the sphere of geohazards and related
perils.

Importantly, the Bill seeks to instruct the Council for Geoscience to act
as a national advisory body within the above spheres, which should engender
a co-ordinated and comprehensive oversight of their mandate. Additionally,
the council would also be a custodian of all geotechnical information and
reports, as all documents of this nature will have to be submitted by
parties involved in work of this nature.

The Bill also seeks to mandate the council to undertake extensive research
in the petroleum and mineral prospecting sectors that could in the future
prove very advantageous to our country and her economy. South Africa is the
richest country in the world in terms of the actual minerals still in the
ground, and such wealth should be worth literally trillions in US dollars.

As such, it should be judiciously managed, and it is in this vein that the
Council for Geoscience has a great responsibility to the people of South
Africa in that it must work very closely with the Departments of Energy and
Mineral Resources in order to ensure a wise and informed decision-making
process with regard to all geotechnical and related matters.

In conclusion, the IFP supports the Geoscience Amendment Bill and we
believe it to be a very important step in the right direction for
geoscience exploration, management and oversight. We look forward to
engaging with the Council for Geoscience on all aspects relating to the new
mandate in terms of this legislation in the future. I thank you.

Mrs N J NGELE: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, and distinguished guests, the ANC is committed to public-sector-
led development to address the needs of our people and to ensure that
public resources serve the developmental needs of our people.

Hon members, the Geoscience Amendment Bill must be seen against the
backdrop of a broad philosophy that places the needs, health and safety of
our communities at the centre of development. The Freedom Charter
identified that —

   The mineral wealth beneath the soil ... shall be transferred to the
   ownership of the people as a whole.

This requires an effective development strategy in which the state co-
ordinates its efforts around key priorities. It is within this context that
we need to understand the governance framework that this Bill seeks to
advance.

This Bill entrenches good governance in a manner that enhances
accountability and transparency through proposed structures with specific
mandates.

The Bill empowers the council to be the custodian of all geotechnical data,
with the purpose of compiling a complete geotechnical risk profile of the
country. Concurrently, it promotes the search for and exploration of
minerals within the field of geoscience.

Hon members, the Bill enables the Council for Geoscience to act as a
national advisory authority in respect of geohazards related to
infrastructure and geoenvironmental pollution brought about by mineral
exploration.

The Bill enables the council to provide specialised geoscientific services.
The amending Bill gives powers to the council to study the use of the land
and seabed surfaces and to provide the analysis, which would be used as a
geoscientific position. The council can advise government institutions and
the public on the judicious and safe use of materials and land.

The council may review and evaluate all geotechnical reports with respect
to geohazards that may affect infrastructure and the development thereof.
Crucially, an appeals committee will also be set up to deal with disputes
such as may arise over access to private land. The proposed legislation
plans to give the council the right to enter private property in order to
carry out its stipulated tasks.

The Bill proposes a balance in the representivity of the board, with
members reflecting different disciplines but brought together in an
interlocking manner so as to address the overall mandate. Stakeholders have
been addressed in this process.

The numbers on the board have been increased, which reflects the increasing
scope and task of the structure. With regard to representation of
departments, representatives can be nominated by the director-general and
appointed by the Minister.

The powers of the Minister give an indication of the nature and scope of
the board and the strategic and sensitive nature of its work. The powers
assigned to the Minister by the Bill are appropriate. Such powers are
required if we are to meet the demands of the Bill itself. The nature of
the powers assigned support the spirit and intention of the Bill that
geohazard areas must receive close regulation and protection from the
government.

Public safety, especially at the level of poor communities, cannot be
compromised and left to the individual developers or the private sector
alone. Our past experience is filled with examples of conflict in this area
involving private companies and local communities and workers. The
governance framework must eradicate such a fragmented practice.

Chairperson, in conclusion, the council will need to strengthen its role in
exploration and ensure that co-ordination amongst different stakeholders is
both maintained and enhanced. The development of a country, that is, the
infrastructural development and protection of our public resources, are all
critical areas that this amending Bill addresses. Public education on the
intentions of this Bill is critical in order to ensure that communities may
benefit.

Government needs to monitor and evaluate exploration processes, so as to
ensure that both the state and the people benefit and that the specialised
service offered by the council enhances delivery to the people. Attention
must be given to strengthening the structures established by this Bill in
order for the full intention and potential of the Bill to be realised.

Hon members, this Bill will bring about better co-ordinated governance,
control and efficiency in line with the developmental agenda of our
country. It will bring about greater accountability and transparency in
accordance with international health and safety standards, particularly in
respect to the most affected sections, such as poor communities, but
equally to the mining sector. The ANC supports the Geoscience Amendment
Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr E J MARAIS: Hon Chairperson, the Council for Geoscience is mandated to
gather, compile, interpret and disseminate geoscience knowledge for South
Africa, as provided by the Geoscience Act, Act No 100 of 1993. This Act
established the mandate and national responsibilities of the organisation.

During the past year, the Council for Geoscience has continued to execute
both its statutory and mandatory programmes. The management of the new
national geoscience facilities on behalf of the state is included in the
statutory programme. However, the reliance of the organisation on
commercially generated income to fund its annual technical programme has
proved to be a risky business model.

The global economic downturn coincided with a period in the organisation
that saw the completion of large projects funded by the European Union in
Africa. The strong South African rand also impacted negatively on the
income of the organisation during the year, as significant currency losses
were experienced in the international projects.

The Council for Geoscience has to establish and strengthen partnerships
with both private and public sector institutions in order to achieve its
growing mandate within the context of the broader South African national
and international priorities.

The organisation is faced with significant key challenges that include an
increased shortage of mid-career scientists, ageing infrastructure, a
decline in commercial income, inadequate statutory funding and the
refocusing and aligning to address South Africa’s developmental challenges.


The council will in the future be more involved in assisting the Department
of Mineral Resources to seal extremely dangerous openings of abandoned and
unsafe mines. Furthermore, they will be involved in addressing the acid
mine drainage, specifically in Gauteng, and will advise the Department of
Mineral Resources on the effective rehabilitation of mines.

The production of geoenvironmental maps is seen as a vital step towards the
dissemination of information in an appropriate format to local governments
in order to assist them with issues relating to land-use planning. The
Council for Geoscience is doing excellent work in dolomite stability,
especially where there is the continued formation of sinkholes in the
Gauteng province.

The council aims to increase earthquake monitoring in the gold mining areas
of South Africa with the hope of promoting research into minimising the
risk of seismic rock bursts and rock falls and their impact on the lives of
miners and on the flooding of abandoned mines.

New amendments to the Geoscience Act will bring new challenges in terms of
the additional resources required for the implementation of these changes.
This is exactly where the major problem lies. The intended extension of the
mandate of the Council for Geoscience will require an additional R80
million per annum, excluding assets.

While the Council for Geoscience is struggling to fulfil its current
mandate with allocated resources, the capacity required to fulfil its new
intended mandate appears to be far too ambitious. The Treasury is faced
with requests from other departments to address more essential needs in
South Africa such as energy, housing and water supply. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M R SONTO: Chairperson, I gladly follow on after hon member Marais, a
member of the committee on which I serve. Let me start by saying that the
ANC supports the Geoscience Amendment Bill. This Bill seeks to amend the
principal Act, the Geoscience Act of 1993, so as to strengthen the mandate
of the Council for Geoscience.

This amendment will allow the council to play a greater role in research
and development in the mining industry by, among other things, promoting
the search for and exploitation of any minerals in South Africa;
undertaking geoscientific research and related technological development;
and acting as a national advisory authority in respect of geohazards
related to infrastructure and development and geoenvironmental pollution
arising from the mineral industry.

Public submissions were received by the committee from the relevant
stakeholders, as the process requires. It was outlined that the Bill, in
particular, seeks to put in place mechanisms that will deal with problems
associated with building on dolomitic land. Such land is susceptible to
sinkholes, as has been said before, and therefore the danger of loss of
life exists. The ANC wants to ensure that the land released for development
is stable.

The geotechnical industry is an integral part of urban planning, civil
engineering and the mining sectors of our economy. A geotechnical
investigation is a precursor to every infrastructure development project in
South Africa, such as urban township development, roads, railways,
sanitation, water, mine infrastructure and so on.

The geotechnical industry is therefore responsible for ensuring safe,
responsible and sustainable infrastructure development. The economic growth
of our country hinges on this. Where public safety is at stake, through the
actions of unscrupulous and opportunistic developers, regulatory
intervention is required.

Chairperson, geohazards are also increasingly important in the field of
disaster management, both globally and in South Africa. The Council for
Geoscience is in a strong position to provide services and consult in this
area through its huge information base and considerable expertise that it
possesses, contrary to what the previous speaker was saying here.

The development of a national geohazard system for South Africa addresses
geohazards issues by using geological information held by the Council for
Geoscience. This system plays a significant supporting role for critical
stakeholders such as planning authorities, municipalities and many other
public organisations.

With an estimated figure in excess of 11 000 property transactions per
year, and growing as building stock increases, there’s a high demand for
technical data regarding the ground conditions upon which these properties
could be built or already exist.

The use of historical data and local knowledge of all geohazard occurrences
and their effects can provide the basis for an understanding of what could
happen in the future.

Chairperson, the home building manual of the National Home Builders
Registration Council prescribes the technical requirements to be met by
both engineers and home builders. It requires that a competent person shall
investigate any proposed township areas which are underlain by dolomite,
and prepare a clearly motivated report detailing any precautionary measures
that are required to reduce the risk of sinkhole formation.

The report must therefore be submitted to the Council for Geoscience for
their confirmation that the investigations were conducted on the stability
of dolomitic land referred to in the report.

I am not surprised that the DA is not supporting this Bill because during
the public hearings that we held, the DA was at pains to try to drive the
committee to appoint the board. Where have you seen that? The DA is also
worried that the Minister has got this responsibility of appointing the
board. The DA’s problem is that it wants to control everything; it is used
to that and indeed it wants to control it. [Applause.]

They have a concern about the mining company that is in the offing. It is
coming, like it or not, because the wealth of this country belongs to the
people of this country and not anywhere else. [Interjections.]

Your worry is that these engineering companies want the government to buy
information from them about this country — that is not on. The government
will establish mechanisms that are going to make it possible for the
government to get information about the mineral resources of this country,
Trollip. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, on a point of order: Was the hon
member addressing me?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I didn’t hear him addressing you,
hon Trollip.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well, he said “Trollip” and I am not
“Trollip”, but I am “the hon Trollip”.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Yes, you are “hon Trollip”. If you
said that, hon member, please note that the hon members are hon members.
Let’s address them as such that.

Mr M R SONTO: Thank you, Chair. The DA is worried about the capacity of the
council. What capacity? We have already explained that not a single
engineering or geoscience company has the requisite capacity that will deal
with everything that we need, especially the information that we are
talking about.

The government is there to help even the council, if it lacks the capacity,
so that it can get the capacity it requires, because we want the council to
deliver on its mandate.

I am very grateful on behalf of the committee that all the parties that
represent constituencies of poor people understood the necessity of the
Bill, except for the DA. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERAL RESOURCES: Chairperson, firstly, I would like to
say I am very disappointed in Mr Schmidt. I thought he was intelligent
enough to understand the objective of this Bill.

It is interesting that the DA has been up in arms about the Information
Bill and the state concealing information. However, when it is the private
sector, the DA says that it has a right to conceal information on
exploration. I am really disappointed. You are not consistent. [Applause.]
You can say “Wha, wha, wena”, but it is just like that.

The Council for Geoscience wants the state to be the custodian of any
exploration that happens in the country so that anyone who wants to invest
in South Africa can have access to that information. That is the purpose.

We want to promote investment and to grow this country’s economy; and the
mining sector must also grow. In fact, as far as the private sector is
concerned, the mining companies are keen to provide that information to the
state as the custodian. That’s what we want the Council for Geoscience to
do. I am very disappointed, Mr Schmidt.

We welcome the support from the ANC, but I also must say that we should not
confuse what is in the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act,
when it comes to the mining rights, and the custodianship of the mining
data. Those are two different things.

We want to grow the economy. Research is very critical in making sure that
technology in the country grows and that we understand what the state has
and where to find that information. We want to make South Africa globally
competitive, so that’s the purpose and objective of the Council for
Geoscience.

I must respond to hon Kotsi: We recognise the issue of professional bodies,
but it must also be open. It cannot only be one institution for life
because then you’ll have ancestors who serve on the Council for Geoscience
for ever - 30 years! Why don’t we give other people a chance also to
participate? That’s the issue. This person you are talking about has been
idlozi [an ancestor]. [Applause.] We cannot have amadlozi [ancestors].
Space must be created for others.

We welcome the support of the IFP.

I agree with Mr Marais that when it comes to the issues of skills and
infrastructure there are challenges, but we are addressing that with
Treasury to making sure that the Council for Geoscience can be properly
funded.

I hope that through the new system of budgeting you will also play a role
in making sure that we get better resources from Treasury. I hope that you
will contribute positively.

With this particular Bill, we welcome the support of the ANC. I also want
to thank the chairperson for the appropriate and important public hearings
he held and that he managed to steer this ship in the right direction.
The Council for Geoscience is very important when it comes to making sure
that we know what is where. If it were not for the Council for Geoscience,
we wouldn’t know about those areas in the country that are dolomitic. Today
we have this knowledge because of this institution, hence we now need to
capacitate it much more.

In conclusion, Mr Schmidt, do not mix up state-owned mining companies with
the Council for Geoscience; it is going to come and you will understand its
role.

There are no blurred areas between the Council for Geoscience and the state-
owned mining company. It will come and compete, as we’ve said, with the
rest of the private sector. We don’t have the intention of taking short
cuts.

It will go through due diligence like any other company and it will apply
to the Department of Mineral Resources for opportunities like any other
private company.

Let’s not mislead the public into thinking that the lines are blurred.
There is nothing that is blurred; everything is clear. [Interjections.]

Hon Ellis, you’re the oldest member of this Parliament, you must teach us
how to behave. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order, sir: The hon Minister who
has just spoken is misleading the House. I am not the oldest member of this
House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I agree!

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

Nom J B SIBANYONI: Sihlalo, ngijame la njengomjaphethe, esikhundleni
sakaSihlalo wethu wekadeni, uMhlonitjhwa uNgoako Ramathlodi, begodu
simfisela itjhudu ngokukhethwa kwakhe abe liSekela Ngqongqotjhe lomNyango
wezokuVuselelwa kweeMilo. Begodu bekuzabakhona uSosibebhe wekomiti yethu
uMhlonitjhwa uMondli Ngungubele, naye simfisela itjhudu ngokukhethwa kwakhe
... [Iinthikaziso.] (Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[Mr J B SIBANYONI: Chairperson, I am standing here as acting chairperson on
behalf of our longest-serving chairperson, hon Ngoako Ramatlhodi. We
therefore wish him all the best on being appointed Deputy Minister of
Correctional Services. And to our Chief Whip, hon Mondli Gungubele, who was
supposed to be here, we also wish him all the best on being appointed ...
[Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, hon members, order please!

Mr J B SIBANYONI: ... waba yiMeyara ephezulu eMkhandlwini Dorobha
wekuRhuleni. [... Executive Mayor of Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality.]

I’m here just to give a very brief report on the Repeal of the Black
Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill. In order
for the members to understand this, we’ve got to remember that there was an
Act called the Native Administrative Act, Act No 38 of 1927. It later
became known as the Bantu Administration Act, Act No 38 of 1927. Finally,
it was known as the Black Administration Act, Act No 38 of 1927.

When we repealed all the apartheid laws, it was not possible to repeal this
Act in toto because there is section 12 and section 20 of this Act, as well
as the third Schedule of this Act, which deals with the judicial functions
of the traditional leaders. This portion deals with the traditional courts
or the tribal courts, the iinkundla – makgotla [traditional courts].

Now, if the Act had been repealed in toto, there would have been a vacuum.
In order for the vacuum not to exist, it was necessary to keep on extending
these particular portions.

These portions have been extended lately by the Repeal of the Black
Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Act of 2005. That Act
comes to an end on 30 December this year. It was obvious. We could foresee
that there was no way in which we could be in a position to pass the
Traditional Courts Bill before 30 December this year. As such, it became
necessary that we should come before this august House and ask for the
extension of this Act.

I must say that the judicial functions of traditional leaders constitute
one of the most important African laws. It has to do with the restorative
justice of ubuntu, a system of law where there is no winner or loser, but
where disputes are reconciled. As we stand here, we say this Bill intends
to ask for an extension until 20 December 2010.

We need some time as the Justice Portfolio Committee to engage with ...
amakhosi emvelo, amakhosi endabuko, abantu bakwaMthaniya, sibanikele
isikhathi sokobana baveze amazizo wabo, abakwaXhosa, bakwaSikhukhune bakwa
Makhado sithi ... [... indigenous leaders, traditional leaders, the people
of Mthaniya, who will be given an opportunity to express their views; to
the people of kwaXhosa, Sikhukhune and Makhado we say ...] ... Ndaa! ...
[... Hello!...]
... so that they have a chance to comment on this intended Traditional
Courts Bill. This is a Bill that takes into consideration the Constitution,
as well as the Bill of Rights. It is gender sensitive. As a result we need
time to undergo that process to give all South African people, who are
still living according to and observing our beautiful traditional
jurisprudence or our traditional law, an opportunity to comment.

Yeke-ke, sitjhaba sekhethu, sibawa isikhathi. Sizoninikela ithuba lokobana
niveze amazizo wenu noke ngokupheleleko. [We therefore request time from
our people. We are going to give all of them an opportunity to express
their views in full.]

In conclusion, I want to say the ANC supports this Bill, the Repeal of the
Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill. I
must also mention that we are fortunate that all the parties that are
participating in the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development agreed that they don’t have any problem with this Act being
extended until 30 December 2012. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the report be adopted.
Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE - 2010 REVISED
                              FISCAL FRAMEWORK

Mr T A MUFAMADI: Nndaa, khakhamela, dada muhali, marungadzinndevhelaho ...
[Praise.]

With regard to the responsibilities vested in me as of now, it is my
pleasure to introduce the report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
the Revised Fiscal Framework, as presented by the Minister of Finance on 27
October 2010 in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.

Let me indicate that the main thrust of the Fiscal Policy Framework is
premised on a countercyclical and expansionary policy approach informed by
the need to stimulate job creation, growth and development to best address
the objectives of a developmental state.

Amongst other things, it seeks to promote the creation of decent work and
sustainable livelihoods by strengthening labour market institutions;
further the expansion of education and opportunities; promote health;
ensure rural development underpinned by food security and land reform;
enhance safety and security and fight corruption; and advance settlement
philosophy and programmes and, amongst other things, local government that
addresses the needs of the people.

Through strategic state intervention, the achievement of the above-
mentioned priorities will ensure that a developmental state provides
equitable wealth redistribution in the economy. Fiscal policy is one of the
key policy instruments available to policy-makers to redirect the economy
in order to activate the stated objectives of government.

The monetary policy is a key policy instrument of the Reserve Bank which
focuses on monetary intervention in the economy. This includes management
of interest rates, price stability, exchange rates which must be utilised
to actively promote the creation of decent employment, economic growth,
broad-based industrialisation, reduced income inequality and other
developmental imperatives.

On the balance of evidence, the Revised Fiscal Framework as presented to
this honourable House is consistent with the government policy which is
directed towards the maintenance of social expenditure and economic
infrastructure investments. It also provides stimulus packages for economic
activities as stated in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement of 2010.

The basis for the committee to analyse the Revised Fiscal Framework and any
envisaged changes remains the adopted fiscal framework that laid the basis
of the Division of Revenue Bill and other relevant money Bills tabled
earlier this year. The Revised Fiscal Framework as announced in the Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement does not show any major shifts that are
inconsistent with the government objectives, which are geared towards the
expansion of public spending directed towards the maintenance of economic
investment, particularly in infrastructure — social and economic.

In essence, the main thrust of the revised fiscal policy is to ensure a
balance between expansion and spending in order to address problems of
unemployment and the need to reduce the levels of borrowing and to mitigate
against long-term implications of debt service costs. The committee has
noted the positive aspects of South Africa’s countercyclical policy
designed to steady the economy and to protect core social and economic
programmes from undue volatility.

In pursuing this trajectory, in the past the government realised some
surpluses, particularly when the economy was growing at a higher rate. Let
me also indicate that the Revised Fiscal Framework as tabled before this
House seeks to achieve higher gross domestic product, GDP, growth and
reduced inflation; a recovery in tax revenue as a ratio to GDP; moderation
in the real growth of non-interest expenditure; a reduction in the
proportion of expenditure to GDP over the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework, MTEF; and a rise in government debt service costs from 7,5% of
expenditure in 2010-11. Most important is the R977,2 billion made available
for spending next year; and the additional R89 billion for public
expenditure over the next MTEF period.

Before I recommend the committee’s report and proposal, let me also take
this opportunity, on behalf of the committee, to congratulate the
government and the National Treasury in particular, on being rated number 1
amongst 94 countries by the International Budget Partnership in its 2010
Open Budget Survey. [Applause.]

The survey is based on the degree of transparency that government is able
to display in providing budget documentation and information to allow for
both public participation and oversight by the public in the process of
budget decision-making, so that the citizens can at all times hold
government accountable for the public purse.

Equally, we must congratulate the collective efforts of our electorate for
keeping government under constant scrutiny through parliamentary committees
and public engagement. May I also congratulate committee members and thank
them for their willingness to deliberate on the Revised Fiscal Framework as
presented within a very short space of time, as dictated by the
parliamentary programme. Despite those limitations and obligations imposed
on us, the committee has succeeded in applying its mind to the content of
the document.

Amongst other things, based on those deliberations, the committee
recommendations are as follows: National Treasury should take appropriate
steps to accelerate the rate of decline in expenditure; provide the
committee with a detailed report on how government will rebuild a fiscal
space that we seem to have lost during the recession; provide the committee
with a detailed report on the impact of the fiscal framework on a value-
added tax zero rating, particularly on school textbooks; and government
should resolve the issue around Southern African Customs Union revenue-
sharing formulas as a matter of urgency.

Since it has become evidently clear that to realise the full implementation
of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act,
Parliament’s programme would require a total overhaul. We therefore
recommend that the House accept the Revised Fiscal Framework as tabled.

Let me also say and indicate up front, that the ANC supports the Revised
Fiscal Framework.

Lastly, on behalf of the committee, I would also like to congratulate
government under the stewardship of President Jacob Zuma, the Minister of
Finance, and his deputy, together with the National Treasury staff for
their incisive collective efforts on the presentation of the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement. I thank you.

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


   That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:40.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Correctional Matters Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Correctional Services. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Correctional Services and the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Development.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1.  The  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  of  the   Portfolio
   Committee on Energy on the Performance of the Department  of  Energy  for
   the 2009/10 Financial Year, dated 26 October 2010

   The Portfolio Committee on Energy, having assessed the performance of the
   Department of Energy, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

During May 2009, the President of the Republic  of  South  Africa  announced
the  restructuring  of  Cabinet  and  national  departments  to  align   the
structure  and  electoral   mandate   of   government   with   developmental
challenges. As a result, the former Department of Minerals and Energy  (DME)
was divided into two Departments, that of  Mineral  Resources  and  that  of
Energy. A government-wide task team was established under  the  auspices  of
the Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA)  to  oversee  the
transition. The establishment of the Department of Energy as a  stand  alone
department was finalised at the end of the 2009/2010  financial  year.  This
report therefore seeks to analyse the performance  and  expenditure  of  the
Department of Energy during the 2009/2010 financial year (and the first  two
quarters of the 2010/11 financial year.

1.1 The Role and Mandate of the Committee

In terms of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,  Parliamentary
committees  have  a  mandate  to  legislate,  conduct  oversight  over   the
Executive’s actions and facilitate public participation.

The Portfolio Committee on Energy’s  mandate  is  governed  by  Parliament’s
mission and vision, the rules of Parliament and  Constitutional  obligation.
The mission of the Portfolio Committee  on  Energy  (the  Committee)  is  to
contribute to the realisation of a developmental state and ensure  effective
service-delivery through  discharging  its  responsibility  as  a  Portfolio
Committee of Parliament. Its vision includes enhancing  and  developing  the
capacity of Committee Members in the exercise of  effective  oversight  over
the Executive Authority. The  primary  objective  of  the  Committee  is  to
oversee, scrutinise and influence the performance of the Executive  and  its
agencies.  This  implies  holding  the  Executive   and   related   entities
accountable  through  oversight  on  the  objectives  of   its   programmes,
scrutinising its  budget  and  expenditure  (quarterly  and  annually),  and
recommending, through Parliament,  actions  the  Executive  should  take  in
order to attain their strategic goals and contribute to service-delivery.

Furthermore, Section 5 of the Money Bills Amendment Procedures  and  Related
Matters Act, No 9 of 2009 (the Act) provides  that  the  National  Assembly,
through its  committees,  must  annually  assess  the  performance  of  each
national department and annually submit Budgetary Review and  Recommendation
(BRR) Reports for tabling  in  the  National  Assembly.  These  BRR  Reports
should  be  considered  by  the  Committee  on  Appropriations  when  it  is
considering and  reporting  on  the  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement
(MTBPS) to the House.

1.2 The Department

The  Department  of  Energy  (the  Department)  is  the  primary  Government
institution that is responsible for formulating  and  implementing  policies
on energy. The Department reports  to  and  advises  the  Minister  who,  in
conjunction with the Cabinet,  takes  final  responsibility  for  Government
policies.  The  Department  is  headed  by  the  Director-General,  who   is
responsible for ensuring that South Africa  has  a  secure  and  sustainable
provision of energy for socio-economic development.

1.3 Methodology used in compiling the BRR Report

For  the  period  under  review,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Energy,  in
exercising its oversight role, had interacted with the Department of  Energy
and analysed its 2009/10 to  2011/12  strategic  plan,  the  2009/10  annual
report, the 2009/10 Estimates of the National Expenditure, budget  vote  for
2010/11 and the Constitution.
2. Strategic Priorities and Programmes of the Department

2.1 Strategic Priorities of the Department

The Department’s  strategic  plan  seeks  to  deliver  results  along  eight
strategic  objectives  that  include  promoting  energy   security   through
reliable, clean and affordable sources; universal access to energy  sources;
transformation of the energy sector and  strengthening  the  operations  and
management of  the  Department.  A  brief  description  of  these  strategic
objectives is as follows:

    • Ensure energy security – creating and maintaining  a  balance  between
      energy supply  and  energy  demand,  develop  strategic  partnerships,
      improve co-ordination in the sector and ensure reliable  delivery  and
      logistics.
    • Achieve universal access and transform the energy sector  –  diversify
      energy mix, improve access and connectivity, provision of quality  and
      affordable energy, promote safe use of energy and transform the energy
      sector.
    • Regulate the energy sector – develop effective  legislation,  policies
      and guidelines, encourage investment  in  the  energy  sector,  ensure
      compliance with legislation.
    • Effective and efficient service  delivery  –  understands  stakeholder
      needs and improves turn-around times.
    • Optimal utilisation of energy resources – develop  enabling  policies,
      encourage energy efficient technologies.
    • Ensure sustainable development – promote  clean  energy  alternatives,
      encourage economic development, promote job creation.
    • Enhance DoE culture systems and people – attract, develop  and  retain
      appropriate skills, promote  good  organizational  culture,  make  the
      Department an employer of choice.
    • Promote good corporate governance – optimal utilisation of  resources,
      manage budget effectively, implement fraud and  risk  management,  and
      ensure compliance with relevant prescripts.

2. Programmes of the Department

The  activities  of  the  Department  were  organized   in   the   following
programmes:

2.1 Programme 1: Administration

The purpose of the Administration programme is to enable the  Department  to
deliver on its mandate by providing strategic management and  administrative
support to the Department of Energy and its Ministry. Programme  1  provides
strategic  support  and  management  services  to  the  Ministry,  Director-
General’s Office, Audit  Services  Chief  Directorate,  Strategy,  Risk  and
Monitoring Chief Directorate, Special Programmes and  Projects  Directorate;
Corporate Services Branch (Human Resources, Communication and  International
Relations, Legal Services and Auxiliary Support Services);  Chief  Financial
Officer’s Office-Branch (Finance, Information Technology  and  Supply  Chain
Management).

2.2 Programme 2: Hydrocarbons and Energy Planning

This programme comprises of  two  sub–programmes,  namely  Hydrocarbons  and
Energy Planning. Hydrocarbons sub-programme develops policy and  regulations
to manage petroleum, coal and  natural  gas.  The  Petroleum  Controller  is
included in this sub-programme and is responsible for the implementation  of
the Petroleum Product Amendments Act (Act no. 58 of 2003).  Energy  planning
sub-programme, in particular, focuses on promoting the  sustainable  use  of
energy resources through integrated energy planning.

2.3 Programme 3: Electricity, Nuclear and Clean Energy

Electricity and Nuclear management provides the  platform  for  the  overall
management  of  the  programme.  The  Electricity   sub-programme   develops
implements and monitors electricity policy and  programmes.  The  Integrated
National Electrification Programme (INEP)  Business  Planning  Unit  manages
the electrification planning, funding and implementation process,  including
addressing electrification backlogs with  the  aim  of  achieving  universal
access to  electricity.  The  Nuclear  sub-programme  aims  to  improve  the
governance of the  nuclear  sector,  specifically  in  relation  to  nuclear
safety, non-proliferation as well as nuclear technology.  The  Clean  Energy
sub-programme facilitates the implementation of renewable energy and  Energy
Efficiency Technologies. This sub-programme also promotes and regulates  the
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) activities.

2.4 Programme 4: Associated Services

The Associated Services programme is made up of  five  State-Owned  Entities
reporting to the Minister of Energy, namely the National  Nuclear  Regulator
(NNR), the National  Energy  Regulator  (NERSA),  the  Central  Energy  Fund
(CEF), South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (NECSA) and the  Electricity
Distribution Industry Holdings (EDIH).
3. Analysis of the Department’s Prevailing Strategic and Operational Plans

3.1 Programme 1: Administration

Due to the split from  the  former  Department  of  Mineral  Resources,  the
Department had to grapple with the issue of ensuring that it  had  manpower.
The process of filling vacancies is key to the Department in  its  drive  to
implement its plans and achieve its strategic  objectives.  The  composition
of the interim structure had 325 personnel. At the  moment,  the  Department
is operating at a rate of 531 funded posts. This creates a shortfall of  349
unfunded posts, when one takes into account the desired total figure of  925
for the Department to be fully staffed. At present, the  Department  has  73
vacant posts. The recruitment and selection process to fill these  73  posts
is at an advanced stage.

The following are key projects  for  the  Department  as  contained  in  the
strategic plan:

    • Filing of vacancies,
    • Payment turn around time,
    • Procurement spent on HDSA,
    • Internship programme,
    • Bursaries,
    • Training,
    • Presidential Hotline, and
    • Employment Equity.

3.2 Programme 2: Hydrocarbons and Energy Planning

The purpose  of  the  Hydrocarbons  and  Energy  Planning  programme  is  to
undertake energy planning in order to promote the sustainable use of  energy
resources by developing appropriate policies and regulations that, in  turn,
are expected to promote efficient use of petroleum products, coal,  gas  and
renewable energy sources. The Hydrocarbons  and  Energy  Planning  programme
comprises  of  two  sub-programmes,   namely   the   Energy   Planning   and
Hydrocarbons sub-programmes.

In terms of service delivery achievements, this  programme  has,  since  the
implementation of the Petroleum Products Amendment Act (PPAA) Act No. 58  of
2003, issued approximately 5 581 licences  compared  to  the  pre-determined
target of 1 200. But, the PPAA awareness campaign  to  inform  people  about
rules and regulations was not held due to financial constraints.

The Programme’s key projects for 2010/11 are as follows:

    • Fuel strategic stock policy,
    • LPG price regulations,
    • Fuel specifications and standards,
    • 25 year Fuel Liquid Infrastructure Plan,
    • Petroleum pricing framework,
    • Transnet Multi Product Pipeline,
    • 20 Year Integrated Energy Plan,
    • National Integrated Energy Modelling System, and
    • SANERI/SANEDI

3.3 Programme 3: Electricity, Nuclear and Clean Energy

The purpose of the Electricity, Nuclear and Clean  Energy  programme  is  to
govern the electricity,  Nuclear  and  Clean  Energy  sectors  with  special
emphasis on secure supply, universal access to electricity,  development  of
the nuclear sector, diversification of energy sources and the  promotion  of
the clean energy technologies.

This programme also  transfers  conditional  grants  to  municipalities  and
Eskom for Integrated National Electrification  Programme  (INEP).  The  INEP
connects electricity to rural households and schools. Other  plans  of  this
programme  for  the  2010/11  financial  year  include,  among  others,  the
following:

    • IRP 2010,
    • ISMO,
    • Electricity Regulation Act, Second Amendment Bill
    • Independent Power Producers,
    • REDs,
    • Standard offer policy,
    • INEP,
    • Solar Water Heaters, and
    • Nuclear.

3.4 Programme 4: Associated Services

The purpose of the Associated Services programme is to provide  services  in
support of the Department’s mandate through funded and non-funded  statutory
bodies and organisations.

The measurable  objectives  were  to  enhance  the  Department’s  objectives
through policies and  directives,  promoting  its  legislative  mandate  and
leading  to  the  creation  of  an  environment  conducive  to   sustainable
development, investment and the improvement of the quality of  life  of  all
South Africans.

The greater percentage of the  Departmental  budget  (approximately  80  per
cent) was allocated to this programme for  transfers  to  entities  such  as
NECSA, EDI and NNR.

4. Analysis of Expenditure Reports

4.1    The Overall Departmental Allocations and Expenditure

Departmental Budget per Programme

|Programme    |2010/11     |Roll-Over|Adjusted |Expenditure |Exp as %     |
|             |Initial     |s        |Allocatio|YTD         |of Budget    |
|             |R’000       |R’000    |n        |R’000       |             |
|             |            |         |R’000    |            |             |
|Hydrocarbons |1,558,608   |         |1,558,608|402,196     |25.80        |
|and Energy   |            |         |         |            |             |
|Planning     |            |         |         |            |             |
|Electricity, |408,817     |         |408,817  |29,132      |7.13         |
|Nuclear and  |            |         |         |            |             |
|Clean Energy |            |         |         |            |             |
|Associated   |3,463,760   |         |3,463,760|1,618,750   |46.78        |
|Services     |            |         |         |            |             |

Total |5,535,390 | |5,535,390 |2,110,335 |38.12 | |
The Department’s overall expenditure is 38 percent  of  the  R5,  3  billion
allocated budget for the 2010/11 financial year as  at  30  September  2010.
The Department has already spent 48 percent of  the  allocated  Compensation
of Employees budget, 69  percent  of  Goods  and  Services,  64  percent  of
Capital Assets allocation and 37 percent of Transfers and Subsidies  budget.


The Department’s budget is 97 percent Transfers and Subsidies and 3  percent
operational expenses. As  a  result,  although  the  expenditures  on  other
spending areas is well above the norm of 50  percent  as  at  mid  year  (30
September 2010), the lower expenditure on Transfers brings down the  overall
average below the norm (38 percent) especially  because,  as  stated  above,
Transfers and Subsidies accounts for 97 per cent of the total  budget.  This
is a significant weighting which greatly influence the total expenditure  as
at 30 September 2010.

The observed under-spending by the Department on Transfers and Subsidies  is
a  matter  of  concern  particularly  taking  into  account  that  the  core
operations of the Department are funded though Transfers. Taking  cognizance
of the fact that the Department is on its  first  year  of  operation  as  a
stand-alone entity, factors -such as capacity  constraints,  appropriateness
of  the  supporting  infrastructure  and  so  forth  -are   of   significant
importance  in  assessing  the   performance   of   the   Department,   both
qualitatively and quantitatively.

The Goods and Services expenditure of the  Department  is  approximately  19
percent above the 50  percent  norm  or  expectation.  The  costs,  in  that
regard,  seem  to  be  escalating  amid  the  austerity  measures  that  the
Department  has  put  into  place.  The  Department  however  is   allocated
additional R48 million through the adjustment budget process which  will  be
spent on operational activities and therefore easing the prevailing trend.

4.2 Administration

The spending on this programme is 58 percent which is above the  50  percent
expectation at the middle of  the  financial  year.  The  spending  on  this
programme is satisfactory. However, the Department  should  monitor  closely
the expenses and contain them within the  allocated  budget  to  avoid  over
spending.  It  is  encouraging  that  the  Department  adopted   some   cost
containment measures in the beginning of the financial year in  response  to
the limited resources at their disposal.

4.3 Hydro-Carbons and Energy Planning

The operational budget performance of this programme is at 52 per cent.  The
transfer and subsidies expenditure  is  however  25  percent  of  the  total
allocation of R1.5 billion and the Committee is not satisfied with this  low
level of spending. This money hinges significantly on  the  ability  of  the
Department to discharge its mandate of security of petroleum supply  through
the construction of the Transnet Multi-Purpose pipeline.

There are concerns around  the  running  costs  of  the  projects  with  the
delays.  But,  the  Department  indicated  that  the  blockages  that   were
experienced on the project are resolved and the work is continuing  smoothly
and  the  second  payment,  which  will  increase  total  spending  on  this
programme by 25 per cent to 50 per cent, will be made in the near future.

Furthermore, there was an indication that the project is behind schedule  by
9 months. It was reported that Transnet  is  assessing  the  impact  of  the
delay and will report to the Department in the middle of November 2010.

It is therefore recommended that the Department engages Transnet  to  ensure
that the impact of the delay is managed properly and costs to the  taxpayers
are contained. The Committee requested that the  Department  should  forward
the progress report to the Committee before the end of November 2010.

4.4 Electricity, Nuclear and Clean Energy

The compensation of employee’s expenditure of this programme is  58  percent
as at the end of September 2010. The Goods and Services  expenditure  is  78
percent, which is way above the  50  percent  benchmark.  The  Transfer  and
Subsidies, on the other hand, is at zero per cent expenditure and this is  a
serious cause for concern.

This programme is the driving force behind renewable energy and  has  a  lot
of projects that can make  a  lot  of  difference  to  poor  South  Africans
through access  to  renewable  energy.  It  is  therefore  disappointing  to
observe that not much seems to be happening  at  the  halfway  mark  of  the
year. The Committee is not satisfied with this.

The Department reported that procurement processes  were  complete  and  the
roll out is gaining momentum,  particularly  in  the  Province  of  KwaZulu-
Natal.
4.5 Associated Services – Transfers and Subsidies

The average expenditure of 48 percent for this  programme  approximates  the
norm  of  50  percent.  The  transfer  to  the  State-Owned   Entities,   in
particular, is at a very comfortable level of more than 50 percent.

The Intergraded National Electrification Programme transfers  to  Eskom  are
at a reasonable level of 45 percent  but  transfers  to  municipalities  are
lagging behind with 26 percent.  The  Department  reported  a  challenge  of
misalignment of National Departments and  Municipalities’  reporting  cycles
as the cause of disparity in this regard.

The Department further elaborated on the  trends  over  the  years  on  this
project  on  expenditure  performance.  The  analysis  indicated  that   the
expenditure on this project picked up in July 2010, which is  the  beginning
of the municipalities financial period.

There is a clear indication that the capacity to  implement  these  projects
at  the  Local  Government  level  is  still  a  challenge.  The  Department
indicated  that  it  used   to   intervene   by   deploying   engineers   to
municipalities through an internship programme  which  was  discontinued  in
the 2010/11 financial year due to lack of funding.

Over the past few years, the Department has spent around 98 percent  of  the
budget on these projects and it is suggested that the  Committee  is  fairly
comfortable with the expenditure level on this programme.

Furthermore, the Department raised a number  of  critical  projects  to  the
value of R203 million that are unfunded.  These  projects  are  crucial  for
stability of this Department and its capacity development and  therefore  it
is recommended that the amount be granted to the  Department  for  execution
of these projects. The  additional  funding  is  critical  considering  that
Government has already committed the funding of these activities.

5. Statement of Financial Performance

The total revenue of the Department  amounted  to  R4.9  billion--comprising
R4.7 annual appropriation and R217.1 million from Departmental revenue.

The total expenditure amounted to R4.5 billion--comprising of  R673  million
for current expenditure; R3.8 billion total  transfers  and  subsidies;  and
R48.7 million total expenditure for capital assets.  The  under  expenditure
for the 2009/10 financial year amounted to R348.6 million.

6. Analysis of Auditor General

For the 2009/10 financial year  under  review,  the  Department  received  a
qualified audit report. The reasons cited for such a qualified audit  report
were that the Accounting Officer of the Department did not ensure that  full
and proper records of  the  receivables  for  Departmental  revenue  of  the
Department was kept as per prescribed norms and  standards.  The  Department
could not provide sufficient  appropriate  audit  evidence  to  support  the
Departmental receivables for revenue balance  amounting  to  R25.6  million.
The Audit Report also  pointed  to  some  irregular  expenditure  which  was
incurred without adhering to the  internal  delegation  of  authority,  e.g.
services rendered prior to approval by the relevant  authority.  Those  were
picked up by the internal controls established by  the  Department  and  all
cases were evaluated and condoned  by  the  Accounting  Officer  during  the
year. Although under-spending was reported,  the  percentage  was  very  low
(2.9 percent of the total budget) and this  was  mainly  due  to  delays  in
finalising contracts for non-grid service.
7. Report from the Committee on Public Accounts

The Department received a qualified audit and it is yet  to  meet  with  the
Committee on Public Accounts,  wherein,  recommendations  by  the  Committee
will be made.

8. Observations

    • The overall expenditure of Programme 1: Administration is  58  percent
      which is above 50 percent expectation at half year.

    • The local and national spheres reporting cycles are  not  aligned  and
      this is causing Integrated National Electrification  Programme  (INEP)
      grants and Solar Water Heaters (SWHs) programme at municipality  level
      seem to be spending less than they are supposed.  National  Department
      commenced transferring grants  to  municipalities  during  its  second
      quarter  (July  –  September)  which  is   the   first   quarter   for
      municipalities.


    • The Department continuously transfers INEP  grants  to  municipalities
      well aware and conscious of the fact that most of  the  municipalities
      do not have technical capacity to implement this programme.


    • The Department of Energy is still sitting with key unfunded activities
      such  as   National   Electricity   Response   Team,   Federation   of
      International Football Association  (FIFA)  tournament,  Clean  Energy
      Operations, International affiliations,  accommodation,  establishment
      of SANEDI and electrification internship programme amounting  to  R203
      million.

    • Transnet Multi Product Pipeline project expenditure is at  25  percent
      to date and this very is  worrying  considering  the  need  to  ensure
      security of petroleum supply for the Country. The delays  were  caused
      by the Environmental Impact Assessment  processes  and  land  disputes
      that occurred in areas where the pipeline is  being  constructed.  The
      project is understood to be running behind schedule  by  nine  months.
      There  is  also  possibility  that  the  delay  may  result  in  costs
      escalation of the project if it is not managed well.

    • The Committee is concerned with REFSO and Working for Energy that have
      spent 2.3 percent and 0 percent, respectively. This is  attributed  to
      lack of Human Resources  within  the  Clean  Energy  Division  of  the
      Department.

    • Roll out of Solar Water Heaters (SWHs) by municipalities is marginally
      low. However, tendering and  procurement  processes  are  at  advanced
      stage and roll out may commence at any time from now.

9. Recommendations

The Portfolio Committee on Energy recommends the following:

    • That the Department of Energy should closely monitor its expenses  and
      carefully implement cost containment measures to avoid  over  spending
      on the allocated budget for Programme 1.

    • That  Committee  on  Appropriations  should  look  at  ways  to  align
      reporting cycles and engage with Department of Cooperative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs to align and synchronise national,  provincial
      and local spheres of government planning, budgeting and implementation
      of programmes. This systemic governance issue is impeding planning and
      implementation of programmes and should be  seriously  looked  at  and
      joint committee meeting between  Portfolio  Committee  on  Cooperative
      Government and Traditional Affairs and Portfolio Committee  on  Energy
      need to be convened to examine this matter.

    • That the business model of implementing INEP and Solar  Water  Heaters
      by municipalities should be  revisited  and  redesigned  in  order  to
      transfers of funds to implement such programmes should be based on the
      assessment of municipalities’  technical  capacity.  Furthermore,  the
      Department should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Energy  on  a
      business model to improve the current situation with  clearly  defined
      timeframes.

    • That unfunded Departmental activities to the amount  of  R203  million
      should be funded by National Treasury because commitments have already
      been made by  Government  i.e.  World  Cup  Guarantees,  Clean  Energy
      Operations, International affiliations,  accommodation,  establishment
      of SANEDI and electrification internship programme and the  Department
      has  also  made  commitments.  However,  the  Department   must   take
      cognisance and address under-spending  that  was  experienced  in  the
      2009/10 financial year.


    • That Transnet should undertake the impact assessment of the  delay  on
      the Multi Purpose Pipeline project and report this to  the  Department
      within 30 days after the adoption of this report  by  the  House.  The
      Department should, in turn, report on  this  issue  to  the  Portfolio
      Committee on Energy 15 days after the receipt of the said report  from
      Transnet.


    • That National Treasury should consider allocating additional resources
      to the Department of Energy for the  Clean  Energy  Programme  of  the
      Department  in  order  to   implement   renewable   energy   projects.
      Furthermore, the Department of Energy should report to  the  Portfolio
      Committee on Energy on the recruitment processes for the Clean  Energy
      Programme. The latter report should  be  submitted  to  the  Portfolio
      Committee on Energy every quarter for three coming years.

    • That the Department of Energy should report to the  Committee  on  the
      progress made on SWHs roll out on a monthly  basis  for  a  period  of
      three months after the adoption of this report by the House.

    • That the Department of Energy should consider the establishment  of  a
      designated Monitoring and Evaluation Unit that will oversee the State-
      Owned Enterprises reporting to the department.
    •  That  the  Department  of  Energy  should  strengthen  its  oversight
      mechanisms over its State-Owned Enterprises in order to  determine  if
      they are fulfilling their strategic mandates and identify  operational
      inefficiencies.


    • That the Department of Energy should focus more  on  hydrocarbons  and
      clean energy sources in the Country.

    • That the campaign around  changing  consumer  behaviour  on  usage  of
      energy (energy  saving  lifestyle),  one  of  the  objectives  of  the
      Department of Energy, should be reflected on the Department’s  revised
      strategic plans since the Portfolio Committee on Energy  supports  the
      Department’s intentions to educate the public  on  the  need  to  save
      energy.


   Report to be considered.

                           MONDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Tourism


     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam on co-
        operation in the field of tourism, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.
     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam
        on co-operation in the field of tourism.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 12 – Department of Arts
        and Culture  for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-10.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

1.    MEMORANDUM OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE MEMBERS’ LEGISLATIVE  PROPOSALS
   AND SPECIAL PETITIONS IN TERMS OF RULE 238(1)



The  Committee  on  Private  Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and   Special
Petitions hereby tables a  memorandum  in  terms  of  Rule  238(1),  seeking
permission from the National Assembly to introduce a bill dealing  with  the
processing of special and general petitions at national level.



MEMORANDUM ON THE OBJECTS OF THE PROPOSED NATIONAL PETITIONS BILL



   1. PURPOSE OF THE BILL




   The rationale of the proposed bill can be summarised as follows:

          a) To give effect to  democratic  accountability,  including  the
             right to petition Parliament, as a constitutional dimension of
             the principle of the rule of law.

          b) To provide a comprehensive and unified mechanism for  lodging,
             processing and regulating petitions at national level, thereby
             enhancing public participation in the democratic processes  of
             Parliament.

          c) To address citizens’ concerns by creating a petitions  process
             that will lead  to  enhanced  service  delivery  and  improved
             socioeconomic conditions.




   2. OBJECTS OF BILL




   The bill seeks to address grievances that citizens present to  Parliament
   in the form of a petition. The bill will not override existing provincial
   legislation on petitions and does not intend to introduce  anything  that
   is not in keeping with the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic
   of South Africa, 1996 and other  laws  in  the  Statute  Book.  It  seeks
   furthermore to give practical effect to the democratic  values  of  human
   dignity, equality and  freedom,  as  set  out  in  section  7(1)  of  the
   Constitution. In terms of section 7(2) of the Constitution, the state  is
   obligated to respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights in the  Bill
   of Rights, including the right given in section 17  where  it  is  stated
   that “everyone has the right… to present petitions”.




     3. FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS FOR STATE




   There will be no financial implications for the state.




   Memorandum to be considered.


CREDA INSERT T101101e-insert2 – PAGES 3524-3545



3. Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the  2010  Revised  Fiscal
   Framework, dated 29 October 2010

   The Standing Committee on Finance, having  considered  the  2010  Revised
   Fiscal Framework, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

Section 12(3) of the Money Bills Amendment  Procedure  and  Related  Matters
Act, Act No. 9 of 2009 (the Money Bills Act) requires that the  Minister  of
Finance tables a revised fiscal  framework  with  the  national  adjustments
budget if the adjustments budget effects changes to the fiscal framework.

Section 12(5) of the Money Bills  Act  further  requires  that  the  revised
fiscal framework be referred  to  a  joint  sitting  of  the  Committees  on
Finance for consideration and reporting.

The 2010 revised fiscal framework was tabled in  the  National  Assembly  of
Parliament by the Minister of Finance, on 27 October 2010 and  the  National
Assembly referred it to the Standing Committee on Finance on the  same  day.
The Standing Committee on  Finance  and  the  Select  Committee  on  Finance
conducted, on 29 October 2010, a  joint  meeting  to  consider  the  revised
fiscal framework.

2. Committee’s Observations
The  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  (the  Committee)   noted   that   the
consolidated government deficit is projected to decrease from 6.3  per  cent
of the gross domestic product (GDP) in the 2010/11  financial  year  to  3.2
per cent of GDP in the 2013/14 financial year. The  projected  reduction  in
government deficit was driven, amongst other things, by  the  strong  uptake
in  revenue  and  the  stabilization  in  non-interest  spending.   National
Treasury indicated that growth in expenditure will need to moderate as  debt
service costs increase over the Medium Term  Expenditure  Framework  (MTEF).
National Treasury undertook to continue to pursue a counter-cyclical  fiscal
policy that will aim to grow revenues while gradually reducing  non-interest
stimulus spending. It is however important to keep the fiscal trajectory  on
a sustainable path while meeting growth expectations.

The Committee noted that revenue, as a percentage of GDP, is  increasing  at
a rate of 0.2 per cent per year over the next three  years  (that  is  28.7,
28.9 and 29.1 per cent in the 2011/12, 2012/13 and 2013/14 financial  years,
respectively). In the same period, expenditure is declining  at  a  rate  of
0.4,  0.5  and  0.5,  per  cent  respectively.  As  revenue  increases   and
expenditure decreases, the budget will remain in deficit  albeit  declining,
until the 2018/19 financial year.

Over the MTEF period, government departments are requested  to  reprioritise
programmes in order to be efficient and  effective.  In  view  of  the  2010
audit outcomes by the Auditor General  on  various  government  departments,
this calls for more stringent control measures on  expenditure  and  prudent
financial management.

The Committee recognizes that the Southern  Africa  Customs  Union’s  (SACU)
revenue sharing formula is  currently  under  review  and  that  the  SACU’s
Council will meet in December 2010 to resolve  this  matter.  The  Committee
accepts  that  this  revision  should  be   done   carefully   and   without
jeopardizing the economic stability in the Botswana,  Lesotho,  Namibia  and
Swaziland (BLNS) countries. The Committee advises that the  revenue  sharing
formula should be favourable towards the  South  African  fiscal  burden  in
order to support South Africa’s ability to  boost  revenue  collection,  and
consequently  increase  revenue  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  in  the  fiscal
framework until 2013/14.

The Committee noted that, over the long term, higher  economic  growth  will
support debt reduction, enabling government to rebuild the fiscal space.

The Committee noted that  the  2010  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement
(MTBPS) estimated that the debt amount will be approximately 40 per cent  of
GDP in the 2015/16  financial  year.  If  the  economy  experiences  another
recession and the level of debt is as projected  in  the  2015/16  financial
year, the Committee foresees major challenges.  While  the  MTBPS  indicated
that the exact level of debt will largely depend on  the  pace  of  economic
growth, the Committee is of the view that  there  is  still  an  element  of
economic uncertainty. The Committee however fully  endorses  the  fact  that
the economy is currently in a solid position.

3. Conclusion

The Committee would like to commend  National  Treasury  that  South  Africa
scored first in the world in  the  survey  of  budget  transparency  of  the
International Budget Partnership. This achievement  results  from  years  of
commitment to the reform of the budget system towards  greater  transparency
and greater potential for accountability and participation.

4. Recommendations

Having considered the revised fiscal framework, the  Standing  Committee  on
Finance recommends the following:

4.1 That National Treasury should take appropriate steps to  accelerate  the
rate of decline in expenditure.
4.2 That National Treasury should provide  the  Committee  with  a  detailed
report on how government would rebuild the fiscal space.

4.2 That National Treasury should provide  the  Committee  with  a  detailed
report on the impact of a zero rating value added tax (VAT) on books on  the
fiscal framework.

4.3 That National Treasury should resolve issues pertaining  to  the  SACU’s
revenue sharing formula as a matter of urgency.
4.3 That the House accepts the Revised Fiscal Framework.

Report to be considered.

4.  The  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendations  Report  of  the   Standing
   Committee on Finance on National Treasury, dated 29 October 2010

   The Standing Committee on Finance, having  assessed  the  performance  of
   National Treasury for the 2009/10 financial year, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

In terms of section 5(2) of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and  Related
Matters Act, Act No 9 of 2009, committees  must  annually  submit  budgetary
review and recommendation reports for tabling in the National  Assembly  for
each department. A budgetary review and recommendation report  must  provide
an  assessment  of  the  department’s  service  delivery  performance  given
available resources, an assessment on the effectiveness  and  efficiency  of
the department’s use and forward allocation of available resources,  and  it
may include recommendations on the forward use of resources.

1. The Mandate and Role of the Committee

The Standing Committee on Finance was established in terms of section 4  (1)
on the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act No 9  of
2009. The mandate of the Committee is conferred to it by  the  Constitution,
legislation, the standing rules  or  a  resolution  of  a  House,  including
considering and reporting on-
   a) The national macro-economic and fiscal policy.
   b) Amendments to the  fiscal  framework,  revised  fiscal  framework  and
      revenue proposals and Bills.
   c) Actual revenue published by the National Treasury.
   d) Any other  related  matter  set  out  in  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
      Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act No 9 of 2009.

Further to the above, the mandate also encompasses the committee’s  function
to  legislate,  conduct  oversight  on  the  Executive’s  actions  and   its
entities. The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters  Act,  Act
No 9 of 2009 makes provisions for a procedure for this  committee  to  amend
money bills.

2. Methodology.

In complying with section 5(2) of the Money Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
Related Matters Act, Act No 9 of 2009, the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance
and the Select Committee on Finance  held  joint  meetings  on  the  2009/10
Annual Reports of National Treasury,  the  South  African  Revenue  Services
(SARS), the Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC), Statistics  South  Africa
(Stats SA). The Office of the  Auditor-General  was  also  invited  to  give
input during the  budget  review  and  recommendation  report  process.  The
report therefore reflects  key  issues  that  were  identified  by  the  two
committees.

3. Mandate and role of National Treasury

The National Treasury is responsible for managing  South  Africa’s  national
government finances, and draws its mandate from  Chapter  2  of  the  Public
Finance Management Act, Act No 1 of 1999, together with Chapter  13  of  the
Constitution, 1996. National Treasury continued to  monitor  the  impact  of
the global financial crisis and  was  able  to  find  appropriate  responses
(interest rates were cut  five  times,  increased  the  pace  of  government
expenditure etc).

The budget process was enhanced as a result of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedure and Matters Related Act, (Act 9 of 2009) and  National  Treasury’s
capacity was increased by creating a  division  handling  international  and
regional economic policy.

The legislative mandate of the National  Treasury  includes  developing  and
prescribing measures to ensure  equitable  resource  allocation  and  proper
expenditure control in each sphere of government, as well as to ensure  that
this function is executed in a transparent manner.   The  National  Treasury
does this by advocating and ensuring adherence to the  following  guidelines
and procedures:

 • Generally Recognised Accounting Practice.
 • Uniform Expenditure Classifications.
 • Uniform treasury norms and standards.

As the  custodian  of  state  funds,  the  National  Treasury  is  therefore
responsible  for  coordinating  departments’  budgets  in  all  spheres   of
government.   The  Treasury’s  role  in  this  regard  is  to  ensure   that
appropriated funds are transferred  to  departments  for  implementation  of
government priorities,  and  that  government  expenditure  is  continuously
monitored. In  2010/11,  the  National  Treasury  plans  to  take  stock  of
conditions associated with  a  recovering  economy.  In  responding  to  the
developmental  challenges  currently  facing  South  Africa,  the   National
Treasury will, in line  with  its  mandate,  play  a  crucial  role  in  the
government’s plan to shift resources away from lower  priorities  to  higher
priorities.

3.1 Strategic Priorities of National Treasury

In line  with  the  President’s  call  for  more  systematic  approaches  to
challenges and doing things differently, and  to  adopt  a  multidimensional
approach in partnership with business  and  labour  in  order  to  speed  up
service delivery,  improve  employment  and  reduce  poverty,  the  National
Treasury strategic plan indicates commitment to several issues, such as.

 • Ensure that the macroeconomic perspective and analysis provided, is clear
   and dependable.
 •  Continue  robust  and  constructive  engagement  with  departments   and
   Parliament.
 • Sustain the fiscal stance followed over the years by applying appropriate
   fiscal policies.
 • Embracing the new outcomes-based approach in government and adhering  to
   the President’s call for a more efficient  performance  oriented  public
   service.  This entails developing measurable outcomes for all programmes
   and projects, working hand in hand with the new Planning and  Monitoring
   and Evaluation ministries in the Presidency, as well as adhering to  the
   Government Wide Monitoring and Evaluation System.
 • Exploring policy objectives for a new growth path, including  making  the
   economy more labour absorptive, raising productivity,  boosting  exports,
   promoting investment, as well as improving education, health and training
   outcomes.
 • Ensure proper management of public finances.
 • Continue with the infrastructure development programme, which provided an
   essential stimulus during the recession.
 •  Accelerate  economic  growth  and  higher  employment,   which   require
   stabilising microeconomic reforms and  implementing  sound  macroeconomic
   policy.  The Treasury has also identified a need to  respond  to  serious
   challenges such as employment (especially youth employment)
 • Efficient use of funds to eliminate waste through the government  savings
   and reprioritisation drive that started in 2009.
 • To stabilise micro and macro economic policy by coordinating  fiscal  and
   monitory policy, working in conjunction with the  South  African  Reserve
   Bank in this regard.
 • The drive to eradicate fraud and corruption  in  procurement  and  tender
   processes also has important implications on the  National  Treasury  and
   its partners, particularly the Auditor General.

3.2 Analysis of Expenditure Reports

National  Treasury  is  established  in  terms  of  Section   216   of   the
Constitution, 1996 and Section 5 of the Public Finance Management  Act  (No.
1 of 1999). Among its responsibilities, National  Treasury  is  required  to
enforce compliance with good financial  management  principles  and  monitor
the implementation of budgets. The department’s mandate is executed  through
programmes that largely play a facilitation and  coordination  role  of  the
budget. To ensure effective delivery  on  its  mandate,  the  department  is
allocated a budget  as  per  programme  and  economic  classifications  that
supports the identified priorities of the department.

The Constitution requires that budgets and budgetary processes must  promote
accountability. In line  with  this  constitutional  principle,  the  Public
Finance Management  Act  (PFMA)  requires  each  government  department  and
public entity to prepare reports (performance and financial) to  account  on
their activities. The scrutiny of such reports  is  very  important  to  the
oversight work of Parliament, as it provides Members of  Parliament  with  a
holistic overview of the actual  performance  against  plans.  This  section
analyses the expenditure performance of the National Treasury.

3.3 Budget Allocation
National Treasury was allocated an adjusted appropriation of  R62.8  billion
in the 2009/10 financial year. These  funds  were  allocated  proportionally
across the departmental programmes, with  Provincial  and  Local  Government
Transfers and Fiscal Transfers programmes receiving a substantial  share  of
the departmental budget. The  Provincial  and  Local  Government  programme,
which is responsible for managing conditional grants  to  other  spheres  of
government was allocated R14.4 billion   (22.93  per  cent)  of  the  budget
while R42.2 billion (67.15 per cent) was allocated to the  Fiscal  Transfers
Programme.  The  budget  allocation  for  the  Fiscal  Transfers   Programme
included R30  billion  for  an  Eskom  loan  which  aims  at  expanding  its
capacity. This programme is responsible  for  transferring  funds  to  other
countries as well as  multilateral  and  domestic  institutions  and  public
entities.

The departmental budget was dominated  by  transfers  and  subsidies,  which
amounted to allocated R61.6 billion (98.07 per cent) of the budget.  Current
Expenditure was allocated  R1.2  billion  (1.90  per  cent),  while  Capital
Payments  category  was  allocated  R16.3  million  (0.02  per  cent).  This
indicates that the National Treasury was allocated only 1.3 billion  (2  per
cent) for its operational budget.

3.4 Expenditure at the end of the 2009/10 Financial Year

The following table presents the spending trends by  the  National  Treasury
on its programme budget.







   Source: National Treasury

As indicated in Table 1 above, the National  Treasury  spent  R62.7  billion
(99.72 per cent) of its adjusted budget at the end of  the  financial  year.
It had under-spent by R176.8 million (0.28 per cent) due  to  a  combination
of factors. These include the following:
  • Under-expenditure of R7.8 million (12.79 per cent)  on  the  Asset  and
    Liability Management Programme. This was attributed to slow spending on
    the Capital Structure and Financial  Distribution  Policy  project,  as
    well as delays in the development of the Treasury Management System.
  • Under-expenditure of R53.8 million (11.72 per cent)  on  the  Financial
    Management and Systems  Programme.  This  was  due  to  the  less  than
    anticipated spending on the  Integrated  Financial  Management  Systems
    (IFMS).
  •  Under-expenditure  of  R83.3  million  on  the  Provincial  and  Local
    Government Transfers Programme. This was due to the non-disbursement of
    R83.3 million  to  municipalities  for  the  Neighbourhood  Development
    Partnership Grant (NDPG). This Grant aims to support the development of
    township development plans. It further aims to support nodal investment
    into the construction or upgrading of community facilities.
  • Under-expenditure of R22.4 (0.05) million on Fiscal Transfers  was  due
    to  less  than  anticipated  transfer   payments   to   the   Financial
    Intelligence Centre (FIC).
  •  Cost  cutting  measures  implemented  by  the  National  Treasury   on
    operational expenditure. These include training and development, travel
    and subsistence, venues and facilities.
  •  Vacancies  in  both  Asset  and  Liability  Management  and  Financial
    Management and Systems Programmes.

While the National Treasury reported an impressive  overall  expenditure  of
99.72 per cent, it should be noted  that  transfers  to  receiving  entities
constitutes a substantial share of the expenditure. Transfers and  Subsidies
constituted 98.07 per cent of budget and 99.83 per cent  of  transfer  funds
was disbursed to receiving entities at the end of the  financial  year.  The
National Treasury’s responsibility regarding transfers is to coordinate  and
to disburse transfer funds to the receiving entities,  as  well  as  monitor
the use of funds by entities,  particularly  provinces  and  municipalities.
Transfer budgets are  implemented  (actual  expenditure)  by  the  receiving
entities.

It should be noted that some programmes that were allocated  an  operational
budget had significantly under-spent at  the  end  of  the  financial  year.
These include the Asset and Liability and Financial Management  and  Systems
programmes.  Even  though   the   departmental   operational   budget   only
constituted 2 per cent of the total budget,  it  still  under-spent  on  its
operational budget. In this regard, the  National  Treasury  under-spent  by
R59.4 million (7.5 per cent) on goods and services, R4.6 million  (28.7  per
cent) on payment for capital assets and  R6.5  million  (1.6  per  cent)  on
compensation of employees.

3.5 Analysis of the Annual Report and Financial Statements

The indispensability and comprehensive analysis of annual reports cannot  be
underestimated. Annual reports are the most salient  tools  to  measure  the
performance of a department or entity, and play an enormous role in  holding
government departments accountable to the  legislature  and  the  citizenry.
According to the Guidelines for Legislative Oversight,  annual  reports  are
key reporting instruments for departments to report against the  performance
targets and budgets outlined in their strategic plans,  read  together  with
the Estimates of the National Expenditure (ENE). They  allow  Parliament  to
evaluate the performance of a department after the end of a financial  year.
The critical information contained in the annual report, which is  backward-
looking, include inter alia, service delivery information,  presentation  of
financial statements, audit report and accounting officer report.

This section provides a summary and analysis of the  2009/10  Annual  Report
for  National  Treasury  and  looks  at  the  overview  of  the   identified
programmes as per National Treasury‘s 2009/10 Annual  Report,  wherein  only
the unattained targets shall be outlined. The section further  explains  the
management report  as  per  2009/10  Annual  Report,  the  Auditor-General’s
report. Financial statements are salient in measuring both  the  performance
and position of an undertaking and their short analysis is also presented.

Programme Analysis

It is in the interest of good ethical reporting to  present  accurate,  fair
and  correct  information  regarding  the  department‘s  annual  performance
against its planned objectives as set out in the  different  documents.  The
method or approach followed is to draw attention to targets  that  were  not
met during  2009/10  fiscal  year.  The  focus  is  on  output  performance,
targets, actual performance and reason why they are not met.

Programme 1: Administration

Within the Administration Programme, the  Corporate  Services  sub-programme
set 10% as the target of the Electronic Procurement System that should  have
been implemented, but the system only went live on the 24 May  2010  due  to
delays in the implementation of the Integrated Financial  Management  System
(IFMS). The annual report is not clear regarding the actual  work  done  and
what the status quo is.
Programme 2: Public Finance and Budget Management

With regards to the Public Finance  and  Budget  Management  Programme,  the
Technical  and  Management  Support  sub  programme   indicated   that   the
feasibility  studies  for  6  hospitals   Public-private-partnership   (PPP)
projects should be completed for the year under review.  The  Annual  Report
however, only reports on the actual work  done  on  only  2  hospitals  PPP.
Moreover, the  agreement  that  is  reached  to  complete  the  remaining  4
projects does not state when that will be completed.

A further target for the  department  was  that  one  hospital  PPP  project
should reach financial close in  the  year  under  review,  but  the  Annual
Report indicates that there has been no  progress  in  this  regard  due  to
delays in procurement.

While the Annual Report  acknowledges  that  several  activities  under  the
Public Finance and Budget Management Programme are in  their  final  stages,
and are being discussed (e.g.  Standard  Operating  Procedure  Manuals,  the
draft Public Finance Management Bill, Structure of the  Appraisal  Framework
for quality of capital planning), it does not indicate when  the  activities
will be met and completed as required.

Programme 3: Asset and Liability Management

With regards to the Governance and Financial Analysis as sub programme,  the
department set a target of 33%( for 6 SOEs) for  benchmarking  to  determine
appropriate capital structure. This target was not achieved due to the  time
it took to obtain buy-in from the executive authority of the department  and
delays in obtaining data from State Owned Enterprise (SOEs).  A  concern  in
this regard relates to the fact that the Annual Report  does  not  stipulate
any alternative to meet the target.
Programme 4: Financial Management and Systems

The Financial Systems sub programme reflected unachieved targets  pertaining
to  setting  up  a  call  centre  help-desk  and  the  Integrated  Financial
Management System (IFMS) training unit at the State  Information  Technology
Agency (SITA).

Programme 5: Financial Accounting and Reporting
The Internal Audit Support sub programme achieved only 62 %  (997  of  1600)
of  the  target,  but  the  2009/10  Annual  Report  does  not  provide  any
explanation of why this target was not met. It had been noted as  well  that
there might have  been  some  typo  errors,  wherein  the  2009/12  National
Treasury Strategic Plan recorded 1 600  trainees  as  the  target,  but  the
2009/10 Annual Report recorded 600 trainees as the target.

Programme 6: Economic Policy and International Financial Relations

The Tax Policy sub programme achieved 70% of the target with regard  to  the
Draft policy paper on carbon pricing relating to mitigating  the  impact  of
carbon emissions and issues of climate change through  environmental  fiscal
reform. The document is expected to be published in the new financial  year.


Programme 7: Civil and Military Pensions, Contribution to  Funds  and  Other
Benefits

Within this programme, the  Civil  Pensions  and  Contributions  to  Medical
Schemes sub programme, 98.4% and 94.2% of  targets  relating  to  Injury-on-
Duty (IOD) and monthly contributions by  members  to  medical  schemes  have
been achieved respectively. The reasons for not meeting the set  target  was
due to the incomplete information on application forms and the  slow  uptake
of the under-35  applications  and  because  employees  on  salary  level  5
downwards are applying at a slow rate.

3.6 Report of the Accounting Officer

The report of the  Accounting  Officer  cited  the  review  of  the  Service
Delivery Model as a major focus and a challenge for the year  under  review.
The introduction of the Human Resources  Business  Partnering  Model  had  a
significant positive impact for the Department in terms  of  establishing  a
platform to transform human resources’  way  of  working  in  an  effort  to
increase value added service to the business. The actions of human  resource
have shifted to a more of customer-focused, innovative  and  structured  way
of responding to dynamic priorities.

The issue of resourcing  was  also  depicted  in  the  Accounting  Officer’s
report. Although the vacancy rate is still a challenge, resourcing  has  led
to an improvement of vacancy rates from 9.0% to 6.8%, and an  average  of  9
to 11 weeks as  turnaround  time  for  filling  posts.  The  report  of  the
Accounting  Officer  also  reveals  that  this  resource  focus  led  to  an
improvement in filling pipeline requirements at entry level.

Initiatives undertaken under the Senior  Management  Leadership  Development
Programme during period under review include inter alia:
    • New Directors Development Programme.
    • Managing for results.
    • Chief Directors Development Programme.
    • Coaching for Results; and
    • Choice at work.
As  a  way  of  implementing  the  Capacity  Building  Model  for  Financial
Management and enhance  public  service  capacity,  the  Accounting  Officer
report reveals that National Treasury will roll-out  2009/10  business  plan
for training  and  development,  facilitated  by  the  Institute  of  Public
Finance and Auditing.

The report indicated that an Internal Audit  Function  (IAF)  organisational
structure was approved by the audit committee, and the positions have  since
been filled. This  will  culminate  in  the  conclusion  of  the  co-sourced
service provider’s contract by the end of December 2010. The report  further
indicates that the IAF  monitors  its  human  capital  to  ensure  that  the
existing staff obtains relevant qualifications. Management had  noticed  the
importance and value of IAF within its system of governance and its  success
in formulating a three-year rolling plan, incorporating an  approved  annual
plan. The Accounting Officer’s report indicated a direct reporting  line  of
the Head of IAF to the Audit Committee.

The Accounting Officer’s report further reveals  that  the  Enterprise  Risk
Management Strategy was reviewed under the  leadership  of  the  Chief  Risk
Officer (CRO) in order to integrate  risk  management  into  the  day-to-day
activities of National Treasury. The report also  cited  the  initiative  of
good governance, and also indicated that the success of the Risk  Management
Unit through approved risk management processes  culminated  in  an  updated
Risk Profile for the National  Treasury,  which  is  monitored  by  internal
governance structures, including Exco, the  Audit  Committee  and  the  Risk
Management Committee.

The report further mentioned that  the  activities  to  mitigate  corruption
risks have been incorporated into the  reviewed  Fraud  Prevention  Plan  to
achieve the National Treasury‘s zero tolerance to corruption.

The report further highlights the completeness of the 2010  FIFA  World  Cup
in July 2010, with considerable savings on the  fiscus  and  the  specialist
unit that shall prepare a lessons learned report  which  will  be  completed
before 31 March 2010. The Accounting Officer’s  report  further  recommended
that the 2010 FIFA World Cup Unit migrate to the new  Mega  Capital  Project
Analysis Unit, on the basis of the  high  calibre  expertise  and  the  vast
resources allocated to the unit. The unit will  render  six  key  functions,
commencing during 2010/11 financial year. These are:

    • Develop sound relationship  with  National  Treasury  divisions,  line
      departments and   SOE companies implementing capital projects.
    • Collect monthly data from each of the  forty  nominated  mega  capital
      projects until the project construction and commission phase has  been
      completed.
    • Conduct a data analysis to determine the delays, cost overruns,  risks
      going forward and forward data for use in economic modelling.
    • Preparations of reports on a regular basis to guide  decision  makers,
      including National Treasury, Office of the  Director-General  and  the
      Minister of Finance.
    • The Accounting Officer report states that  National  Treasury  ensured
      proper use and record keeping of  the  departmental  assets  and  that
      these are all accounted for in the assets register.

The Accounting Officer’s report mentioned that no significance matters  were
reported by the Auditor –General in its management letter to the  department
and internal control related matters that were  highlighted  were  addressed
and the required control measures were taken  to  prevent  re-occurrence  of
those matters.

3.7 Analysis of Financial Statements

The  Department  received  an  unqualified  audit  opinion  on  its  2009/10
financial statements with some matters of emphasis. An  audit  opinion  with
matters of emphasis indicates that there  are  some  weaknesses  within  the
department’s  financial  control  systems.  The   following   matters   were
emphasised:

    • The financial statements showed  that  corresponding  figures  for  31
      March 2009 have been restated as  a  result  of  an  error  discovered
      during the 2009/10 financial year in the financial statements  of  the
      National Treasury.
    •  Note  26  to  the  financial  statements  disclosed  that   irregular
      expenditure of R2.7 million relating to the prior  year  was  incurred
      due to the fact that proper tender processes had not been followed.
    • The Auditor General was unable to audit  the  statements  relating  to
      conditional grants paid to provinces and unconditional grants paid  to
      municipalities,  as  well  as  the  amounts  spent  by  provinces  and
      municipalities. The Auditor General could therefore  not  express  any
      opinion on these matters.
    • Contrary to the requirements of  Public  Service  Regulation  1/111/B2
      (d), no human resource plan was in place for the 2009/10  Medium  Term
      Expenditure Frame Work period.
    • An investigation was conducted in terms of Proclamation  R50  of  2006
      published  in  the  Government  Gazette  on  07  December  2006.   The
      investigation was  initiated  based  on  the  allegation  of  possible
      maladministration of  the  Special  Pensions  Board  and  improper  or
      unlawful  conduct  by  officials  of  the  Board.  The   investigation
      identified 374 (6.9%) disentitled beneficiaries in  respect  of  fraud
      and/or a schedule 1 conviction as well as  683  (12.6%)  instances  of
      misinterpretation of the Special Pensions Act of  South  Africa,  (Act
      No. 69 of 1996) by the Board. The investigation resulted in 141 (2.6%)
      criminal matters that have been handed to  the  South  African  Police
      Services. A forensic investigation was conducted but the  results  had
      not yet been made available for review at the time of  finalising  the
      audit.

4. Consideration of Reports of Committee on Public Accounts

The National Treasury has  not  appeared  before  the  Committee  on  Public
Accounts in the past three  years,  therefore  there  are  no  Committee  on
Public Accounts resolutions relating to it.

5. South African Revenue Services (SARS)

5.1 Mandate and Role of SARS
The South African Revenue Service was established by legislation to  collect
revenue and ensure  compliance  with  tax  law.  Its  vision  is  to  be  an
innovative revenue and customs agency  that  enhances  economic  growth  and
social development, and supports South Africa's integration into the  global
economy in a way that benefits all citizens.
In accordance with the South African Revenue Service Act  34  of  1997,  the
service is an administratively autonomous organ of the state: it is  outside
the public service, but within the  public  administration.  Although  South
Africa's tax regime is set by the National Treasury, it is managed by  SARS.

SARS aims to provide an enhanced, transparent and client-orientated  service
to ensure optimum and equitable collection of revenue.

5.2 Economic Context of 2009/10
The Commissioner  of  SARS  reported  that  2009/10  was  one  of  the  most
challenging and demanding financial years in the history of  SARS.  A  clear
indication of the prevailing economic downturn  experienced  during  2009/10
is reflected in the revenue performance is reported in  the  2009/10  Annual
Report. The report reflects a year-on-year decline  in  overall  revenue  of
R26.4 billion – the first time in the 13  year  history  of  SARS  in  which
revenue collection declined in a 12 month period.
Revenue collection is a key driver of SARS’s performance and is  central  to
the mandate of SARS as prescribed by legislation. The financial crisis  that
manifested in the 2008/09 financial year  affected  revenue  collections  in
the 2009/10 financial year. The 2009/10 financial year saw South  Africa  go
through the worst recession in 17  years,  bringing  financial  hardship  to
millions of South Africans. The revenue target for  SARS  was  decreased  by
R69 billion from R659.3 billion in 2008/09 financial year to R590.4  billion
in the financial year under review.

Only collections from Personal Income Tax –  which  was  buffered  by  above
inflationary wage increases – the fuel levy and excise duty showed  year-on-
year gains but these were not enough  to  off-set  significant  declines  in
Corporate Income Tax (R30.2 billion or 18% lower), VAT (R6.4 billion  or  4%
lower) and Customs duties
(R3.2 billion  or  14%  lower).  In  response  to  the  challenging  revenue
collection  target,  coupled  with  the  tough  economic  conditions,   SARS
identified a number of necessary special  initiatives  to  enable  achieving
its target. These initiatives, along  with  the  dedicated  SARS  workforce,
were key factors in helping SARS exceed the revised target by R8.4 billion.

5.3 Increase in the Debt Book
In relation to the debt book, the Commissioner  highlighted  that  the  debt
book grew 23% year-on-year to R85.8 billion in 2009/10. For the same  period
the credit book declined by 7.3% down from R45.5bn in 2008/9 to  R42.2bn  in
2009/10. The Credit Book is a reflection of payments to SARS which have  not
yet been allocated.

The increase in debt was in part a  reflection  of  the  difficult  economic
circumstances in which taxpayers – both corporate  and  individual  –  found
themselves in during 2009/10, which significantly affected their ability  to
pay on time and in some cases at all.  Much  publicity  has  been  given  to
similar trends, which  have  been  experienced  and  reported  by  financial
institutions and tax authorities across the world.

Over the next two years, SARS plan  to  introduce  a  system  in  line  with
modern banking  in  which  taxpayers  are  in  control  of  their  accounts,
payments and transfers which should significantly  reduce  both  the  credit
and debt books. SARS believes this process will also  necessitate  a  review
of the current debt write-off policy to remove unrecoverable debt.

5.4 Cost of Collection
The decline in revenue collection also resulted in a slight increase in  the
cost of collection which rose from the steady 1% level over the  past  three
financial years to 1.2% in 2009/10. This ratio remains highly efficient  and
is equitable with many comparative revenue administrations globally.  It  is
anticipated that as revenue collections rebound over the  coming  years  and
the efficiency gains of the Modernisation Programme  are  further  realised,
this ratio will return to the 1% range.

5.5 Compliance Gains
One of the more positive  gains  achieved  during  the  year  was  a  marked
improvement in compliance – especially in  terms  of  returns  submitted  on
time. By the end of Tax  Season  2009,  SARS  had  received  more  than  3.1
million returns compared to 2.4 million a year earlier, reflecting a  growth
in the compliance ratio to 79% compared to 58% in 2008.

Equally encouraging is a growing trend by taxpayers to submit their  returns
earlier. It took just eight weeks in Tax Season  2009  to  reach  1  million
submissions. By the same point  in  2008  only  427  000  returns  had  been
submitted. This year, the trend towards early filing continues and  it  just
took 7 weeks to reach the 1million mark. Three months into Tax  Season  over
2.2 million returns was received compared to 1.8 million by this stage  last
year – a 22% increase.

During 2009/10, SARS issued more than 270 000 penalty notices  to  taxpayers
with multiple outstanding returns resulting in the  submission  of  over  80
000 late returns. This has been followed up in the past few weeks  with  the
issuing of approximately 60000 IT88 Agent  Appointment  notices  to  recover
outstanding penalties from defaulting taxpayers’ salaries.

The Commissioner highlighted  that  SARS  clamped  down  on  fraudulent  VAT
claims through a focused effort to remove bogus VAT vendors and  to  tighten
up on VAT registrations to ensure legitimate access to the VAT system.  This
saw some 16 000 VAT vendors suspended during the year.

The sophisticated risk engines, expanded use of third party  data,  and  the
reorganised compliance process also allowed SARS to  expand  its  audit  and
verification coverage for tax returns which increased by over 50% from  just
over  70000  audits  to  almost  160  000  audits  last  year  resulting  in
additional revenue of approximately R1.3 billion.

SARS plan to further expand  the  use  of  administrative  penalties,  third
party data and  risk  detection  for  those  who  continue  to  skirt  their
obligations.
Targeted interventions have been introduced, which had led  to  seizures  of
illicit and counterfeit goods including:

    • 560 cloned cheques to the value of R7.8 million;
    • 67 million cigarettes to the value of R33 million;
    • Two warehouses of alcohol;
    • 340 000 DVDs worth R53 million;
    • 35 tons of textiles; and
    • And 400 seizures of narcotics with a street value of R280 million

Over 880 investors, who are South African taxpayers, have been contacted  in
connection with Ponzi schemes. It should be remembered  that  Ponzi  schemes
are illegal and any earnings will be surrendered to the state.

5.6 Service Improvements
In relation to services improvements, the Commissioner indicated  that  SARS
continues to deliver against target and  expectation  on  the  modernisation
programme embarked on in  2007.  The  key  initiatives  initially  aimed  at
transforming the income tax process from a complex paper-based  and  labour-
intensive process, to a simplified  and  automated  process,  has  delivered
great results. This endeavour has not only reduced cost for  both  SARS  and
taxpayers, but it  has  also  gone  a  long  way  toward  strengthening  the
compliance aspect.

Over  the  past  three  years,  the  number  of  registered  e-Filing  users
increased from 500 000 at the end of 2006, to over 6 million  users  at  the
end of 2010 – a twelvefold increase. Usage of  this  channel  has  increased
substantially, with the number of electronic  returns  submitted  increasing
from approximately 1.5 million per  annum  in  2006  to  approximately  10.8
million at March 2010 – resulting in an increase of 720% across Income  Tax,
VAT, PAYE, SDL and UIF tax products.

Turnaround times for the assessment of returns were almost  95%  of  returns
processed within 24 hours during Tax Season 2009  compared  to  62%  a  year
earlier. In the vast majority of cases this resulted in refunds  being  paid
within 48 hours of submission directly into taxpayers’ bank accounts.
During the year, SARS refunded R14.8 billion compared  to  R11.2  billion  a
year earlier, providing  significant  and  speedy  relief  to  cash-strapped
consumers.

5.7 Customs and Border Management
The Customs Modernisation Programme was launched in October 2009 and will
address five aspects of the supply chain namely:
    • Trusted trader.
    • Customs inspections.
    • Customs systems replacement.
    • Declaration processing.
    • Leveraging SARS capabilities.

5.8 Collaboration with other Government Institutions
The collaborative approach to work with  other  government  departments  has
culminated in the on-going work  of  a  steering  committee  comprising  all
significant role players  in  border  management  and  protection  which  is
pursuing the Border Management Agency initiative announced by the  President
last year.

Working  relationships   were   established   with   the   following   state
institutions:
    • Collaboration in the Justice, Crime Prevention  and  Security  (JCPS),
      International Cooperation, Trade and Security  (ICTS)  and  Governance
      and Admin clusters.


    • Participation of SARS in the Multi Agency Working Group  on  improving
      the state procurement capability and the reduction of fraud and waste.
    • Shaping the founding of the Roundtable of Financial State Institutions
      to enable improvement of the management of the whole financial system.

    • Joint investigations of various cases including some highly publicised
      pyramid schemes, illicit goods such as drugs and cigarettes, and  work
      in the anti-poaching and smuggling of abalone and rhino horn.

5.9 Human Resource Trends
The Commissioner indicated that  the  headcount  reduced  marginally  during
2009/10 compared to the previous financial year  with  a  total  of  14  738
permanent employees and 525 temporary employees. This was 44 less  than  the
previous year.

SARS continued with their upward trend of employment equity  with  increases
in the number of black employees and women,  including  in  supervisory  and
management positions.

5.10 Governance Gains
SARS received  an  unqualified  audit  opinion  for  both  the  Administered
Revenue and Own Accounts with one emphasis of matter.
The one emphasis of matter which the Auditor-General noted  relates  to  the
impairment of the loan to Clidet Pty LTD. Clidet is the name of the  company
wholly owned by SARS, which was established as part of  the  acquisition  of
the TATIS customs software as reported in last  year’s  Annual  Report.  The
loan was required to be impaired as Clidet will be  supported  by  SARS  for
their cash flow as the customs  and  border  management  system  is  further
developed and implemented as part of Customs Modernisation.

5.11 Key Achievements
The following were some of the key achievements:
SARS pioneered and is chairing the African Tax Administration Forum  (ATAF).
The ATAF was launched in Uganda and attracted over 30 African  countries  as
members. This  forms  the  basis  for  closer  co-operation  and  engagement
between revenue authorities on the  African  continent.  South  Africa  will
host the ATAF secretariat and in addition, SARS  continued  to  play  a  key
leading role in a number  of  international  multilateral  tax  and  customs
forums including the  OECD  Forum  for  Tax  Administration  and  the  World
Customs Organisation (WCO).

SARS was awarded top honours in  the  inaugural  Public  Service  Excellence
Awards in October 2009, the Grand Prix Platinum Award  for  Best  Reputation
of all Government Departments and State-owned Entities.  In  addition,  SARS
received four Gold Awards for Overall  Effectiveness,  Service  Orientation,
Service Orientation in Rural Areas,  as  well  as  Best  Reputation  in  the
Financial Services category.

SARS received an accolade in the form of the Lean Institute  Africa  Diamond
Award for Excellence. This award recognised achievements in  efficiency  and
productivity internationally in line with the “lean”  production  philosophy
developed by Toyota.

6. Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC)

The FFC is coordinated by the Minister of Finance and  consists  of  a  full
time chairperson and deputy chairperson (nominated by national  government),
who is also the chief executive and accounting officer  of  the  FFC.  There
are seven other  commissioners  (two  national,  three  provincial  and  two
organised local government [SALGA] nominees). All appointments are  made  by
the President of the Republic of South Africa.

6.1 Mandate of the FFC
The primary mandate of the FFC is to provide recommendations  to  the  three
spheres of government and other organs of state on: the division of  revenue
between and among the three spheres of government and, any  other  financial
and fiscal matters.

In the discharge of its mandate, the  FFC  timeously  tabled  its  2009/2010
Annual Report, tabled its 2011/2012 Submission on the Division  of  Revenue,
responded to the 2009 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement, responded to  the
2010 Division of Revenue Bill, commented on the 2010 Fiscal  Frameworks  and
Revenue Proposals, commented on the 2010 Appropriations Bill in April  2010,
individual Commissioners and Staff published technical reports based on  the
work of the Commission in academic journals  and  thus  contributed  to  the
knowledge base on IGFR issues to the broader community.

The FFC is in the second year of implementing its 5 Year  Research  Strategy
which extends  focus  from  first  generation  issues  relating  to  revenue
sharing formulae to include second generation issues relating to the  impact
of the intergovernmental system on development outcomes.

The 2009/2010 Research and the  2011/2012  Submission  on  the  Division  of
Revenue focus on the processes necessary to  adjust  to  the  recession  and
global economic crisis from which the South  African  economy  is  emerging.
The need for cushioning  the  vulnerable  and  laying  the  foundations  for
future growth and development in this environment.  The  fiscal  adjustments
and reprioritisation that the state will need to make in order to  take  the
economy back to where it  was  before  the  recession  without  compromising
access to basic services by the vulnerable groups.
The FFC successfully conducted an annual review of its internal controls  as
well as its financial and non-financial Risk Management Framework.

The FFC once more received an unqualified audit  opinion  from  the  Auditor
General. The Commission continued  to  engage  with  Parliament,  Provincial
Legislatures  and   Executives,   Organised   Local   Government,   National
Government and other organs  of  state  in  briefings,  hearings  and  other
forums on its recommendations when invited to do so.

Some of the recommendations that  the  FFC  made  in  its  2010/2011  annual
submission on the Division of Revenue and Government’s Response to them  are
the following:

6.2 Provincial Equitable Share (PES): Principles

Expenditure assignments between provinces and national government should  be
clarified beyond what is covered  under  Schedule  4  of  the  Constitution.
There should be a clear separation of instruments in  the  transfer  system.
Government indicated that these recommendations will be considered  as  part
of a Government-wide review of the PES.

6.3 Provincial Equitable Share (PES) Review: Reform Options
In the short term reform of the PES formula stay within the confines of  the
current constitutional dispensation, and in the  medium  to  long  term  the
reforms should depart from the realisation that fixing the  PES  as  a  pool
requires the fixing of other aspects of the current fiscal  decentralisation
system. The FFC highlighted that national government  indicated  that  these
recommendations will be considered as part of a  government-wide  review  of
the PES.

6.4 Public Infrastructure Investment and Social Assistance

In relation to public infrastructure investment and social  assistance,  the
FFC reported that government should develop and  implement  a  comprehensive
national   infrastructure   maintenance   strategy,   appropriate    funding
mechanisms through intergovernmental coordination to  facilitate,  integrate
and sequence infrastructure planning and delivery. Social assistance  should
be managed in such a way as to eventually reduce dependency  on  the  social
grants.  Government  should  use   infrastructure   expansion   to   provide
opportunity for workfare programmes as well as activities identified in  the
Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP). Government  agreed  with  all  these
recommendations.

6.5 Management and Financing of Road Infrastructure

The FFC reported that here should be an increased and stable flow  of  funds
for maintenance, rehabilitation and addressing backlogs  in  the  long-term,
greater coordination of road management functions across the  three  spheres
of government. Priority should be given to addressing the lack of  technical
skills  in  the  road  management  sector   of   sub-national   governments.
Government indicated that these recommendations will be considered  as  part
of a Government-wide review of the PES.

6.6 Local Government Capacity Building
In relation to local government capacity building, the  FFC  indicated  that
local government should be central  to  setting  the  agenda  for  capacity-
building   programmes.    Government    must    therefore    establish    an
intergovernmental-wide framework for understanding what constitutes  a  lack
of capacity within the context of local government.  When  capacity-building
interventions are undertaken with respect  to  different  functional  areas,
there should be a clear separation of responsibilities, as well as  coherent
interface, between service authority and the service  providers.  Government
agreed with these recommendations
The FFC also made detailed submissions on:

    • 2009 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement;
    • 2010/2011 Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals;
    • 2010 Appropriation Bill;
    • Financial Management of Gauteng Provincial Legislature Bill;
    • Seventeenth Constitution Amendment Bill;
    • Eighteenth Constitution Amendment Bill; and
    • Money Bills Amendment Procedures and Related Matters Bill


A National Treasury request for comment on the possible continuation  and/or
lapsing of municipal taxes (other than property rates)  that  existed  prior
to the Municipal Fiscal Powers and Functions Act.

7. Committee’s Observations
The committee commended the work  of  National  Treasury  in  terms  of  its
strong macroeconomic  policy  framework,  which  helped  to  improve  growth
performance over the last two decades. Of concern to the committee  however,
are the low rates of job creation and productivity growth.
However, beyond bringing the economy  back  to  potential,  many  challenges
remain.  These, the committee noted focused on:

   • The need to make better use of South Africa’s abundant resources, both
     physical and human.
   • To accelerate the increase in living standards.
   • Faster growth is required  to  achieve  the  government’s  social  and
     economic targets and to meet the aspirations of the people.
   • An extreme and persistent low employment problem, which interacts with
     other economic and social  problems,  in  the  education,  health  and
     increased crime, further exacerbate the situation.

The committee noted that faster growth is needed to meet social  objectives.
 The AsgiSA growth targets were framed with a view of  halving  unemployment
and poverty by 2014.  The low rate of employment and the  extreme  level  of
inequality are considered by the government to be important problems  facing
the country.

To  adequately  address  the  challenges  faced   by   South   Africa,   the
institutional   framework,   governance   and   monitoring   of   government
departments expenditure is critical to the  mandate  of  National  Treasury,
which is:

   • To advance economic growth and job creation through appropriate macro-
     economic, fiscal and financial policies.
   • To play a pivotal role in the management  of  government  expenditure,
     setting  financial  management   norms   and   standards   for   state
     departments, monitoring their performance and reporting any deviations
     to the Auditor-General.

Within this specific mandate, the committee raised a number of  issues  with
regards to expenditure trends between the three spheres  of  government.   A
number of  government  departments  are  allocated  substantial  amounts  of
monies to address the challenges, but one needs to engage national  treasury
on the manner in which the following would be addressed:

The Committee noted that considerable progress has been made with regard  to
revenue collection, but notes that many sectors in  the  economy  are  still
outside the tax net.

The Committee noted that many criminal matters that  were  referred  to  the
police after the intervention of the National  Treasury  were  not  followed
through owing to an apparent  lack  of  co-operation  with  law  enforcement
agencies.  The Committee would like to urge National  Treasury  to  expedite
this process so  that  these  cases  could  be  brought  to  an  appropriate
conclusion.

The Committee expressed concern about the levels of  “naked  corruption”  in
the field of procurement among government departments that were  “rotten  to
the core”.

The Committee noted that rural municipalities faced a  challenge  in  making
use of local government financial management grants, which were intended  to
help build capacity.  In analysing the figure of 894  graduate  interns,  it
appears  that  most  interns  are  deployed  to  metro   areas   and   large
municipalities.  The Committee suggests that there should at least be  three
graduate interns in all 283 municipalities.

The Committee noted that the infrastructure grant to provinces was  intended
for the rehabilitation of existing health, education, road and  agricultural
infrastructure.   The  committee  further  noted  that   little   work   had
apparently been  done  on  agriculture,  even  though  the  grant  had  been
increased to cater for the replacement of “mud schools” and repair  of  coal
haulage routes.
The Committee would like to urge provincial treasuries  to  take  action  in
cases of corruption, and suggests that National Treasury should step  in  to
assist. 

The Committee noted the vacancy in the Financial and  Fiscal  Commission.  A
national nominee had accepted the appointment,  but  did  not  take  up  the
position since June 2009. The committee is concerned about the  impact  this
will have on the work of the FFC and would like to urge  that  the  position
should be filled as a matter of urgency.

The committee took note that one of the strategic objectives  in  the  FFC’s
Annual Report, that stated a review of public hospital  performance  and  an
evaluation of the national health insurance (NHI)  proposals  were  planned,
but that these had been put on hold.

The committee took note that recommendations submitted by the FFC  were  not
binding on the Government, but that the Minister was bound by  law  to  give
reasons for their acceptance or non-acceptance.

8. Conclusion and Recommendations

The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered the annual reports  and
related  documentation  from  National  Treasury,  South   African   Revenue
Services and Financial and Fiscal Commission, recommends that:
8.1 The Minister of Finance should consider tabling the Medium  Term  Budget
Policy Statement early in October in order to allow parliamentary  processes
to follow accordingly.

8.2 National Treasury should provide the Committee with a detailed  progress
report on the Preferential Procurement Policy.

8.3 National Treasury should provide the Committee with a detailed  progress
report  on  measures  implemented  to  ensure   that   national   government
departments adhere to the appropriate legislation and regulations  regarding
the management of public finances.

8.4 National Treasury should review the Annual Report  format  for  national
departments reporting to Parliament in line with the Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act No. 9 of 2009.

8.5 National Treasury should consider the framework for consumer  protection
against financial exploitation to ensure that the Financial  Services  Board
is appropriately resourced and has appropriate jurisdiction.

8.6 National Treasury should intensify its work  on  working  together  with
law enforcement agencies in order to bring closure to criminal cases  within
its work jurisdiction.

8.7 National Treasury should assist in establishing a  reputable  businesses
register crucial for tax payment by companies.

8.8  South  African  Revenue  Services  should  accelerate  the  process  of
reaching those who are not in the tax net.

8.9 Accessibility to SARS offices poses challenges,  therefore  SARS  should
consider  the  feasibility  of  opening   offices   in   areas   to   ensure
accessibility.

8.10 Parliament should consider reviewing  the  Parliamentary  Programme  to
allow for proper engagement on  the  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendations
Report (BRRR) process and the Medium Term Budget  Policy  Statement  (MTBPS)
process.
8.11 Parliament should also consider reviewing its oversight model in  order
to bring it in line with the Money Bills Amendment  Procedures  and  Related
Matter Act, Act No. 9 of 2009.

Report to be considered.


                          TUESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 2 November 2010:


          a) Transport Laws Repeal Bill [B 19B – 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 37 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) Division of Revenue Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

    (3)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 34 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 77).

3.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2010] – Act No 7 of 2010
         (assented to and signed by President on 31 October 2010).

      2) Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second Amendment
         Bill [B 29 – 2010] – Act No 8 of 2010 (assented to and signed by
         President on 31 October 2010).

4.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
        1) Companies Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
           Trade and Industry.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
        Select Committee on Trade and International Relations.


National Assembly

The Speaker

    1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

   (1)      The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Appropriations in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
         Related Matters Act, 2009:

        (a)      Division of Revenue Amendment Bill [B 35 - 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

    2. Membership of Committees

   (1)      The following members have been nominated by their parties to
      serve on the Ad Hoc Committee on Commission for Gender Equality
      Forensic Investigation:
      African National Congress


      Dlulane, Ms B
      Holomisa, Adv. SP
      Malgas, Mrs HH
      Sibanyoni, Mr JB
      Smith, Mr VG
      Snell, Mr GT


      Democratic Alliance


      Robinson, Mrs, D
      Duncan, Mrs P


      Congress of the People


      Rwexana, Ms SP


      Inkatha Freedom Party


      Lebenya-Ntanzi, Ms P


      Independent Democrats


      Paulse, Mrs S
   (2)      The following changes to Committee membership have been made by
      the ANC:

      Portfolio Committee on Basic Education


      Discharged: Saal, Ms G


      Appointed:      Skosana, Mr JJ

    3. Appointment of new Ministers and Deputy Ministers

    a) A letter dated 1 November 2010 has been received from the President
       of the Republic, informing members of the National Assembly of the
       appointment of the following new Ministers and Deputy Ministers:

          Arts and Culture
          Minister: Mr S P Mashatile
          Deputy Minister: Dr M J Phaahla


          Communications
          Minister: Mr R L Padayachie
          Deputy Minister: Mr K O Bapela


          Correctional Services
          Deputy Minister: Adv N A Ramatlhodi


          Economic Development
          Deputy Minister: Mr E Godongwana
          Energy
          Deputy Minister: Ms B Thomson


          Health
          Deputy Minister: Dr G M Ramokgopa


          Higher Education
          Deputy Minister: Ms H B Mkhize


          Home Affairs
          Deputy Minister: Ms F I Chohan


          International Relations and Cooperation
          Deputy Minister: Mr M L Fransman


          Labour
          Minister: Ms M N Oliphant


          Mineral Resources
          Deputy Minister: Mr G G Oliphant


          Police
          Deputy Minister: Ms M M Sotyu
          Public Enterprises
          Minister: Mr K M N Gigaba
          Deputy Minister: Mr B A D Martins


          Public Service and Administration
          Deputy Minister: Ms A Dlodlo


          Public Works
          Minister: Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde


          Presidency: Performance Monitoring, Evaluation and Administration
          Deputy Minister: Ms D D Pule


          Rural Development and Land Reform
          Deputy Minister: Mr T W Nxesi


          Social Development
          Minister: Ms B O Dlamini
          Deputy Minister: Mrs B M Ntuli


          Sport and Recreation
          Minister: Mr F A Mbalula


          Trade and Industry
          Deputy Minister: Ms E Thabethe
          Water and Environmental Affairs
          Minister: Mrs B E E Molewa


          Women, Children and People with Disabilities
          Minister: Ms L M Xingwana

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Final Acts of
   the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Plenipotentiary
   Conference, Antalya, 2006, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
   Constitution, 1996, dated 02 November 2010.

      The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the Final
      Acts of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
      Plenipotentiary Conference, Antalya, 2006, tabled in terms of section
      231 (2) of the Constitution, 1996, recommends that the House approves
      the Final Acts of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
      Plenipotentiary Conference, Antalya, 2006.

   Report to be considered.

CREDA INSERT T101102e-insert1 – PAGES 3585 - 3610



