---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-03-18
---

THURSDAY, 18 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:06.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M B GOQWANA: Madam Deputy Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House,
I shall move:

  That this House debates the state of readiness of our health facilities
  and health professionals for the upcoming 2010 Fifa World Cup.

Mr A M FIGLAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move the following motion on behalf of
the DA:

  That the House debates measures and the possible implementation thereof
  by which government’s home-building programme can be designed to take
  into account the needs of people who live with disabilities, and possible
  solutions.


Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House, I shall move the following motion on behalf
of the IFP:

  That the House -

  (1) debates the need to promote the education of our children, especially
       those in rural areas and conditions of poverty, above the levels of
       skills, human development and education, not only of their parents,
       but also of their teachers, so as to ensure that the lack of human
       development caused by oppression, colonialism and apartheid does not
       carry over to the new generation born in freedom; and

  (2) debates the need to cause the education of our children to leapfrog
        into a future of modernity by giving consideration to the
        possibility of providing each of our children with an iPad or Kindle-
        type personal device which allows them to receive, by radio signal,
        the very textbooks which the state is now struggling and failing to
        deliver.

Mr M L FRANSMAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move:

  That the House -

     1) debates the report on the National Student Financial Aid scheme,
        announced by Minister Nzimande; and

  (2) debates the issue of access to higher education institutions for poor
       students.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of Cope I hereby give notice that
on the next sitting day of the House, I shall move the following motion:

  That the House debates what appears to be a highly irregular tender
  awarded by Transnet to a company by the name of GNS Security Services,
  closely associated with the Minister of Communications, Siphiwe Nyanda.


  Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I hereby give
  notice that on the next sitting day of the House, I shall move the
  following motion:

  That the House -

 (1)  debates whether or not the singing of the struggle song “Dubula
      ibhunu”, meaning “Shoot the boer”, undermines the process of
      forgiveness, reconciliation and nation-building that the nation is
      enjoying currently; and


 (2)  debates whether it has any relevance in the new democratic order.


Ms E MORE: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move the following motion on behalf of the DA:

  That the House -


  (1) debates the problem of the insufficient number of doctors in our
       health sector, in light of the fact that over the period of 2004 to
       2008 the number of doctors qualifying in South Africa declined from
       1 394 to 1 306 and the fact that 17% of doctors leave South Africa
       after qualifying; and


  (2) debates possible ways in which both government and the private sector
       can rectify the situation.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving, on behalf of the DA, the following motion:

  That the House -

 (1)  debates measures to curtail wasteful expenditure in light of the high
      and growing rate of wasteful expenditure by this government since its
      inception in May 2010, particularly amongst government Ministers; and

 (2)  debates improved mechanisms whereby government can be compelled to
      account for such expenditure.


             ACCOLADES FOR SOUTH AFRICAN SWIMMER NATALIE DU TOIT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

 That the House -

 (1)  notes that on Wednesday, 10 March 2010, South African swimming star,
      Natalie du Toit, won the 2010 Laureus Disability Award at a star-
      studded ceremony in Abu Dhabi;


 (2)  further notes that the mission of Laureus is to use and promote sport
      as a powerful mechanism for dealing with some of the world’s toughest
      social challenges and that currently it has 78 projects around the
      world that use sport as a means of tackling some of the gravest
      social, economic and environmental problems facing society today;


 (3)  recalls that in 2008 Natalie du Toit made history in Beijing by
      becoming the first amputee ever to qualify for the Olympics, where she
      finished 16th in the 10 km open water swim and that she is one of only
      two athletes to have competed in both the Olympic and Paralympic
      Games, and that she became the toast of South Africa after winning
      five gold medals in the Paralympics;


 (4)  believes that the award she has received is in recognition of the
      hard work, dedication and commitment to the sport that she loves and
      the country that she represents; and


 (5)  congratulates Natalie on a job well done, because she has, yet again,
      made South Africa proud by raising its flag in the international
      arena.

Agreed to.

               HIGH STANDARD OF DRINKING WATER IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

 That the House –

   1) notes with pleasure the announcement by the Minister of Water and
      Environmental Affairs on 17 March 2010 that all 2010 Fifa World Cup
      host cities comply with all requirements for the supply of safe
      drinking water on a sustainable basis;


   2) further notes that the municipalities of Cape Town, Johannesburg,
      Tshwane, Nelspruit and eThekwini have once again been awarded Blue
      Drop certificates for maintaining a high standard of drinking water
      purification and supply in 2010, thus retaining their Blue Drop status
      first achieved in 2009;


   3) further notes that, compared to the previous Blue Drop reporting
      period in 2009, the cities of Mangaung in Bloemfontein, Nelson Mandela
      Bay, Polokwane and Rustenburg have improved their operations with
      regard to the management of drinking water, and that they were awarded
      Blue Drop certification for the first time in 2010;


 (4)  extends its congratulations to the officials within these
      municipalities whose hard work has been duly rewarded; and


 (5)  expresses its confidence that these host cities shall ensure that
      their visitors during the 2010 Fifa World Cup will be able to enjoy
      drinking water of the highest quality.

Agreed to.

       TRAGIC DEATH OF PUPILS DUE TO RECKLESS DRIVING BY HIP HOP STAR

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms A MDA: Deputy Speaker, on behalf of Cope, I move without notice:

 That the House –

   1) notes the tragic death of four pupils in Soweto last week, which was
      as a result of a reckless and undesirable race by our own South
      African hip hop star, Molemo Maarohanye, popularly known as "Jub Jub";

   2) conveys its heartfelt condolences to the families of the deceased and;

   3) ensures that measures will be put in place so that the South African
      public is made aware of our commitment as the Parliament of South
      Africa to making sure that justice is done and prevails in this
      matter.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a notice of motion and not a motion
itself, is it not?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, we keep coming back to the same old
problem. Certainly, the DA was not given a copy of that motion without
notice. It is very difficult for us to actually comment now as to whether
we support it or not. And I would prefer perhaps for that motion to be
withdrawn.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a practice that motions go to the Chief Whips
beforehand. That is why I am asking whether it is a notice of motion that
is coming. Is that the case?

Mrs J D KILIAN: Deputy Speaker, I will take it up with the relevant member.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Kilian, are you withdrawing the motion? Is that
what you are saying?

Mrs J D KILIAN: Deputy Speaker, it seems to be a notice of motion, but it
should have been circulated before, so we’ll withdraw it for now, yes.
Thank you.

                  VOLKSWAGEN SA AWARDED BIG EXPORT CONTRACT

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

 That the House –

   1) notes that Volkswagen South Africa has been awarded a R12 billion
      component export contract, which will boost the South African
      automotive component manufacturing industry;


   2) further notes that the contract is to supply the Volkswagen Group with
      diesel particulate filters, DPFs, for the next five years and that
      this is the biggest export contracts for a single part ever awarded to
      the company;


   3) believes that the contract will secure over 100 jobs in the Nelson
      Mandela Bay region in the Eastern Cape where 80 per cent of the parts
      would be manufactured; and


 (4)  welcomes this initiative and believes that it will go a long way in
      strengthening the automobile and components sector as well as
      developing local industries and accelerating decent work
      opportunities.


Agreed to.

       TAXI OPERATORS STRIKING IN PROTEST TO BUS RAPID TRANSIT SYSTEM
                             (Draft Resolution)


Ms H N MAKHUBA: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
IFP, I move without notice:

 That the House –


   1) notes that since Monday, 15 March 2010, commuters in Gauteng have been
      left stranded as the minibus-taxi industry went on strike boycotting
      the expansion of the Bus Rapid Transit System;


   2) further notes that taxi operators have threatened violence and have
      barricaded roads leading from Soweto and railway lines in Soweto with
      burning tyres;


   3) further notes that the back window of a bus was smashed in Eldorado
      Park and that there were attempts to burn a Rea Vaya bus in
      Nancefield;

       4) condemns any act of violent behaviour; and


 (5)  calls on taxi operators and the government to work together in order
      to come up with a solution that will be beneficial to both the taxi
      operators and the commuters who make use of public transport.

Agreed to.

                           WORLD TUBERCULOSIS DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N SINGH: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the IFP, I move without
notice:

 That the House –


 (1)  notes that World Tuberculosis Day is observed on 24 March of each
      year and that its aims are to unite hundreds of medical and volunteer
      organisations across the globe to raise public awareness on the need
      for immediate action against the disease, prevention and elimination
      of this disease;


 (2)  further notes that tuberculosis remains a serious epidemic in many
      parts of the world, leading to the deaths of approximately 1,6 million
      people each year, mostly in the Third World;


 (3)  recognises that World Tuberculosis Day not only draws attention to
      tuberculosis as a worldwide pandemic, but also focuses attention on
      the fact that the disease can be cured if researchers are able to find
      a cure or a worthwhile antidote;


 (4)  further notes that South Africa has recently been hard-hit as the
      infections of TB have almost tripled because of our high HIV rate; and


 (5)  calls upon South Africans to take responsibility for their health and
      get themselves tested for tuberculosis as soon as they suspect that
      they might have been infected with the disease.

Agreed to.

  RESIGNATION OF MR RAYMOND ACKERMAN AS CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE PICK
                                ’N PAY GROUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

    1) notes that on 31 March 2010 Mr Raymond Ackerman resigned from his
       position as chief executive officer of the Pick ’n Pay group in
       favour of nonexecutive chairperson Gareth Ackerman;


    2) further notes that Mr Ackerman has been a pioneer within the retail
       industry and that during the course of his career he has accumulated
       an innumerable number of awards for both his philanthropic work
       within South Africa and for his work relating to Pick ’n Pay, which
       began in 1965 when he purchased four small shops which he, over
       time, turned into the largest and most lucrative retail supermarket
       chain in South Africa;


    3) recognises that during the 20th and 21st centuries Mr Ackerman has
       played an extremely influential and essential role in the growth and
       stimulation of the South African economy and has assisted in the
       social upliftment of communities within South Africa, through the
       work of the Ackerman Family Educational Trust and the Raymond
       Ackerman Academy of Entrepreneurial Development; and


    4) congratulates Mr Ackerman on his distinguished career, extends its
       appreciation for his work and wishes him a peaceful and well-
       deserved break.

Agreed to.

                  SA ARMY HONOURS ITS LONG-SERVING MEMBERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that on Wednesday, 10 March 2010, the South African Army
        honoured its long-serving members who spent 10 to 30 years in the
        service by awarding them medals as a token of appreciation;


     2) further notes that several medals were also awarded to members who
        served as ambassadors in the Great Lakes area and also to members
        who served in the war-torn DRC and Sudan;


     3) recalls that our army played an important role in peacekeeping in
        Africa and that their hard work paid off last year when they were
        withdrawn from Burundi because peace and stability had returned to
        that country;


     4) further recalls that in the DRC, the army trained one of their
        battalions that has already contributed to the peace in that
        country; and
     5) welcomes the move to get the army to guard our borders as their
        presence there has already contributed to the curbing of illegal
        activities.

Agreed to.

            TORCH OF PEACE INITIATIVE AND SAFER SCHOOLS CAMPAIGN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that on Monday, 8 March 2010, the Torch of Peace was handed
        over to the North West education department by the Free State
        education department to mark the beginning of the Safer Schools
        campaign;


     2) further notes that the torch is intended to instil a strong sense
        of humanity, preserve lives and avoid violence, crime and accidents
        wherever possible;


     3) realises that what happens at school reflects what goes on in
        society and, therefore, interventions aimed at curbing the scourge
        of violence and harassment must start in schools if they are to
        have a lasting impact;

     4) believes that the Torch of Peace initiative recognises the need to
        work together in confronting challenges faced by the youth of
        today; and

     5) welcomes this initiative and believes that it will contribute to a
        safe learning environment and curb violence in schools.

Agreed to.

                         SITTING HOURS OF THE HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon Deputy
President, I move the draft resolution printed in my name on the Order
Paper, as follows:


  That the House, notwithstanding the hours of sitting provided for in Rule
  23(2), on Wednesday, 24 March 2010, sits from 10:30 until adjournment.

Agreed to.

                 SITTING HOURS OF EXTENDED PUBLIC COMMITTEES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon Deputy
President, I move the draft resolution printed in my name on the Order
Paper, as follows:

   That, notwithstanding the hours of sitting of the House as provided for
   in Rule 23(2), the Extended Public Committees may sit as agreed to by the
   National Assembly Programme Committee.

Agreed to.

  AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER AND REPORT ON PROTECTION OF INFORMATION BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon Deputy
President, I move the draft resolution printed in my name on the Order
Paper, as follows:

      That the House appoints an ad hoc committee to consider and report on
      the Protection of Information Bill, the committee to -
       1) consist of 17 members as follows: ANC 10; DA 2; Cope 1; IFP 1;
          and other parties 3;


      (2)   perform the functions listed in Rule 201(1)(a) and have all the
          powers listed in Rule 138;


      (3)   confer with the relevant Council committee; and


      (4)   report by 7 May 2010.


Agreed to.

    DEATH OF ANC VETERAN AND ANTI-APARTHEID STRUGGLE STALWART FATIMA MEER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Deputy
President, I move the draft resolution printed in my name on the Order
Paper, as follows:

  That the House -


     1) notes that ANC veteran and anti-apartheid struggle stalwart Fatima
        Meer died on 12 March 2010 at the St Augustine’s Hospital in Durban
        at the age of 82;
     2) further notes that her political career started in 1944 at the
        tender age of 16 when she helped raise £1 000 for famine relief in
        Bengal and that she, like thousands of Indians, two years later was
        swept up by the 1946 Indian Passive Resistance Campaign, which was
        the most dramatic show of militant antigovernment action in South
        African history and in 1955 became a founding member of the
        Federation of South African Women, the women’s organisation that
        organised the famous antipass march on the Union Buildings in
        Pretoria in 1956;


   (3)      recognises that she was a selfless leader, who in 1976 was
       arrested and detained, together with other women, including Comrade
       Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, who remained her friend and comrade until
       the end, and that after Fatima’s release from detention, she was
       restricted to the Durban area by the apartheid regime, a restriction
       she contravened in order to advance the struggle for liberation;

   (4)      further recognises that in 1980 she was one of the vocal Indian
       revolutionaries who mobilised and fought against the tricameral
       system of Parliament, because she felt it was a shame for African
       people to be left out of Parliament any longer and therefore
       criticised the structural arrangements of Parliament into three
       houses;

   (5)      recalls that Fatima was a prolific academic who started to
       lecture in sociology at the University of Natal where she was the
       first black woman to be appointed as a lecturer at a white South
       African university and that she was also a writer, with two of her
       books being the compelling Trial of Andrew Zondo, the story of an
       executed ANC guerrilla, and Higher than Hope, an uncritical
       biography of Nelson Mandela;

   (6)      acknowledges that the role Fatima and her husband, Dr Ismail,
       played in cementing the relationship between the National Indian
       Congress and the African National Congress in the 1940s cannot be
       underestimated; and

   (7)      conveys its heartfelt condolences to her family, friends and
       comrades in the African National Congress and the alliance.


Agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The condolences of the House will be conveyed to the
family and to all concerned.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise because I feel it would appear
that the hon Trevor Manuel has been deposed as a Minister as he is looking
for a seat in the back benches. I wonder who is going to help him.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I am sure, when we go to break later, that the
hon Manuel will tell you why he is standing.

              INCREASED SUPPORT FOR ANC SINCE GENERAL ELECTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, we as the ANC have succeeded
in consolidating and building on our support base since the 2009 general
election. Support for the ANC currently stands at 71% of eligible voters.

After the election a sociopolitical trend survey was conducted by Ipsos
Markinor as part of the “Pulse of the People” public opinion series, the
findings of which confirmed what we have known all along – support for the
ANC and for our President is growing tremendously. [Applause.] According to
the findings, seven out of 10 South Africans chose the ANC on the ballot
paper.

In this survey people were also asked to rate political leaders, including
President Jacob Zuma, on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 means “totally
against” and 10 means “totally in favour of”. President Zuma’s rating
increased over the past six months from 6,1 out of 10 – which was measured
in April 2009 – to 7,6 out of 10. [Applause.] This rating increased not
only amongst black people, but also showed a significant increase amongst
minority groups.
This proves beyond any doubt that the people of South Africa have
confidence in the ANC and in President Jacob Zuma’s ability to lead the
country. We will support the President in making 2010 a year of action.
Together we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, can I ask: When you clap, you are eating
into the time of the speaker, and it is only one and a half minutes.

                  POOR ROAD MAINTENANCE IN EKURHULENI METRO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led Ekurhuleni Metro is
lurching from one delivery crisis to another. The metro has acknowledged
...

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I remember you once ruled that
members of the gallery should not participate in clapping. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is still the case. Members of the gallery are
observers, and they do not participate in the proceedings of the day. Thank
you. Hon member?

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The ANC-led Ekurhuleni Metro is
lurching from one delivery crisis to another. The metro has acknowledged
that there are at least 800 reported potholes in the Kempton Park area
alone and that at least R50 million will be needed to repair these
potholes. Some potholes are 10 metres wide and 20 centimetres deep. In
fact, last week a municipal refuse removal truck fell into a pothole and
could not get out, and had to be pulled out by another refuse removal
truck.

The consequences of failed ANC policy and cadre deployment are daily
occurrences for the drivers and commuters of Ekurhuleni, with drivers
having to swerve continuously across roads in order to prevent their
vehicles from being damaged.

Unless the ANC-led metro council starts taking drastic and immediate action
to repair our roads, we will soon pass the tipping point where the cost of
repair becomes unmanageable. This is a direct result of the ANC-led
government’s lax attitude towards effecting maintenance. [Interjections.]
No, you fix it; you are in power there!

The typical cost of maintaining roads where maintenance is done timeously,
is R100 000 per kilometre. If the road is left for three years, the cost
rises to R600 000, and if the road is left for a further five years, it
will rise to R1,8 million per kilometre. A bad road also costs motorists
twice as much in time, safety and operational costs as a good one, not to
mention road fatalities.

It is high time the ANC in Ekurhuleni rolled up its sleeves and started
delivering. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    ABUSE OF POWER BY VIP PROTECTION UNIT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Madam Deputy Speaker, we in Cope call on the
Ministers in the security cluster once and for all to stop the abuses of
power by the VIP unit. We condemn the latest human rights violations and
attempts to suppress media freedom in this country in the strongest
possible terms.

A mere three weeks after a UCT student was bullied and detained by the
President’s VIP officers, a young reporter from Radio 702, Tshepo Lesole,
was manhandled and his photos erased by the same VIP unit. A Mail &
Guardian reporter was earlier detained for taking pictures of the
President’s house and then the ANC Youth League spokesperson, Floyd
Shivambu, threatened to disclose information that could only have been
illegally obtained from state sources.

Madam Deputy Speaker, the question is: What happened to our free,
democratic society, with media freedom expressly protected by the
Constitution? Cope wants to call on those Ministers in the Cabinet who made
so many sacrifices during the protracted struggle for the liberation of our
country and our people to speak up against these abuses of power. Cope will
submit questions on the conduct of the VIP unit to Parliament. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

         DA PERPETUATION OF WHITE PRIVILEGE AT ITS RECENT CONFERENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M L FRANSMAN (ANC): Adjunkspeaker, ’n jakkals verander van hare, maar
natuurlik nie van snare nie. [Deputy Speaker, a leopard cannot change its
spots.]

At its federal congress, the DA probably showed its true colours during the
provincial leadership elections. Despite its claims of being true to the
policy of “the best man for the job”, or, put differently, “fit for
purpose”, in reality its practice demonstrates commitment to the precept of
the best white man for the job. This is the level of hypocrisy that the DA
subscribes to and hopes to continue to dupe the electorate into believing.

In fact, as we’ve seen more recently in the provincial cabinet of the
Western Cape, 6 to 7 out of 11 members are white. But, more recently, the
federal council of the DA in the Western Cape - four out of the top five in
that executive - still portrays the old non-nonracial agenda.

Therefore we are telling other members and people of this country that we
should not move back to the past but, in fact, we should move into the
future in creating a nonracial, nonsexist and democratic society.
[Applause.]

 PROBLEMS AT PRINCE MSHIYENI MEMORIAL HOSPITAL AND KING EDWARD VIII HOSPITAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs H S MSWELI (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, recent newspaper reports have
revealed that some KwaZulu-Natal hospitals are experiencing a range of
problems. The disappearance of a baby from the mortuary at Prince Mshiyeni
Memorial Hospital is one sad case. The body of Zinhle Shabane’s newborn
baby disappeared without trace after there was no one to receive it at the
mortuary.

The Mail & Guardian has listed many other problems that cause poor service
delivery and compromise the health of patients at the Prince Mshiyeni
Memorial Hospital and at the King Edward VIII Hospital.

The Department of Health should acknowledge the fact that a staff shortage
is the major cause of these problems. In rural hospitals there is also not
enough staff to deal with the backlogs. It is unfair for the department to
expect staff working under these abnormal constraints to cope. We believe
the problems facing our health centres are structural and that they
therefore need the intervention of the Minister and his department. I thank
you.


                      WORLD BANK LOAN FOR SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ID understands the
importance of the World Bank loan for South Africa. We know that we
desperately need this money for the completion of the Medupi Power station,
the construction of a concentrated solar thermal power plant, and a wind
farm. However, what is even more important to the ID is to ensure that
there is clean governance in our electricity sector, and that the ANC does
not profit from government contracts or have a vested financial interest in
a coal-based future.

It is for this reason that last week the ID wrote to the World Bank
demanding that it should not give the loan to South Africa unless
Chancellor House divests its shares in Hitachi Power Africa. The ID will
stop at nothing to ensure that the ANC, through its front company
Chancellor House, is not allowed to make billions of rand from our
electricity build programme.
It is a bitter irony that we have to resort to the World Bank to get the
ANC simply to live up to its word when it stated two years ago that it
would divest these shares. It has also been farcical to watch some members
of the ANC trying to defend the indefensible. This sorry debacle once again
points to the need for comprehensive legislation regulating political party
funding in South Africa. The ID will now step up its campaign to ensure
that this finally happens. I thank you. [Applause.]

               TREATMENT OF CHURCHES IN KHAYELITSHA, CAPE TOWN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv Z L MADASA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC is gravely concerned about
the alleged repulsive treatment of churches in Cape Town’s African township
by the Cape Town municipality and the Western Cape provincial government.
The Cape Town municipality and the Western Cape provincial government have
been demolishing church structures, and this is a matter that we witnessed
as MPs. They have also been evicting church members from schools and
community halls which have served as their temporary places of worship.

This is despite an agreement made just before the elections between the
leaders of these churches and the then mayor Madam Helen Zille. This
agreement was organised by the Western Cape Case Management Forum, the
WCCMF. In terms of this agreement Madam Zille agreed, just before the
elections, that the onslaught against the churches would be halted until
alternative settlement had been identified.

The ANC is of the view that the city and the provincial government should
rather be partnering with the religious communities, particularly black
churches, to deal with poverty, crime, drug abuse and HIV and Aids, rather
than waging an onslaught against them.

Therefore the ANC, through the Chief Whip of the Majority Party Dr Mathole
Motshekga, has submitted a formal request to the SA Human Rights Commission
to conduct an investigation into complaints of gross human rights
violations conducted by the City of Cape Town. The ANC trusts that the
commission will take appropriate corrective measures to bring relief to
these communities. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                        INDUSTRIAL POLICY ACTION PLAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI (IFP): Mr Speaker, Parliament is engaged in
deliberations on the Industrial Policy Action Plan. Most of the industry
which appeared at the public hearings, as well as trade unions, called for
subsidies, export credits, high tariff import areas, privileged procurement
practices, and monopolistic and dominant market positions, in order to
maintain their viability and employment levels.

This is the flipside of the announcement that the Chief Whip gave us about
the BMW contract. Neither the fiscus nor consumers have sufficient money to
pay for all these protectionist measures, which unavoidably result in
higher state expenditure and consumer prices.

Our government should rather focus on identifying one or two industries
which, through massive and focused state assistance and intervention, can
be turned into winners, capable of producing goods and services for the
entire world. The global factory is the new dimension of manufacturing in
the post-Depression economic environment. These should become the focus of
the Department of Economic Development, so as to follow the Taiwanese model
of development.

Let us have a rendezvous with history, by readying ourselves to meet
biotechnology where it will be in 10 years’ time, rather than a thousand
unsustainable subsidies. Let us invest in a Silicon Valley-type
biotechnology park, funded by government, to become the catalyst for the
incubation and the development of such an industry, with shared government-
funded facilities for research and development, laboratories, product
commercialisation, and purchasing of foreign technology for domestic
investment.

By taking bits and pieces from the Department of Trade and Industry, the
Department of Economic Development is adding no value but is creating
problems, such as removing Khula Direct from the same administrative
functional line to which the National Empowerment Fund, NEF, belongs.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, just for your information: In case more members
are curious as to why Minister Manuel is not seated in his usual seat, the
Minister recently underwent a back operation, and arrangements are being
made for him to sit where he is standing. [Laughter.]

                  INTEGRATED ENERGY CENTRE IN EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs B TINTO (ANC): Speaker, on 27 February 2010, the Department of Energy,
jointly with Sasol, hosted a sod-turning event for the setting up of an
integrated energy centre in Qunu, Eastern Cape. The opening of the
integrated energy centre gave credence to the ANC-led government’s
commitment to ensuring access to affordable and reliable sources and the
long-cherished dream of diversifying energy sources towards increased
utilisation of alternative energy carriers.

Access to energy sources is critical in ensuring that we eradicate energy
poverty, which has dogged our communities. Consistent with the ANC-led
government’s stance on achieving social justice, access to diverse energy
sources remains paramount in ensuring that we build sustainable
communities. In order to ensure increased access to nongrid energy sources
in rural communities, partnerships between government and the private
sector are the way to go.

The ANC-led government will continue to be resolute in eradicating energy
poverty in the rural areas of South Africa, by using the integrated energy
centre as a tool for access to affordable energy. We also commend Sasol for
its commitment in ensuring access to energy sources in our rural areas. We
also call on other companies in the energy sphere to follow suit. I thank
you. [Applause.]

     CONTRACTORS PAID IN MOPANI DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY FOR WORK NOT DONE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Speaker, the Mopani District Municipality in
Limpopo, under the ANC, is in a sorry state of affairs. It has emerged that
funds, provided by the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs to
sink boreholes in the municipality, were paid to contractors at prices up
to 10 times more than the market price.

After an inspection by the department, no boreholes were found to have been
sunk. To make matters worse, a contractor was apparently paid R1,8 million
for a sewerage booster pump station to improve sewerage pond overflow, but
shock and horror: On investigation by the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs, no pond was found. In fact, there is no space for a
pond.

The DA is in possession of documentation that shows that an instruction was
given to a contractor, BMK Electronics, to perform emergency work at
various water treatment works and an acknowledgment by the municipality
that the work was completed. The municipal manager, Mr M Maake, disputes
having given the instruction to contractors to do this work, but where is
the money?

The DA calls on the Auditor-General and the Public Protector to investigate
the allegations of money paid to contractors in the Mopani District
Municipality for work that has not been completed. The people of Giyani and
the surrounding towns in the district of Mopani have a right to receive the
service delivery that has been promised to them. There is a very urgent
need for accountability from all officials in this municipality. Thank you.
[Applause.]

          DYSFUNCTIONAL PUBLIC SCHOOLS SUFFER UNDER UNION POLITICS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L S NGONYAMA (Cope): Speaker, the public education system is at a
crossroads. It is failing the poorest of the poor who rely on public
education. The upper and middle class can escape public schools and send
their children to private schools. The Minister of Basic Education has
admitted that 80% of the public schools in the country are dysfunctional.

Cope, therefore, calls on Minister Motshekga to take a firm stance in
favour of quality education for all children and against the bullying
tactics of the ANC-aligned SA Democratic Teachers’ Union, Sadtu. The Sadtu
proposal for a 100% increase in the threshold for participation in the
Education Labour Relations Council is clearly aimed at emasculating all
other teacher unions. If implemented, it will turn this council into just
another arena where the feuding alliance partners will fight it out. This
will have devastating consequences for our democracy.

Minister, we call on you to deal with the matter with the urgency it
deserves, as it begins to undermine the Constitution of our country. I
thank you.

                               WORLD MATHS DAY

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr J J SKOSANA (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC views World Maths Day as an
important day – a day to celebrate international numbers when children try
to set a record in answering arithmetic questions. They participate at home
and at schools against other students around the world in live games of
mental arithmetic.

World Maths Day was launched in March 2007, and uses the Internet to unite
school students around the globe and to set a world record by answering
more than 10 million mathematics-related questions in 48 hours.

South Africa’s poor scores in international assessments of numeracy
prompted the ANC to launch the Foundations for Learning campaign a year
ago, with a call to schools to focus on reading, writing and calculating.

This internationally acclaimed competition was hosted this year on 3 March
by Johannesburg - a world-class city with an African soul. We were very
exited to host this event, especially since this is such a big year for
South Africa.

The World Maths Day competition endorses the importance of quality
mathematics education. Encouraging learners to enjoy mathematics is vital,
and this competition offers a wonderful opportunity to do just that. This
is in line with the ANC’s commitment to improving the quality of schooling,
particularly performance in mathematics, science, technology and language
development.
The ANC congratulates our three World Maths Day ambassadors: Romeo M from
Pridwin Preparatory School, Daniel H from St Stithians Boys’ Preparatory
School, and Lunë S from Midstream College Primary School. They are 11, 12
and 13 ... [Time expired.]

                       FEE INCREASES IN FISHING SECTOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Speaker, the planned increases, as they stand, for
rights, permits and licences in the various fishing sectors are exorbitant
and unjustifiable. The gazetted notice published in late January suggested
that the already hard-pressed South African consumer would now be burdened
by fee increases in the commercial and the recreational fishing sectors
that, in some cases, are higher than 400%.

The outrage of fishers against the proposed increases has been
considerable. In KwaZulu-Natal alone, DA public representatives collected
the signatures of 2 200 fishers who oppose the proposal. In total, 300 000
recreational fishers are affected by these proposals.

After some public consultation, it does seem like sanity will prevail and
that government will rethink the proposals. If this is the case, then it is
important that the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs or the
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries - whoever takes over the
fisheries function on 1 April - says publicly that the gazetted proposals
will not be implemented.

While one might argue that some of the fees currently used are too low, the
proposed increases in fee prices, as originally presented in January, were
not accompanied by any justification and methodology. Whether the January
proposal is maintained or a new proposal is tabled, Marine and Coastal
Management, MCM, must give the public an explanation of what they hope to
achieve by the increase in permit fees.

Most notably, could the public be assured that MCM will fulfil all of its
functions to an acceptable standard, and will it improve the ongoing
engagement with stakeholders in the spirit of co-management? Marine and
Coastal Management must produce a peer review study to publicly set out the
full methodology and conclusions which justify any proposed increases. They
must produce a proper financial assessment that will stand up to public
scrutiny as to the impact the increases will have on job losses and
sustainable livelihoods. I thank you. [Applause.]

                           COMMUNITY POLICE FORUMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Hon Speaker, community police forums, CPFs, were
established to ensure that there is consistent interaction between the
local police station and the community it serves. A CPF is a legitimate
forum for the community to raise challenges and to make inputs into the
priorities of the station.

Community members can provide valuable information that can lead to the
arrest of the people after crimes are committed. Communities can also
assist in providing intelligence that can lead to the prevention of crimes.
There are many success stories, and where CPFs are functioning well and
enjoy a good relationship with the police, crime in the area comes down.

The Minister indicated that he was looking at proper funding for CPFs to
further strengthen their work and increase their impact in the fight
against crime. In the Western Cape, under the leadership of the longing-for-
the-past and anti transformation DA, the premier decided to stop funding
community police forums. This is a serious indication of a lack of
understanding of the complexities of the fight against crime.

The DA and the premier will have to take responsibility for the negative
impact that this decision will have on the progress that the police make in
the fight against crime in the Western Cape. As the ANC in the Western
Cape, we would like to urge the Minister to intervene in this matter, and
to assist all responsible citizens of the Western Cape in stopping this
process.

We believe the DA’s decision to start neighbourhood watches in the place of
CPFs will lead to problems. No formal framework exists that can regulate
the interaction between the police and the neighbourhood watches. The
existence of CPFs empowers the people, and the ANC cannot allow the DA in
the Western Cape to create an island where our people become second-hand
citizens, as with the building of toilets. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! The PAC has not been able to use its opportunity or
slot. Does the ANC wish to take the slot?

                            MORETELE OFFICE PARK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J M MALULEKE (ANC): Hon Speaker, on 1 March 2010, the North West
department of public works handed over the Moretele Office Park to various
departments to assist Moretele residents, as most of the offices were
affected by the cross-border issue.

The people of the Moretele Local Municipality thank the government of the
ANC for bringing services to the people as promised. Chief Mathibe and
Chief Makapan, who are known supporters of the UCDP, publicly congratulated
the ANC government on bringing about these services. As the ANC, we
congratulate the Makapanstad United Taxi Association on supporting the
government by opening the route for the people of Maubane, Greenside,
Potoane, Thulo and Prieska to enable them to also be able to access the
services.

The offices were a contract of the Expanded Public Works Programme. Forty-
eight people were employed: 38 females and 10 males. These offices are
occupied by the department of public works, and by social services, health,
education and agriculture, conservation, arts and culture, home affairs,
etc.

Despite the many challenges we face as the ANC government, we will always
try our best to bring services as close to the people as possible to ensure
that the services rendered help to improve the lives of the people,
especially the poor. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

                        INDUSTRIAL POLICY ACTION PLAN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Speaker, I would like to respond to the
question or statement made by the hon Oriani-Ambrosini, and say that
whatever may or may not have been presented in the hearings, it is not the
intention of the government to deploy vast subsidies to support a myriad of
industries across the country - that is not the thrust of the Industrial
Policy Action Plan. Rather, our approach is to work with industry and with
labour to identify key bottlenecks that we need to overcome in a defined
range of industries, taking some account of the complexity in the
industrial processes in the country.

One of the main focuses, in fact, is on the thorough transformation of the
industrial financing mechanism, precisely so that we don’t have to deploy
subsidies on a continuous basis with regard to various industries. The hon
member is part of the portfolio committee and we look forward to having an
opportunity to engage in a systematic way with the report of the portfolio
committee when it emerges.

As far as the remarks he has made about the relationship between our
department and that of Economic Development, I think the hon member doesn’t
seem to understand that while we have agreed to a series of transfers of
functions between our departments, we have actually also done that in the
context of the creation of a symbiotic relationship, which is reaching
beyond silos, and which I think is setting a new tone of co-operative
working together within government. He clearly doesn’t understand that, but
I think that there would be some clarity as we engage on the Budget Votes
of the different departments. Thank you very much.

                      WORLD BANK LOAN FOR SOUTH AFRICA
                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Mr Speaker, I just want to respond to the question
or statement made by the hon Greyling on the World Bank loan. I want to say
that it is really painful and disappointing to have an hon member of this
House indicating publicly that he wrote to the World Bank demanding that
they not approve the Eskom loan, primarily because I believe that this high
level of unpatriotic behaviour is an indication of the lack of care that we
have in parties that are sitting in this House. [Interjections.]

I have never seen this lack of empathy for low-income-level people, our
poorest of the poor, who, if we don’t get the World Bank loan, will carry
the brunt of the tariff, because we’ll have to make sure that ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order!

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: We will have to make sure that we then take money
from other services to be able to fund the Eskom programmes. I believe that
if we really care about the very people who voted for us to be in this
House, we would be able to understand why it is important that we get
sponsorships as well as loans for Eskom.

I also want to indicate here that it is important that we understand that
the World Bank loan is not just any ordinary loan. It is also intended to
make sure that we can have renewable energy, the clean technology we are
talking about, so as to make sure that we diversify our energy mix, to
ensure that we can desist from an overreliance on fossil fuel.

Regarding the issue that the hon member also raised about Eskom and
Hitachi, I think it is important that we understand that Eskom was going to
be carrying the responsibility for these contracts irrespective of the
configuration of the consortiums that have the contracts to build the
Medupi power station. But I also want to indicate that the ANC ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                  POOR ROAD MAINTENANCE IN EKURHULENI METRO
                           COMMUNITY POLICE FORUMS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Speaker, there is continual interaction between the
media houses represented by the SA National Editors’ Forum, Sanef, and the
police so that we clarify what the do’s and don’ts are. Much as there are
do’s and don’ts in the journalistic fraternity, so you will find in the
police.

I just want to say on the abuse of roads, as the member said, that perhaps
it would be good for him to set an example: If one drives a Q7, one must
respect the roads and respect the people who are using the roads - from
where one comes from to Parliament. That would help a lot. That’s where
abuse comes in. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

On the issue of community police forums, I just want to say that we’ll ask
everybody and request everyone to ensure that communities are mobilised in
the structures in the fight against crime, because if we create a vacuum
there, anybody who takes a decision to do that would be liable for any
criminal activity which happens in that particular area. I have noted what
the member has said. Thank you very much.

                  POOR ROAD MAINTENANCE IN EKURHULENI METRO
         DA PERPETUATION OF WHITE PRIVILEGE AT ITS RECENT CONFERENCE
     CONTRACTORS PAID IN MOPANI DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY FOR WORK NOT DONE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Speaker,
on the issue of potholes, I want to request Mr Waters to stop politicising
service delivery, because it is us ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Let the speaker be heard.
The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: It is us,
through the state of local government reports, who identified these
challenges and problems.

The reason I say he must stop politicising this issue is because there are
so many potholes in the Western Cape, even in the parts of the other
municipalities under the DA. [Interjections.] We have the reports, and we
are saying it is important that we focus on the issues at hand and stop
politicising, because we are pretending that municipalities under the DA
are good municipalities.

Let me move to the issue of cadre deployment. In the Cape Town Metro, you
have 18 000 workers. One hundred and thirty of them, at a management level,
were employed by the ANC. The last batch that is being removed – hounded -
is going at the end of this month. [Interjections.] All bright black people
are being removed by the DA, because they want to put their people in these
positions. What do you call that? That is cadre deployment. [Applause.]

Speaker, I want to conclude ...

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: I want to
conclude by saying that on the issue of the boreholes in Limpopo, we will
be able to follow up on that issue, because the ANC, as an organisation,
does not support corruption. We want to uproot it wherever it exists.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

In the past, the hon member came forward with the issues and we did attend
to them, but now she is playing politics — she is in the gallery - by
raising these issues without following the procedures that we have
developed between us and her party. We would like to ask the member to
raise the issues with us in future, and we will attend to them as we
usually do. Thank you. [Applause.]

          DYSFUNCTIONAL PUBLIC SCHOOLS SUFFER UNDER UNION POLITICS
                               WORLD MATHS DAY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Speaker, on the SA Democratic Teachers’
Union’s proposal to increase the threshold to qualify in the labour
relations council, the matter is still to be tabled formally. Therefore, it
is quite difficult to engage on it, hon member. [Interjections.] It is not
sub judice. It is still not formal; it is rumoured elsewhere. Speaker, I
think it will be quite useful for members to resist or desist from using
our challenges in education as an excuse for any fights or threats that
they may have.

I suspect the member from Cope is concerned about the rumoured ambitions of
Mr Madisha to form a teachers’ union and this is about to ...
[Interjections.] But the matter is quite serious. As I was saying to the
member, let’s engage on the issue when it arises, because it is quite
serious, and then let’s engage when it is formally tabled.

As a department we would like to support the second point, which was raised
about the maths day. In fact, all of us here in our constituencies should
begin to excite our children around maths and all the gateway subjects.
Therefore, we do welcome the statement, and we wish all members would also
use this opportunity to excite members through their constituency offices.
Thank you. [Applause.]

               TREATMENT OF CHURCHES IN KHAYELITSHA, CAPE TOWN

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Somlomo, i-DA ikhangeleka njengengqokelela
yabantu abangakwaziyo ukulawula. [Kwahlekwa.] Bayabhatyaza, bayabhutyuza,
bachitha iicawa, bachith’ amangcwaba, bakha nezindlu zangasese
ezingagqumekanga ezidala ukuba abantu babe kwampengempenge xa besiya
ngasese. Linye ke icebo; abantu baseKapa mabakhuphe i-DA esihlalweni.
Yeyona nto iza kusinceda leyo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] I-DA ngumbutho wabacinezeli,
oonomgogwana noovukayibambe; masiyihlome ihlasele kuphela. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, the DA appears to be a bunch of people
who cannot govern. [Laughter.] They are just incoherent and inefficient.
They are demolishing churches, desecrating graves, constructing open-air
toilets that do not allow for privacy. There is only one solution: The
community of Cape Town must remove the DA from government in the Western
Cape. That is the only thing which will help us. [Applause.] The DA is a
party of oppressors, illegitimate and disorderly leaders. Let’s mobilise
and overthrow it. [Applause.]]

 ABSENCE OF THE PRESIDENT FROM PROCEEDINGS, AND ALLOCATION OF TIME TO PARTY
                      BRINGING MOTION OF NO CONFIDENCE

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with this motion, I would like
to refer to a question that was raised during the programming committee
meeting this morning regarding the absence of the President in the House
today. Members may recall that today the President was initially expected
to respond to questions. However, owing to an international commitment, the
date for questions to the President was moved, by agreement, to 24 March.

Therefore the President could not be in the House today. In any event,
there is no requirement in the Constitution or the Rules for the President
to be present when a motion of no confidence in him is being considered by
the House. I now wish to invite the hon Dandala to address the House.
[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order: Before the hon
Dandala starts, if I may, sir, it would appear from the speakers’ list that
Cope has been given a total of four minutes in this debate. Now, there is a
long-standing convention in this House, going right back to 1994, which
says very clearly, and has always been understood, that the party that
proposes a motion will be given extra time. In fact, Mr Speaker, that time
has usually been in the region of 10 minutes.

I believe it is a fatal flaw in this debate, and I cannot think of any
reason why it should have happened — why Cope has not been given additional
time in this debate — other than that the ANC wishes to shut Cope down.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Hon member, you know as well as I do that
the allocation and management of speaking time is the responsibility of the
Whips. Whips are indeed employed as such for the smooth functioning of the
House. It is not for the Speaker to interfere with the allocation of time.
It is the responsibility of the Whips. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, may I address you on that, please, sir? There has
always been an agreement between parties. I do know that Cope has asked for
additional time in this debate, and has been denied by the ANC. The
importance of this is really great, because we are setting a precedent
today for when future motions are debated in this House. Is the ANC going
to shut down every other party in the future, in the same way they have
shut down Cope today?

Mrs J D KILIAN: Thank you, Speaker, for raising the issue that I have also
written to you about, as Speaker of the House. I believe it is important
for the House to note that we have followed the right route and that is to
ask the Chief Whip of the Majority Party for extra time. That was declined.
It was said that it would be strictly proportional. Thereafter, I
approached your office. You then informed us that it was not the role of
the Speaker to grant extra time.

However, we just want to place on record that we have done the appropriate
thing, and we cannot but concur with the hon Deputy Chief Whip of the DA
that this is a clear attempt to silence us on a very important
constitutional matter. Thank you.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, I just want to bring to your attention
that in terms of the Constitution, you bear the final and sole
responsibility of ensuring the conduct of these proceedings. The Whips may
carry some delegated responsibilities, but if, in fact, the convention
exists in the allocation of time, you bear the final responsibility of
enforcing it and applying it correctly with equanimity.

Mr C T FROLICK: Hon Speaker, from the side of the ANC, we want to
acknowledge that indeed Cope did approach us for additional time. We gave
them our position, and the hon Kilian indicated that they fully understand
our position. I thus do not understand the reason why this matter is being
dealt with in this way.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I do not want to entertain any more debate on the
matter. We have listened to the concerns expressed, and I would really urge
that the Whips deal with the matter, even in future.

  MOTION OF NO CONFIDENCE IN THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev H M DANDALA: Mr Speaker, Cope feels very strongly that our country has
abandoned and wilfully squandered the moral high ground that we, as a
country, occupied so proudly after 1994. The President of our country has
let us down. He has let Africa and the world down. Our destiny, that looked
so promising until a few months ago, now faces a universal erosion of
goodwill.

On behalf of Cope, I move the draft resolution printed in my name on the
Order Paper as follows:

  That the House -

     1) has no confidence in the President of the Republic; and


  (2) in terms of section 102(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of
       South Africa, 1996, passes a motion of no confidence in him for his
       failure to live up to the expectations of a broad spectrum of South
       Africans.


A few examples demonstrate the flagrant violation of the oath that he took
when he occupied this highest office. It is common knowledge that the
President has failed this nation by setting a poor example through his
repeated risky sexual behaviour, thus weakening the crucial fight against
HIV and Aids.

He has failed to exercise any leadership over his Cabinet, some of whom
continue to send conflicting messages of what is acceptable, ethical and
moral behaviour.

He has failed to act against approximately 2 000 public servants who are
alleged to have stolen more than R650 million from the public purse.

Despite having the Ginwala commission’s report available to him, he failed
to exercise good judgement and appointed a man of dubious record and poor
capability as the National Director of Public Prosecutions.

He has failed to lead on issues of accountability to this Parliament by not
declaring his assets and liabilities on time, and only doing so eight
months later and under public pressure.

This sad reality, rather than any politicking or having a vengeful vendetta
against the President, is why we are bringing this motion before this
House. The President swore at his inauguration:

      I commit myself to the service of the nation with dedication,
      commitment, discipline, integrity, hard work and passion.

Speaker, the President has, by his own wilful conduct and dangerously
flawed judgement, lost the confidence of this House and the nation. He
should do the honourable thing and resign his office. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Speaker, Deputy
President, hon members, from the outset, let me restate the historical fact
that the real Congress of the People is the ANC. [Applause.] As a majority
party, it is, therefore, through the ANC that the people speak of their
representation in the executive.
At our 52nd conference, at Polokwane in December 2007, delegates
overwhelmingly elected Comrade Jacob Zuma as the President of the real
Congress of the People, the ANC. We did not, at that time, release any
white smoke into the Limpopo University chimneys, because we were very
clear in our minds that we had not elected a pope, but a human being who
has human strengths and human frailties, like all of us. [Applause.]

On 22 April 2009, 11 650 748 voters – what we consider to be a broad
spectrum of South Africans and nearly 70% of the electorate – voted for the
real Congress of the People, the ANC, led by President Zuma, to be the
government of this great Republic. [Applause.]

One million more people voted for the ANC in 2009 than in 2004, and yet,
today, the arrogance of a mere 30 people in this House is trying to tell us
that millions of our people were wrong. The collective minds of these
millions of our people are convinced that our great movement, the ANC, the
real Congress of the People, and its President, are fit and proper to run
this great Republic.

This motion goes contrary to the recent findings of the Ipsos Markinor
survey of February 2010, which had the following to say:

   At the start of 2010, President Zuma is in an enviable position in terms
   of his public rating. He begins the year with 77% of the population
   agreeing that he is doing his job fairly well or very well.

[Applause.]

   This is the highest rating for a President since May 2006 ...


This means that the President of the real Congress of the People, the ANC,
at 77%, is more popular than the ANC itself, at 70%.

As the ANC we’ve never wavered from our understanding that each president
of the ANC – from Rev John Langalibalele Dube to Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma
– would come and go, but each one of them would leave an indelible mark on
the character of this great movement, responding to the particular
challenges of their tenure and the challenges of the stage of our national
democratic revolution.

I am, therefore, very surprised that we are gathered here today to
entertain the views of a mere 30 people who are driven by motives other
than those of honesty, particularly with regard to democratic majority
rule. I venture to say that, had we been alive to the current challenges of
our communities, and were it not for the permissiveness of our
constitutional democracy – for which we, the real Congress of the People,
the ANC, take full credit – such a motion would not have been tabled.

As we deliberate this issue, we are inadvertently being made partners in
throwing a lifeline to an entity that is drowning under the inconsistencies
of its own power hunger. [Applause.] As I speak, I do not know who of the
three – you know who they are – my eyes should be fixed on, because my
action may be misunderstood to mean my endorsement of one character, as
opposed to the other. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

This is the gravity of their leadership squabble that I’m talking about
that characterises Cope. This House is being roped in to being fellow
sojourners on a journey of 30 disgruntled members who have not come to
terms with the realities of democratic politics in South Africa, of winning
and losing.

I rise not because I’m a Member of this Parliament who’s expected to defend
the integrity of our President. I rise because many of us are very
surprised that the proposers have entered a motion of no confidence in the
President, knowing very well that their motion will not see the light of
day, but that they will get their cheap publicity all the same. [Applause.]


If we, hon members of this august body, do not rise, this new tendency to
grandstand will continue unabated. On two previous occasions we have seen
the same group of people using this Parliament for cheap publicity.

Firstly, when they proposed a candidate to contest the Presidency of the
Republic, they knew very well that it would be easier to win Powerball and
Lotto than the Presidency. [Applause.]

Secondly, when they tried to precipitate a crisis by walking out of this
Chamber last month, because they disagreed with the ruling of the Deputy
Speaker, they may have got their six cents’ worth of the media spotlight,
but the wheels of democracy continue to grind on, thanks to the political
parties that stayed behind and fulfilled their mandate which they have been
given by our electorate.

The track record of Cope – from Polokwane, to their internal problems, to
the current motion – seems to border on anarchy. Cope has displayed
characteristics of being a party of failures.

One, Cope failed to launch itself as a party in the hastily organised
conference in Bloemfontein on 16 December 2008. Two, Cope cannot create
unity even amongst its arbitrarily self-appointed leadership. Three, it
deceived the electorate by promising to have a manifesto, but did not even
have a policy upon which to base that manifesto. [Applause.] Four, the
party deceived the electorate by promising them that they would be the next
government, but later changed their tune by claiming they were going to be
the next official opposition. [Applause.] Five, they claimed that they
would be an effective opposition ...

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, I rise on a point of order: The hon Minister, who
happens to be the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development,
should well know that we could not have participated in an election without
the necessary constitution as an organisation. Secondly, we have registered
our name as The Congress of the People, Cope ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that is not a point of order. Please take your
seat. Continue, hon member.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Five, they claimed
that they would be an effective opposition, but the deputy leader of Cope
is never seen in the corridors of Parliament, and their leadership has
become moribund.

South Africans have voted and they have expressed a vote of no confidence
in Cope. I say this because this group has, on two occasions since
Polokwane, in 2007 and in April 2009, dismally failed to get political
recognition through democratic processes and is now using this House to win
their vote.

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, there’s a point of order.

Ms A MDA: Mr Speaker, will the hon Minister take a question?

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I don’t belong to
the youth wing of Cope. [Applause.] I’ve observed that the timing of this
motion is not accidental. There are three clear indications that the timing
was carefully considered.

Firstly, misled again by some sections of the media that hyped up their
earlier existence, Cope labours under the illusion that the ANC-led
alliance is about to unravel. This will never happen. Secondly, we have
noted that, after trying to postpone the inevitability of an elective
conference since 16 December 2008, the youth wing is pushing them for an
elective congress. Thirdly, after a long courtship, there’s now a mooted
multimatrimonial relationship led by the DA.

Let me highlight a few examples of why we, the real Congress of the People,
the ANC, and the majority of South Africans, think that our President is a
fit and proper person to lead this country, and that the motion of no
confidence is a spurious allegation.

Our President facilitated the end of the Burundian conflict, after taking
over as a facilitator from our iconic former President Nelson Mandela, who,
in turn, took over from Mwalimu Nyerere.

On 12 December 2009, President Jacob Zuma was awarded the title of Best
African President for his role in the liberation of our country and on the
African continent at the African Consciousness Media Leadership Awards.
[Applause.]

Two weeks ago, Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain, invited our
President on a state visit as one of two world leaders who are invited
annually by her. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Except for one
racist tabloid indiscretion by one Stephen Robinson of the British Daily
Mail, among many media in the UK, this state visit was declared among the
most successful state visits ever undertaken by a South African President.
[Applause.]

In December last year, at the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference, our
President, together with leaders from the United States, China, Brazil and
India facilitated the Copenhagen Accord which has now been accepted by the
African Union.

As I speak today, 18 March 2010, the President is currently facilitating
the Global Political Agreement in Zimbabwe, and on his shoulders rest the
hopes and aspirations of all Zimbabweans. [Applause.]

Our government today, under his leadership, has been restructured so that
all Ministers are monitored on the basis of outcomes-based performance
agreements.

Allow me, as I conclude, to borrow words of wisdom from the Holy
Scriptures, and quote Matthew chapter 7:

   Do not judge, so that you may not be judged. For with the judgment you
   make you will be judged, and the measure you give will be the measure you
   get. Why do you see the speck in your neighbour’s eye but do not notice
   the log in your own eye? Or how can you say to your neighbour, “Let me
   take the speck out of your eye,” while the log is in your own eye? You
   hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see
   clearly to take the speck out of your neighbour’s eye.


I’m highlighting this fact so that those who counsel us on the Good Book
should know that much more is expected of them.

This motion by Cope has, therefore, the wrong target. It should be a motion
of no confidence in the leadership of Cope. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Hon members, order! Please take your seats, hon
members. Order! Hon member, on what point are you rising?

An HON MEMBER: Speaker, it is a special order because when the Minister ...


The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat. You are out of order!

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, it is ironic that we have this
debate of no confidence less than one year into President Zuma’s term of
office. There is obviously clear opposition to this from the ANC. I think,
however, you protest too much. When you decided that you had lost
confidence in President Mbeki, you had no hesitation in expressing this by
recalling him. Hon Radebe, you forgot the millions of voters who voted for
him.

This is precisely the danger of having a president who is not directly
elected. This is, in fact, to the detriment of our democracy because this
fact allows the President either to hide behind the support of his or her
party or, in turn, for the party to claim its support for itself and recall
the President at a whim.

President Zuma’s actions or lack thereof have damaged the people’s faith in
his ability to lead South Africa properly. I know that it is unreasonable
to expect any public representative to enjoy the full confidence of the
entire citizenry all the time. Such a state of affairs is not possible in
the real world and highly unlikely in South Africa. However, it is
reasonable to expect that a public representative, and the President in
particular, should enjoy the broad support of the public, based on the
expectation that he has both the experience and the wisdom to make the
right decisions and in turn to articulate a vision and provide the
necessary leadership to give life to that vision.

Somlomo, kuba ilizwe lonke belithembele kwezi zinto, ingaba loo nto
ayithethi ukuba uMongameli wesizwe akaphumelelanga ukwenza njengoko
bekulindelekile kusini na? (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Speaker, seeing that the whole country was depending on these things,
doesn’t this mean that the President of the country has failed to deliver
as expected?]

We must not conflate the litany of policy programmes with purpose and
direction. Policies are important building blocks of any democracy, but,
unless they are held together by a set of coherent principles and values
that mirror the kind of society our Constitution envisions, they are
undermined from the first principle and work against that objective.

The President has simply made too many poorly considered decisions that
compromise good governance. He has also appointed people to key positions
as a form of political reward for loyalty to himself and his personal and
political travails. These have not always been in the best interests of the
government and they do not always represent commitment to excellence.

More pertinently, the President has failed to provide leadership on matters
of principle and to provide guidance and direction. The President says he
implements the collective decisions of the ANC. Frankly, this is not good
enough for South Africa, because the ANC is failing to give guidance to
itself, let alone the country.

Leadership is not about appeasing and compromise, for all its virtues can
easily be distorted down to a level at which no hard decisions or direction
are possible at all. This has often been the effect of the President’s
silence and also of his failure to identify what principles are at stake
and how best to protect them.

The President’s embracing of the Mbeki era’s policy of silent diplomacy
regarding Zimbabwe, which is classical appeasement, is a case in point. The
President misled this country into believing that he would adopt a
different approach to the octogenarian “President for Life”. He, too, has
been seduced by Mugabe’s wily ways.

This is not the worst, though. The fact that he agitates for the lifting of
targeted sanctions against Mugabe and his acolytes and tacitly supports the
latest harebrained scheme of indigenisation of foreign companies, sends
disinvestment shivers down the spines of potential foreign investors who
hold the key to economic growth and job creation in South Africa.

This spineless behaviour also places all South African investments in
Zimbabwe in jeopardy and begs the question: Whose interests does the
President represent — the citizens of both Zimbabwe and South Africa, the
South African investments in Zimbabwe, the reputation of SADC, or those of
Mugabe and his generals who have violated almost every law and human right
conceivable?

This pandering to a decrepit despot is also costing South Africa jobs, as
Zimbabweans compete in their millions for scarce job opportunities in South
Africa. My prediction is that President Zuma will return from his current
visit having achieved nothing or very little with regard to salvaging the
Global Political Agreement, GPA, that has been abrogated by Mugabe.

The President has also shown no appetite to deal with his chief
cheerleader, Mr Malema, because of his debt of gratitude stemming from
Polokwane. I know you will all shout Mr Malema’s praises again today, like
you did yesterday in the Human Rights Day debate, but I don’t expect you to
do anything else because of the position of your ANC President, who also
happens to be the President of South Africa.

Minister Pandor was correct yesterday when she said that all murders are to
be condemned, but the regular murder — one every 36 hours — of South
African farmers and farmworkers, black and white, is beyond the pale. The
incendiary and inciting song that exhorts the killing of “rapist farmers”
should not be tolerated. Both Mr Mantashe and especially the President are
in dereliction of their duty by condoning this call to arms in our
constitutional democracy. Their and Malema’s hands are being stained by the
blood of these defenceless victims who look to them to guide and protect
them in their own country.

Another issue of major concern that erodes confidence in the President is
his personal legal quandary that has been all but expunged by people who
appear to have been compliant when they should have held the independent
judicial line. The ANC policy of cadre deployment, which the President
endorses and applies with alacrity, especially in the realm of the
judiciary and the Judicial Service Commission, has no place in our society,
let alone in this venerable realm.

The President’s failure to unambiguously take a principled position on the
participation by his party’s investment arm, Chancellor Houses’ a
partnership with Hitachi, is reprehensible. Apart from the fact that the
Deputy President told this House that he was unaware of the deal, the
President has not done or said anything about this since being informed
thereof. It confirms the adage: There are none as deaf as those who do not
want to hear.

Speaking of not wanting to hear, it is becoming abundantly clear that the
President and his VIP protection unit, the police, some metro police units
and other arms of the security services are adopting a zero-tolerance
attitude towards law-abiding citizens and to any form of dissent and other
guaranteed human rights.

This is the antithesis of their constitutional role. We do not want to
return to a police state. We want to be protected by these services, not
bullied, beaten, raped, detained and even murdered, as has recently
occurred in Knysna and in other well-documented cases.

Some incidences involving the President himself confirm that this situation
is out of control, and this has deepened the loss of confidence in the
President. Let me refresh your memories about a few incidents.

Firstly, on 16 March 2010, there was the assault on Eyewitness News
photographer Tshepo Lesole by the President’s VIP unit.

Secondly, on l0 Feb 2010, there was the arrest and detention of Chumani
Maxwele, a University of Cape Town student on a training run, who was
arrested at gunpoint. His hands were tied behind his back, his head was
covered with a black bag and he was subjected to arrest without charge. He
was insulted and intimidated for 24 hours and his home was ransacked, all
for allegedly gesturing at the President.
Thirdly, on June 2008 – note when this took place; the President was not
president then — a VIP officer on Jacob Zuma’s armed convoy fired three
shots at the vehicle of an 84-year-old motorist who was deemed a threat.

Ndiqinisekile ukuba abantu abaninzi abalapha kule Ndlu namhlanje babephila
kabuhlungu ngaphambili phantsi kwengcinezelo yamapolisa, kodwa namhlanje
siyayamkela ingcinezelo yamapolisa. [I am sure that the majority of the
people in this House today unfortunately lived under police brutality
before, but today we accept that very same oppression.]

These are but a few of the issues and are coupled with the President’s own
personal challenges, not least of all the fact that he rejected the call
for wealth audits of senior politicians and public officials even though
there exist mechanisms and procedures to declare their interests, and he
himself only made such declarations under extreme public pressure, eight
and a half months after the deadline.

Die President sê dat hy ’n teenkorrupsiekommissie aangestel het, maar tot
nou toe is daar geen strategiese raamwerk vir die kommissie se werksaamhede
nie. Ek wonder of dit die oneerbare en vrugtelose uitgawes onder die
kabinetslede sal stop. Ek glo nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[The President is saying that he has appointed an anticorruption
commission, but up to now there has been no strategic framework within
which the commission should operate. I wonder whether this will bring an
end to improper and fruitless expenditure by members of the Cabinet. I
don’t think so.]

The DA, therefore, supports this motion of no confidence brought by Cope. I
am all too well aware that this will, in all likelihood, not lead to the
President’s impeachment, owing to the fact that some opposition parties
will be swayed either to abstain or to vote against it.

This watershed debate is like the metaphorical ladder in a stocking: It
starts as a small hole and ends up running through your divided government.
In the words of Lincoln, and I quote: “A house divided against itself
cannot stand.” I thank you. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Speaker, Your Excellency the Acting President,
hon Ministers and hon members, I think we must get this right, in that it
is important that the motion of no confidence be debated in this House. The
IFP does not support the motion, but we support Cope’s right to bring it
because it is an important exercise in democracy. Debates and decisions
about the President ought to be made in this House and in this House alone.


It is regrettable that the President has not appreciated the importance of
the debate by gracing it with his presence. It is also regrettable that our
Rules have not yet been brought into compliance with the Constitution and
best parliamentary practices requiring the voting on this motion by secret
ballot, as is the case in the election of the President.

Today we assert how the President and his Cabinet serve at the pleasure of
the members of this House, who have the ultimate right to fire both, and
the duty to do so when necessary. If we fail to use the powers the
Constitution gives us to hold the President accountable for his
shortcomings, we become equally responsible for them, because the vote of
no confidence empowers us all to rectify problems. This debate should be
part of such a process.

As I stated in the debate on the state of the nation address, I accepted
our President, warts and all, and pledged my personal support to ensure
that he does not fail because the country cannot afford it. The times are
too dire, the challenges too great and the risks too frighteningly high for
us to undermine the Commander-in-Chief at this juncture. But he must
perform, and perform soon. [Applause.]

This debate offers the opportunity for us all to qualify our support for
the President by defining what we expect of him, failing which a subsequent
vote of no confidence may have a different outcome.
At this juncture we pledge our support to the President, giving him the
benefit of the doubt after only nine months in office. We will tightly
monitor his progress, especially in respect of his stewardship in getting
us out of the economic crisis and building a competitive new industrial
base, while creating employment and addressing crime and corruption.

We want to see firm and immediate action, starting with this nonsense of
hate speech which he has allowed in his ranks. The singing of the “Kill the
boer” song, or the rapist songs, destroys whatever has been achieved by way
of reconciliation. It destroys Madiba’s legacy, which is also our joint
legacy. I’m not saying that our history should be swept under the carpet. I
think there is a difference between these songs, for instance: Hhayi, usizi
lomuntu omnyama e-Afrika. Zonke izizwe zisibeka phansi kwenyawo. [Ihlombe.]
[Oh, what a shameful situation a black man finds himself in, here in
Africa. All nations are keeping us under their feet.] [Applause.]

As time goes by, we may reassess the situation, although I hope this will
be not the case. It could be that the next motion of no confidence may be
moved by me, if the President does not live up to the expectations that
history has gathered around his person.

This occasion should also prompt us to reflect again on how much better off
the Republic would be if the offices of head of state and head of
government were to be split into a president who does not get involved in
the daily work of the government – who is not in the belly and dust of
politics – and a prime minister who governs, as contemplated in a pure
parliamentary system. I remember I tried to introduce this, but in fact it
was rejected out of hand.

In fact, it is likely that the Presidency will continue to become the
lightning rod on which the growing tensions of our society will concentrate
as long as the status quo remains, and its undermining will weaken the
Republic. A vote of no confidence passed on a prime minister, as head of
government, would not weaken the Republic if the president, as head of
state, remained unaffected by it. After all, he is our President. But, this
dual role of head of state and head of government will continue to make him
vulnerable as long as this remains the case. I thank you, Mr Speaker.
[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Mr Speaker, the ID is not taking this vote of no confidence
in the President lightly, because he has been elected as the President of
this country in a democratic election. However, he was not elected to do
whatever he wants to do with impunity and bring the country into disrepute.
The public has been extremely patient, but are also now tired of hearing
the regular apologies coming from the President.

Speaker, I want to say to the President in his absence that we will no
longer be misled by your smile and your fake apologies. South Africans
deserve a President who can uphold the dignity of his office, inspire us
and give us hope.

There are many ANC people on this side who agree with this motion in
private, but who are more afraid to stand up for the Constitution. I know
it. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mr Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, last year in
this House we asked the President about the political connections of
companies called Clident 1 and Clident 445 (Pty) Ltd, which had an interest
in the sale of Vodacom shares by Telkom. To date, he has not responded.

This year, we asked the President in this House about the massive financial
benefit for the ANC from the Eskom-Hitachi deal, which will be partly
funded with unpopular tariff hikes and a World Bank loan. Again he failed
to respond. Now we are being rushed to agree to a huge World Bank loan for
Eskom, just as was the case with the arms deal.

One begins to wonder whether the recent electricity crisis was purposefully
staged to create a state of panic, to ensure the approval of this massive
Eskom project for the benefit of the ruling party. Meanwhile, the majority
of citizens of this country are in a state of hopelessness.

The UDM does not have confidence in the ANC and its leadership in
government; it is no better than the Mbeki administration. This looting
must come to an end. I’m reminded of the German expression that the troughs
haven’t changed, only the pigs feeding from them.

Nikezelani ngale mali niyibuyisele kwiSebe lezeMali kulungiselelwe abantu
abahluphekayo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Give this money back to the Department of
Finance to cater for poor people.][Applause.]]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Speaker, it is always better in politics to play the
ball and not the man. That is not what we have seen today. The hon
President is a very loyal party man. All decisions are taken jointly,
whether by the national executive committee, the NEC, the national working
committee, the NWC, or the top six. However, it was Mr Zuma who was elected
by this House to become President. He is the President of the Republic and
nobody else, and that places on him a number of serious responsibilities.

Section 83(b) of the Constitution instructs the President, as the President
in his own right, to uphold, defend, and respect the Constitution. The
President must do so and not the NEC or the top six in the ANC; he must do
so.

This dictates that the President, regardless of party loyalties, should
defend the nation and the Constitution under all circumstances. That is his
responsibility. He should set the example and should be the first, for
example, to reprimand Mr Malema in public for incitement to violence and
advocacy of hatred. But he remained silent, and that was a mistake. Did the
ANC not say, “Together, we can do more”? Yes. Who? The ANC only, or all
South Africans? But, they allow Mr Malema to incite hatred and violence.

The FF Plus will support this motion of no confidence. However, the
important point of today’s debate is not the fact that this motion will be
defeated by the majority — that’s why you are the majority – but the fact
that today’s debate, this motion of no confidence, was brought by Cope and
not the DA.

That is the real importance of today’s debate, because we must understand
in our politics that if a motion like this is ever to succeed in South
Africa in future, it will be brought by a party like Cope, representing the
majority at that stage, and not by the DA, with its progressive core. That
is the reality of South Africa. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Mr Speaker, I’ve grown up to
respect the hon Mangosuthu Buthelezi, but I stand here to disagree totally
with the proposition he put forward here, and I will tell you why.

The vote of no confidence in President Zuma as proposed by Cope is fatally
flawed. The claim that the President has failed to live up to the
expectations of a broad spectrum of our society is nothing more than a
desperate grab at publicity by a bunch of media-hyped people. It provides
no specificity on what these expectations are.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: I believe it is improper
parliamentary language to refer to the Members of Parliament of Cope as a
bunch of desperate people. Will the Minister please withdraw that statement
immediately?

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, please withdraw.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: ... by a group of people who
have been hyped up by the media. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order! Hon Minister, withdraw and continue
with the debate.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Speaker, I withdraw “bunch”
and “people hyped up by the media”. I emphasise that I withdraw nothing
more.

The vote of no confidence provides no specificity on this expectation.
Neither does it provide any evidence of the purported claims. Hon members,
for us to debate what it is that we are ...

The SPEAKER: What point are you rising on, hon member?
Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Mr Speaker, I am trying to look at Rule 69. Can we read
it?

The SPEAKER: I will rule on that point after I have looked at the Hansard.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Mr Speaker, could I ask a question?

The SPEAKER: Minister, are you willing to take a question?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Mr Speaker, with respect, I
would rather that the Minister and I ...

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Ngenzeni kuwe, Xhamela? [What did I do to you,
Xhamela?] [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Nothing! [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order! Hon Shenge, after this session I am
going to act as a mediator. [Laughter.] Please continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: My father, Shenge, I will
tell you why we disagree. This is a frivolous motion, and it is an outright
waste of our time. It begs the question: Why are we even debating this? Why
do we come here and even put it on the Order Paper? Importantly, how do we
as Parliament deal with such frivolity in future?

I need to re-emphasise the point that the hon Mulder was trying to make
here: The basis of this motion is section 102(2) of the Constitution, which
requires, as hon Minister Jeff Radebe has indicated, that the majority of
this House sitting here must pass this particular motion.

Therefore, for this motion to pass, we need 50% plus one. It should be very
obvious to anyone, especially to the hon Mulder – who is numerically
literate – that for this motion to pass it must get the support of the ANC.
Nothing outside the ANC will get the 50% that you need, because, as we sit
here, the ANC is the majority party with 65,9% of the seats in this House.
How could Cope ever have imagined that they could carry this on 7,4%?

For those of us who are numerically challenged, it is important to note
that, at this point in our debate, the Cope motion can only, at best, be
supported by 25%, even if they were to combine all those members whom they
have lobbied. [Interjections.]

Hon De Lille, you can postulate outside. There is not a single member of
the ANC who would have supported this nonsense of a motion.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: I dare you to stand up and
say that! There isn’t a single one! [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order! Order!

An HON MEMBER: Mr Speaker ...

The SPEAKER: Please take your seat, hon member. Those in the gallery are
invited only to observe, not to participate. [Laughter.] Please continue,
hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Mr Speaker, to protect
themselves from such frivolity, most democracies require a threshold
against which support can be measured. There ought to be a threshold, not
only of support, but of substance, for a motion of this nature to even find
its way into a debate. This is the kind of stupidity we should not accept.

We verified with Parliament’s Rules and confirmed that the word “stupidity”
is parliamentary. Albert Einstein once said ...

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, I rise on a point of order: Could you please make
a ruling on the word “stupidity” because, firstly, this also refers to the
ANC Whippery who agreed to the debating of this motion. Secondly, perhaps
we could introduce the hon Minister of Defence and Military Veterans to the
Constitution, which gives us the right to debate a motion of no confidence.


The SPEAKER: Hon member, you are making a speech now. I am told that the
remark was not addressed to a specific individual.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Speaker, I did check: It is
not unparliamentary. Albert Einstein once said:

   The definition of stupidity is doing the same thing over and over and
   hoping for different results.

Cope continues with its hopeless pursuit of President Zuma, with disastrous
consequences; first in Polokwane, then in the national general elections,
and now they are going to be defeated disastrously here.

By entertaining frivolous motions of this nature, this House may well have
elevated ridiculous political immaturity to an undeserved status. I contend
that we carry an absolute majority mandate in this House, and again want to
emphasise that this motion would have needed the support of some members of
the ANC, which would not have happened. [Interjections.]

Speaker, I have had occasion to scrutinise the Rules of Parliament, and
have consulted, and this has been confirmed by my father here, the hon
Mangosuthu Buthelezi. We in the ANC would like to have a review of the
Rules of Parliament, because this matter is not regulated in the Rules of
Parliament.

Specifically, there should be an onus on any party proposing such a motion
to show that it has a reasonable opportunity to carry through the
constitutional provision of a majority. This should also ensure that there
is no abuse of the Constitution for purposes other than what it was
intended for, especially by the same people who always grandstand and stand
up there as protectors of the Constitution. We must stop this abuse.

Calling for a motion of no confidence in a President is a serious matter.
It is not something to be taken lightly. This constitutional provision is
intended to allow Parliament to use this provision should the President
fail on matters that he is constitutionally bound by. These matters are
very clearly spelt out in sections 83 and 84. Read the Constitution.
[Interjections.]

The allegations that are raised here about Zimbabwe and about Malema are
not remotely connected to the Constitution. What is there about
constitutional failure that you want to bring to our attention about
President Mugabe? What is there about constitutional failure that you want
to bring to our attention about Malema? Why should we be sitting here or
standing here discussing Malema?

The opposition parties’ latest publicity stunt comes as no surprise. As the
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development has indicated, it comes
at a time when the leadership of Cope has been accused of ineptitude, which
all of us can see. It has to resort to theatrics to respond to accusations
that it is being upstaged by the DA. And it continues to allow the DA to
upstage it. They want to use Parliament to address their leadership
squabbles. We should not allow this.

To Cope, I wish to say: Play the game, not the man. This is what has flawed
your politics for so long. You have been playing the man and it has
completely blinded your vision. You are obsessed with President Zuma. Get
off it! [Applause.]

I was disappointed that the hon president of the IFP did not stick to the
submission that he made to us at the state of the nation address. I want to
repeat, purely for emphasis, what he said:

   I respect President Zuma, warts and all, because behind him, rightly or
   wrongly, is the will of the democratic mandate of 66% of the South
   African people.

Hon Buthelezi, I wanted you to repeat this. You said that you could not
hinder or oppose, without opposing the people of South Africa. “I cannot
afford to see the President or his government fail”, you said to us. “If
they fail, my own country fails. If the President fails or the government
fails, I will not applaud or rejoice, but weep. For, if they fail, our
liberation fails.”

That’s what you said and that’s what I respect you for. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: On what point are you rising, hon Shenge?

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Speaker, I just want to find out from the hon
Minister whether, in fact, she is deaf, because I actually said those
things today. Everyone heard me say them. Is she deaf? [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: That is exactly what I am
emphasising on your behalf, Shenge, because I heard you loudly and clearly,
especially that, if the government fails, then our liberation fails.

In an act of desperation and consumed by a vengeful spirit, the Cope
leadership has tried to exploit the President’s willingness to accept where
he might have erred. The President is not beyond criticism and he is the
first to say so, and where he believes he has failed us, he is the first to
acknowledge it. Mbhazima, are you listening? He is the first one to
acknowledge this. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

Mr M S SHILOWA: Hon member ... Mr Speaker ...

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Hon Mbhazima Shilowa.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, we don’t address hon members by name.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Speaker, I had just hoped
that perhaps the word “acknowledge” might ring a bell with him.

Where President Zuma believes he has failed us, he is the first to
acknowledge it and apologise. We, who constitute 66% of this House, have
forgiven him. Here is a bitter pill for all of you to swallow: The Minister
of Justice and Constitutional Development has said — using the April 2009
election as a starting point — the TNS survey showed that President Zuma’s
approval rating rose from 40% at the beginning of 2009, to 52% at the time
of the election, and increased to 58% in November of the same year. The TNS
survey was led to argue that “... it is clear that many ordinary citizens
separate their approval of President Zuma from his private life”.
We are also pleased that the latest report from the Bureau of Economic
Research, which was published only last week, found that business
confidence had risen by 15% to 43% in the current quarter. This represents
the single biggest increase in 16 years. [Applause.] Eat your heart out and
tell us what you are griping about today.

What galls us is the sheer hypocrisy of the President’s detractors. To Cope
I wish to say: You are a bunch of sore losers, sour at democracy. Turn your
attention to yourselves. [Interjections.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask you to again ask the hon
Minister to withdraw the reference to “bunch”. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Mr Speaker, I was talking
about sour, and perhaps “bunch” does not arise there. But, sour losers,
sour at democracy. Turn your attention to yourselves.

An HON MEMBER: Mr Speaker ...

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister ...

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: I withdraw the bunch of
grapes, but sour nonetheless. [Applause.]

Check with your erstwhile friend the hon De Lille how her media-hyped
support very quickly dwindled to 0,9%. It is in the nature of politics that
the media can make you out to be more than what you are. Even when she is
busy drumming up support for her coalition of the disgruntled, she will
tell you how damaging it is to lose a deputy president of an organisation,
such as you have lost, and we gained her. Lynda Odendaal has seen the
light, not only because she discovered ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: ... what we have always told
everybody is that Cope is made up of permanently angry individuals who lost
a democratic contest; also, importantly, that we in the ANC are the only
people who can rise to the challenges of the nation. We stand here ready to
defend the hard-won freedoms of our democracy. The hypocrisy is so
sickening. Which one of these hon members sitting here in their individual
glass houses can throw a stone?

Hon Dandala, would it be you? [Laughter.] Never! Hon Shilowa, would it be
you? [Interjections.] Never! Any of you in Cope? Should I go on and name
you? No!

Hon Dandala, for what it is worth, get out of Cope while you can.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] It is a destructive energy over positions,
legitimised under your bishop’s cloth. Get out and go and serve the church
and ... [Interjections.] [Applause.]
The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Order! I would also like to remind people in the
gallery that they are our guests here; they should not participate.

An HON MEMBER: Speaker, this is a people’s Parliament.

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon member.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Speaker, while we are at it,
I propose that we throw this motion out. Hon Dandala can take it out with
him as he leaves. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Speaker, the ACDP is disappointed that the ANC has
decided to stifle debate on a very important motion by giving us only one
minute to tell the nation whether we support the motion before us or not.

The President has made our nation the laughing stock of the world by his
carelessness and repeated moral failures. He has undermined his own
government’s safe-sex message by having unprotected sex with his
mistresses.

Firstly, on behalf of the ACDP, I have advised the President to seek
counselling and sex addiction therapy, as was recommended to Tiger Woods,
who also had a similar problem of sleeping around. Since the President has
rejected our advice, we have, therefore, decided to support this motion of
no confidence today.

Secondly, corruption seems to be getting out of hand under his leadership.
Tender processes are undermined, thus benefiting a few connected
individuals while the poor are getting poorer. Under his government
leadership, state expenditure has increased substantially. In addition,
taxpayers will have to pay more than R15 million to maintain his three
wives.

Lastly, he has failed to show overall leadership in times of crisis and
violent protests caused by poor service delivery. Thank you. [Applause.]

Moh M N MATLADI: Motlotlegi Mmusakgotla, re le lekoko la UCDP re na le
dintlha tse di latelang mo ntlheng e ya tshisinyo kgatlhanong le
Moporesitente Zuma; UCDP e dumela mo go rateng motho, mo go tlotleng motho,
go mo direla, go mo rerisa le go mo itshokela. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[Mrs M N MATLADI: Hon Speaker, as the UCDP we have the following points to
make regarding the motion against President Zuma: The UCDP believes in
loving a person, respecting him, working for him, informing and being
patient with him.]

In the Bible, we have references to leaders who have erred like the hon
President — people like Abraham, King David, King Solomon, and others. God
had His own way of dealing with their behaviour.

We believe that this matter is too personal, that it has to be dealt with
in the political party to which the hon President belongs, since the South
African electoral system is not a constituency—based one, but one based on
proportional representation of parties. We say that for the other matters
of delivery that the hon members of the opposition have referred to, let us
give the hon President some extension of time, lest we evaluate him too
soon.

Ra re monyadiwa ga a bolawe. [We cannot expect a person to be perfect in
everything.]

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Mr Speaker, Mahatma Gandhi once said that true leaders are
those who add value to society, and a country which does not invest in its
youth does not have a future.

The President must forget about fanfare. The country is concerned about
ethics and values, and leaders have to set an exemplary example for the
youth to emulate. If not, we will deliver embarrassing products like Julius
Malema with his absurd slogans.

Everything has limitations. Human rights provisions have limitations, and
even traditions have limitations. We are judged. Independent analysts are
questioning our leadership of our country. When it comes to families, there
must be norms, for example the king’s expenses. The MF proposes that the
policy be reviewed.

However, the MF will indeed abstain, and rather calls upon the President
and the ANC to have a special lekgotla at which they search their inner
soul and cleanse themselves and come back new and fresh. All those who are
working under the President have failed him.

Let us march forward today with courage, conviction and determination, and
instil the correct goals and morals in our youth so that they will be
responsible, respectful and dignified adults.

Mr N T GODI: Mr Speaker, it appears that the politics of personalised
invectives that we have witnessed in the media have finally set foot in
Parliament. The APC believes that our politics must be steered away from
the froth and bubble to focus on the issues that affect the majority of our
people.

The APC believes that the people expect us to be absorbed by a search for
solutions to daily material concerns like unemployment, inequality, timeous
and qualitative service delivery, and the fight against corruption and
fraud in both the public and private sectors.
The APC does not believe that it is objective to call for a no-confidence
vote in a government that is less than a year into its five-year term. We
believe that what should rather be occupying us as the National Assembly is
how to strengthen and deepen oversight over the executive in, firstly, the
fight against corruption, and wasteful and fruitless expenditure in
government, as emphasised by both the President and the Minister of
Finance; secondly, the proposed new economic growth trajectory that is
premised on job creation, as proposed by Ministers Davies and Patel; and,
lastly, the campaign for clean audits and service delivery by
municipalities, better health care, quality education, and faster land
reform.

The APC calls on all parties to show leadership and responsibility by being
sincere, patriotic and mature, and to act with integrity. We call on the
National Assembly to strengthen oversight and give greater support and more
powers to its oversight committees, especially those that deal with the
management and utilisation of public funds like the Portfolio Committee on
Finance, the Standing Committee on Appropriations, and the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts.

It must always be about the people and never about narrow partisan
interests. The APC does not support the original motion for a vote of no
confidence in the President of the Republic.

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I move the following
amendment to the motion before the House: To omit all the words after
“That” and to substitute: “The House has full confidence in the President
of the Republic of South African and appreciates his leadership of the
government and nation.”

I stand here, in front of the country and the world to speak to the
suitability of the President of the Republic of South Africa to continue to
hold high the office of President. As the House is aware, this sad episode
is occasioned by the unfortunate and adventurous tabling of the so-called
motion of no confidence in our President.

This being a party-based system of government, a motion of no confidence in
the President becomes a motion of no confidence in the ANC. Those who seek
to displace an elephant must be prepared to climb a mountain, and be good
mountaineers at that. We reserve the right to self-defence and we are now
called upon to exercise that right. We are exercising that right in defence
of our revolution and in defence of our future as a people.

Accordingly, we are tabling a motion of confidence in the President of the
Republic. In doing so, I wish to remind the country who Jacob
Gedleyihlekisa Zuma is. In the President we have a peasant boy who joined
the army of the working people at a tender age. This background has shaped
and formed his social and political consciousness. That is why he continues
to be biased in favour of the rural and urban poor and the working class.

This bias is reflected in the structure and programmes of the government
that he leads with unassailable distinction. He is the son of the black
people of South Africa. He is a warrior prince born of the proud Zulu
people who distinguished themselves as true patriots throughout the
torturous period of the wars of resistance, which ended with the defeat of
Chief Bhambhatha in the Inkandhla forests in 1902. His participation in the
national liberation struggle is borne of the direct experience of being an
African in apartheid South Africa. As a freedom fighter, he is generally
acknowledged as one of the most dedicated, fearless and exemplary soldiers
and leaders of the people’s army uMkhonto weSizwe.

In this regard, he worked in the underground, was captured and served 10
years on Robben Island. On his release he went into exile and there rose
through the ranks to head the ANC Mbhokodo and become a member of the
national executive committee. It was in this capacity that he became the
first member of the NEC to legally enter South Africa in order to prepare
for formal negotiations.

He is a proud Zulu man who fiercely defends his culture and way of life.
His elevation to high office has not alienated him from his way of life,
and he is an active participant in the village activities of the people of
Inkandhla whenever time permits. He observes and practises traditional
rituals together with his people, and he is not ashamed of who he is.
[Applause.] He refuses to be judged according to the standards of non-
Africans, who continue to insist that theirs is the only acceptable
culture, even 15 years after our liberation. [Applause.]

History will remember our President as a dedicated and highly successful
peacemaker. In exile, he was part of the team that initiated contact
between the ANC in exile and the apartheid regime. In the 1990s, as
chairperson of the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal and working together with Prince
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, he established peace in KwaZulu-Natal and gave South
Africa the rare gift of peace. We are most grateful for this.

As the Deputy President of the Republic he led negotiations that gave
Burundi its own peace. He continues with the mission to restore and
consolidate peace on the continent and in the world in general. President
Zuma is a great reconciler. He has introduced a new style of governance
which does not criminalise opposition, but rather seeks to find common
national interests that bind us together as a nation. [Applause.]

In this regard, he has opened dialogue with leaders of South Africa in all
spheres: political, economic, cultural and everywhere else. He is not
grievance-driven and that makes him a great forgiver. [Applause.] Anyone
else in his place would have gone after those who have persecuted him in
recent times, using state organs to fight political fights. He has not done
so.

All these attributes and many more are found in abundance in our great
movement, the ANC; a movement that seeks to build a humane and caring
society that recognises and accords human dignity to all, without regard to
race, class, colour and gender; a movement that has been at the forefront
of the struggle to create a better life for all; a movement that continues
to promote reconciliation based on political and social justice, sometimes
even in the face of insolent provocation by defenders at the grave of
apartheid and their lackeys and fellow travellers.

As this movement, we unashamedly champion the interests of victims of
apartheid, that is black people in general and Africans in particular. We
are not apologetic in this regard, and we are ready to fall on our swords
in defence of this principle. We are determined to build a new South Africa
that is founded on solid foundations of social justice and political,
economic and cultural equality. We have forgiven those who enslaved us over
centuries. We now insist on being treated as equals. On this, we shall give
no quarter, there shall be no retreat. [Applause.]

We expect no mercy or favours, as we never have done over all those
centuries, from our detractors. There is no easy walk to freedom, Mdala
said. Many gave up and many betrayed us, as we unflinchingly and
relentlessly pursued the struggle for freedom. We are not about to give up
now. There have been moments when anti-people deviants have found
themselves at the helm of our great movement. Whenever they got caught, we
either expelled them or they walked out.

Many of those who walked away soon discovered the grim truth of the
loneliness of the wilderness. It is bitterly cold out there, as they
endured a solitary existence akin to that of the prodigal son. Let me
repeat: It is bitterly cold out there, as they endured a solitary existence
akin to that of the prodigal son.

In recent years we confronted this phenomenon, which sought to own the ANC
as the personal property of a tiny clique, failing which it was determined
to destroy the ANC from within. Happily the people recaptured their
movement in Polokwane. There was a tendency to conduct public affairs and
political discourse with unprecedented arrogance. There were no boundaries
or restraint. Those who tried to offer wise counsel would be rebuffed with
the might of Samson. Not only would their advice be rejected, they would be
subjected to mob lynching. Our own icon, President Nelson Mandela, was not
spared the wrath of this tendency that was running amok.

Those who supported this tendency embarked on a determined struggle to stop
the then Deputy President Zuma from becoming the next leader of the ANC and
the country. Elaborate plans were put in place to retain the ANC as a
personal fiefdom of those who supported this tendency. They wanted to
impose their chosen leader upon us in order to consolidate their anti-
people agenda.

Zuma became an obstacle that stood firm between this greed-driven insanity
and the restoration of our movement to its members. He had to be stopped at
all costs. His persecutors were unrelenting, even in the face of provoking
a possible civil war. In those bleak and dark days, I was among those who
defiantly sang the song: Basithatha phi isibindi esingaka sokuthatha iANC
bayenze eyabo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Where do they get so much courage to make
the ANC their own?][Applause.]

We went to Polokwane and the people spoke and elected President Zuma. The
supports to the tendency were shell — shocked and confused. As the reality
of defeat began to sink in, shock turned into fierce fury against the
tendency itself and against the ANC, our beloved movement. At last and
finally, the tendency had fallen from the high horse of folly and the house
of cards began to collapse into a heap of broken illusions and shattered
ambitions. The boasting came to an abrupt halt. Some of the leaders of the
tendency walked out with the sole aim of destroying and defeating the ANC,
regardless of the political cost to the majority of our people whose hopes
and dreams remained firmly behind the movement. They formed an organisation
and arrogantly called it the Congress of the People, in a way to spite the
real Congress.

We went into the elections under the leadership of President Zuma. The ANC
won with an overwhelming majority and the world did not collapse. In fact,
the sun still rose and it continues to do so today. The prophets of doom
have been silenced, but they are bitter and consumed by an incomprehensible
hatred of the person of the President of the Republic. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Hon Speaker, let me start by thanking you for affording
this House an opportunity to debate this motion. We would like to say,
Speaker, that it is important for us to accept in a democracy, even if
people are in the minority, that they have the right to make their case and
for that to be debated by the nation. [Applause.]

Secondly, we would like to say that it is important that whatever else we
do, we do not lower the bar against which the members who are serving in
the public should be held to account. In spite of our weaknesses and
everything else, we have to uphold the need for a high level of morality in
nation-building.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Allow the speaker to be heard.

Rev H M DANDALA: Finally, I urge the members of this House that because we
are now going to vote people must be guided by their consciences, beyond
party loyalty. It is unfortunate that this is not going to be by secret
ballot, because people will look at how others vote, but we have confidence
that the South Africans out there are going to prove that the motion that
Cope brought here is valid and legitimate. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, we have before us the motion by Rev Dandala upon
which an amendment has been moved. I will first put the amendment moved by
Adv N A Ramatlhodi, namely: To omit all the words after “That” and to
substitute: “The House has full confidence in the President of the Republic
of South Africa and appreciates his leadership of the government and
nation.”


Are there any objections to the amendment?

Mr M S SHILOWA: Hon Speaker, may I address you on a point of order, please?


The SPEAKER: Yes, go right ahead. Hon members, order! You have the floor
and my protection, hon member.

Mr M S SHILOWA: I rise on a point of order: The motion before the House was
brought in terms of section 102(2) of the Constitution, which is a
constitutional provision. The Rules of the House and therefore the
presiding officer, in my view, can never and should never override a
constitutional provision. We therefore submit, as Cope, that you cannot use
Rule 96(c) to allow the proposed amendment, because to do so simply means
we are going to use Rules to trample the Constitution. The Rules are
supposed to enhance the implementation of the Constitution and never to
subvert the Constitution. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: The Rules do not necessarily exclude an amendment being moved
to a motion. Indeed, in terms of the Rules, a notice is dispensed with when
an amendment to a motion is moved. In addition, the Rules provide that the
presiding officer may allow an amendment. In taking such a decision, the
presiding officer would have regard to the practice as it obtains here and
in similar parliaments. I have indeed applied my mind to this issue and I’m
convinced that such an amendment is permissible and in line with Rule
96(c). [Applause.]

Question put: That the amendment moved by Mr N A Ramatlhodi be agreed to.

Division demanded.

The House divided.

AYES - 235: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Ainslie, A R; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya,
V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
V; Chabane, O C; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chiloane, T D; Chohan, F I;
Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange,
J H; Ditshetelo, I C; Dlakudla, D E; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlulane, B N;
Doidge, G Q M; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Duma, N M; Dunjwa, M L; Ebrahim, E
I; Farisani, T S; Fransman, M L; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gasebonwe, T M
A; Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N; Godi, N T;
Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Goqwana, M B; Gumede, D M;
Gungubele, M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S
P; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson,
M; Kekane, C D; Kenye, T E; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Komphela, B M;
Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E;
Luthuli, A N; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C;
Madasa, Z L; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau,
K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makasi, X C;
Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malale, M I; Malgas,
H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Manganye, J;
Mangena, M S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashatile,
P; Mashigo, R J; Mashishi, A C; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H;
Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matladi, M N ; Matlanyane, H F; Matshoba, J
M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Mayende-Sibiya, N A; Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F
A; Mbili, M E; Mdaka, M N; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfeketo, N C;
Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhize, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlangeni, A;
Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-
Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S; Motlanthe, K P;
Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E N; Mufamadi, T
A; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G;
Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Nel, A C; Nelson, W J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J;
Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa, D G; Nkoana-Mashabane, M E;
Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T
W; Nxumalo, M D; Nyalungu, R E; Nyama, M M A; Nyanda, S; Nyekemba, E;
Nzimande, B E; Oliphant, G G; Oliphant, M N; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N
M; Peters, E D; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
Mosoane, M E; Pule, D D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi,
N A; Ramodibe, D M; Rantsolase, M A; Rasool, E; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D;
Sefularo, M; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Sexwale, T M G; Shabangu, S;
Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, S C N;
Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M
R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza,
T B; Thabethe, E ; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F;
Tobias, T V; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J;
Tsotetsi, D R; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A;
Williams, A J; Xaba, P P; Xasa, T; Xingwana, L M; Zulu, B Z.


NOES - 88: Adams, L H; Balindlela, Z B; Blaai, B C; Boinamo, G G; Botha, T;
Carter, D; Dandala, H M; Davidson, I O; De Freitas, M S F; De Lille, P;
Dexter, P D; Dreyer, A M; Du Toit, N D; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
Fritz, A T; Gaehler, L B; George, D T; George, M E; Greyling, L; Holomisa,
B H; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kganare, D A; Kilian, J D; Kloppers-Lourens,
J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Koornhof, N J J v R; Kopane, S P; Kotsi, C M;
Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A; Louw, A;
MacKenzie, G D; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Mashiane, L M; Maynier, D J;
Mazibuko, L D; McGluwa, J J; Mda, A; Mnguni, P B; Molao, S P; More, E;
Morgan, G R; Mubu, K S; Mulder, C P; Ndude, H N; Ngonyama, L S; Nhanha, M
A; Njobe, M A A; Ntshiqela, P; Oriani-Ambrosini, M G; Poho, P; Pretorius, P
J C; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W; Ramatlakane, L; Robinson, D; Ross, D;
Rwexana, S P; Schafer, DA; Selfe, J; Shilowa, M S; Smiles, D C; Smuts, M;
Snell, G T; Steele, M H; Steyn, A; Swart, M; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Tolo,
L J; Trollip, RAP; Van Dalen, P; Van den Berg, N J; Van der Linde, J J; Van
der Walt, D; Van der Westhuizen, A P; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C;
Vukuza-Linda, N Y; Waters, M; Wenger, M.
ABSTAIN - 5: Bhoola, R B; Lucas, E J; Mpontshane, A M; Msimang, C T;
Skosana, M B.

Question agreed to.

Amendment accordingly agreed to.

Question put: That the motion by Rev H M Dandala, as amended, be agreed to.

Division demanded.

The House divided.

AYES - 242: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Ainslie, A R; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya,
V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
V; Chabane, O C; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chiloane, T D; Chohan, F I;
Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange,
J H; Dikgacwi, M M; Ditshetelo, I C; Dlakudla, D E; Dlamini-Zuma, N C;
Dlulane, B N; Doidge, G Q M; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Duma, N M; Dunjwa, M
L; Ebrahim, E I; Farisani, T S; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Frolick, C T;
Fubbs, J L; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M
N; Gina, N; Godi, N T; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Goqwana, M B;
Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hogan, B A;
Holomisa, S P; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T
M; Johnson, M; Kekane, C D; Kenye, T E; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E;
Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgetho,
G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Luthuli, A N; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X;
Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madasa, Z L; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V;
Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G;
Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makasi, X C; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z
S; Makwetla, S P; Malale, M I; Malgas, H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M;
Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Manganye, J; Mangena, M S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-
Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashatile, P; Mashigo, R J; Mashishi, A C;
Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
Matladi, M N; Matlanyane, H F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W;
Mayende-Sibiya, N A; Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F A; Mbili, M E; Mdaka, M N;
Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfeketo, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N;
Mkhize, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mokoena,
A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss,
L N; Motimele, M S; Motlanthe, K P; Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S;
Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, T A; Mushwana, F F;
Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J
S; Nel, A C; Nelson, W J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N
D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C;
Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J; Nkoana-Mashabane, M E; Nkwinti, G E;
November, N T; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nxumalo, M D; Nyalungu,
R E; Nyama, M M A; Nyanda, M F; Nyanda, S; Nyekemba, E; Nzimande, B E;
Oliphant, G G; Oliphant, M N; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Peters, E
D; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E;
Pule, D D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
Ramodibe, D M; Rantsolase, M A; Rasool, E; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D;
Sefularo, M; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Sexwale, T M G; Shabangu, S;
Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, S C N;
Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Skosana, M B; Smith, V G; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E
M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Suka,
L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B;
Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tobias, T V; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L;
Tshivhase, T J; Tsotetsi, D R; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van Schalkwyk, M C J;
Van Wyk, A; Williams, A J; Xaba, P P; Xasa, T; Xingwana, L M; Zulu, B Z.

NOES - 83: Adams, L H; Balindlela, Z B; Blaai, B C; Boinamo, G G; Botha, T;
Carter, D; Dandala, H M; Davidson, I O; De Freitas, M S F; De Lille, P;
Dexter, P D; Dreyer, A M; Du Toit, N D; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
Fritz, A T; Gaehler, L B; George, D T; George, M E; Greyling, L; Holomisa,
B H; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kganare, D A; Kilian, J D; Kloppers-Lourens,
J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Koornhof, N J J v R; Kopane, S P; Kotsi, C M;
Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lotriet, A; Louw, A; MacKenzie, G D;
Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Mashiane, L M; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D;
McGluwa, J J; Mda, A; Mnguni, P B; Molao, S P; More, E; Morgan, G R; Mubu,
K S; Mulder, C P; Ndude, H N; Ngonyama, L S; Nhanha, M A; Njobe, M A A;
Ntshiqela, P; Poho, P; Pretorius, P J C; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W;
Ramatlakane, L; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Rwexana, S P; Schafer, DA; Selfe, J;
Shilowa, M S; Smiles, D C; Smuts, M; Steele, M H; Steyn, A; Swart, M;
Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Tolo, L J; Van Dalen, P; Van den Berg, N J; Van
der Linde, J J; Van der Westhuizen, A P; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C;
Vukuza-Linda, N Y; Waters, M; Wenger, M.

ABSTAIN - 6: Bhoola, R B; Lucas, E J; Mpontshane, A M; Msimang, C T;
Ntapane, S Z; Oriani-Ambrosini, M G.

Question agreed to.

Motion, as amended, accordingly agreed to.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ON
   OVERSIGHT VISITS TO MANGAUNG, NEW KIMBERLEY AND GROOTVLEI CORRECTIONAL
                      CENTRES ON 2 AND 3 FEBRUARY 2010

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ON
    2008-09 ANNUAL REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AND OF
               JUDICIAL INSPECTORATE FOR CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ON
    OVERSIGHT VISITS TO POLLSMOOR AND MALMESBURY CORRECTIONAL CENTRES IN
                     WESTERN CAPE ON 5 AND 6 AUGUST 2009

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.
Report on Oversight Visits to Mangaung, New Kimberley and Grootvlei
Correctional Centres on 2 and 3 February 2010 accordingly adopted.

Report on 2008-09 Annual Reports of Department of Correctional Services and
of Judicial Inspectorate for Correctional Services accordingly adopted.

Report on Oversight visits to Pollsmoor and Malmesbury Correctional Centres
in Western Cape on 5 and 6 August 2009 accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT IN TERMS OF SECTION
    231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996, OF
   MEMBERSHIP OF SOUTH AFRICA TO THE INTERNATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY


Mrs E THABETHE: Speaker, the Portfolio Committee on Energy, having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of membership of South
Africa to the International Renewable Energy Agency, Irena, recommends that
the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve this
request.

The International Renewable Energy Agency was officially launched in Bonn
on 26 January 2009. To date, 140 states and the European Union have signed
the statute of the agency, amongst them 48 African, 37 European, 33 Asian,
15 American and 9 Australia-Oceania states. Mandated by this government
worldwide, Irena will promote the widespread and increased adoption and
sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, acting as a global voice
for renewable energies. Irena will facilitate access to all relevant
renewable energy information, including technical data, economic data and
renewable resource-potential data.

We hope that by passing this and also agreeing with the committee — because
this was a unanimous decision by all committee members — we will be able to
deal with the challenges of renewable energy in this country. Speaker, I
hope that the House will agree and approve this request. Thank you.
[Applause.]
There was no debate.

Request for Membership of South Africa to the International Renewable
Energy Agency approved.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
    AFFAIRS ON VIDEO CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE HELD WITH PARLIAMENT OF
                               UNITED KINGDOM

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
  AFFAIRS ON JOINT PUBLIC HEARINGS ON POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, LEGAL, GENDERED
                    AND SOCIAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
      AFFAIRS ON WATER TARIFF INCREASES OF BULK WATER RESOURCES 2009-10

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

 That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Video Conference held with Parliament of United Kingdom on
Climate Change accordingly adopted.

Report on Joint Public Hearings on Political, Economic, Legal, Gendered and
Social Impacts of Climate Change accordingly adopted.

Report on Water Tariff Increases of Bulk Water Resources 2009-10
accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND
               TRAINING ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO GIYANI, LIMPOPO

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND
          TRAINING ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH

Mr M L FRANSMAN: Hon Chairperson, the Portfolio Committee on Higher
Education and Training undertook an oversight visit to the University of
Stellenbosch, and the strategic focus really related to issues of
admission, language policy, the transformation plan and the challenges for
students.

This happened on 13 October, and the committee was able to meet the
management, under the leadership of the rector, as well as the students
themselves. Some of the issues reflected were the following: Firstly, it’s
very clear that there is very good work taking place at the institution;
secondly, there is the launch of a satellite into space with the Department
of Science and Technology and lastly, there is the hosting of many research
fund centres of excellence, Stellenbosch University being one of the top
academic and research institutions in the country.

However, some of the concerns the committee identified are that after 15
years of our democracy, only approximately 4% of the academic staff are
black, 76% of undergraduates are white, and there is a low through-put rate
of students, as well as a very small percentage in infrastructure to
accommodate challenged students.

What the committee then agreed on — in terms of its findings — was that the
vision of 2015, as defined by the management of the institution, should be
urgently reviewed in the context of the transformation agenda, and that an
inclusive human resource development strategy is required to attract more
black academic staff.

Special emphasis should be placed on undergraduate students and there
should be a focus on research but not an overemphasis on research. And,
equally so, special emphasis should be placed on the issue of teacher
development at that particular institution. The committee is tabling this
report in order for the House to agree to it. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Visit to Giyani, Limpopo, accordingly adopted.

Report on Oversight Visit to University of Stellenbosch accordingly
adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON
   OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MPUMALANGA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, NKOMAZI
  DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY, MBOMBELA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY, MBOMBELA AND NKOMAZI
   MUNICIPALITIES’ PROJECTS, SOUTH AFRICAN SOCIAL SECURITY AGENCY, SASSA,
  OFFICE, PAYPOINTS AND SERVICE AREAS AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY, NDA
                                  PROJECTS

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

 That the Report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Visit to Mpumalanga Department of Social Development,
Nkomazi District Municipality, Mbombela Local Municipality, Mbombela and
Nkomazi Municipalities Projects, South African Social Security Agency,
Sassa Office, Paypoints and Service Areas and National Development Agency,
NDA, Projects accordingly noted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Unfortunately ...

... angizukuvala ngoba nisakhuluma ngaphandle kokuthi nithule ukuze
siqhubeke nomucu wokugcina. [Uhleko.] [... I won’t adjourn this meeting
unless you keep quiet in order for us to continue with the last line.]
[Laughter.]]

The House adjourned at 16:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           THURSDAY, 11 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Letter from Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development on
    late submission of regulations
    (a)     A letter dated 8 March 2010 has been received from the Minister
        of Justice and Constitutional Development, explaining the reasons
        for the late tabling of regulations made in terms of section 97(1)
        of the Child Justice Act, 2008 (No 75 of 2008).


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development for consideration.

    Correction: The above entry replaces item 1(b) published under Tablings
              in the name of The Speaker in the Announcements, Tablings and
              Committee Reports of 10 March 2010, page 486.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) between the Southern African
        Customs Union (SACU) and the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR),
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Preferential Trade Agreement
        (PTA) between the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and the
        Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR).

                            FRIDAY, 12 MARCH 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Public Works dated 11  March  2010,
        to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly  requesting  for  the
        withdrawal of the Department of Public Works Strategic Plan for the
        period 2010 – 2013.

        2010-2013 DEPARTMENTAL STRATEGIC PLAN AND ENTITIES IN PARLIAMENT

        The Department of the Public Works’ strategic plan  was  tabled  in
        Parliament on the 3rd of March 2010.  There  have  been  noticeable
        inaccuracies in the tabled document which have to be  rectified  by
        the Department.

        The amendments made to  the  departmental  strategic  plan  of  the
        department and further undertake to table the  amended  version  to
        Parliament within two (2) weeks. Note that  the  aligned  strategic
        plans  of  the  sector  entities,  namely,  Construction   Industry
        Development Board (CIDB), Council for the Built Environment  (CBE),
        Independent Development Board (IDB) and Agrément South Africa (ASA)
        will also be tabled within the said two (2) weeks.


        I sincerely apologise to Parliament  and  its  committees  for  the
        inconvenience caused as a result of these developments.

        Yours sincerely,

        (Signed)
        G Q M DOIDGE (MP)
        MINISTER
        Date:  11/03/2010

            Cc:  Hon G Olifant – Portfolio Committee on Public Works
                 Hon Sibande MP – Select Committee on Public Services
2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     a) Eskom’s 2010/11 tariff increase and amended pricing structure for
        municipalities with effect from 1 July 2010, in terms of section 42
        of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003
        (Act No 56 of 2003).

                            MONDAY, 15 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Prevention and Combating of Trafficking in Persons Bill [B 7 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 32906 of 29 January 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
             and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land
         Reform and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Withdrawal of Strategic Plan


    (a)     A letter dated 11 March 2010 has been received from the
        Minister of Public Works, requesting the withdrawal of the
        strategic plan of the Department of Public Works for the financial
        year 2010-13 that was tabled on 3 March 2010.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    a) Tariff increase for 2010-11 and amendment to Eskom's pricing
       structure for municipalities, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of
       the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No
       56 of 2003), and supporting documents required in terms of section
       42(3) of the same Act.


2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) Albany Coast Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2010-11,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (b)     Amatola Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (c)     Bloem Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (d)     Botshelo Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (e)     Bushbuckridge Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2010-11,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     f) Lepelle Northern Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
        for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     g) Magalies Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     h) Mhlathuze Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (i)     Namakwa Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (j)     Overberg Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (k)     Pelladrift Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2010-11,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (l)     Rand Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (m)     Sedibeng Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (n)     Umgeni Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Letter dated 11 March 2010 from the Minister of Public Works,
       explaining the delay in submitting the strategic plans of the
       Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB), Council for the
       Built Environment (CBE), Independent Development Board (IDB) and
       Agrément South Africa (ASA) for the financial year 2010-13.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services  on  its  2
and  3  February  oversight  visits  to  the  Mangaung,  New  Kimberley  and
Grootvlei Correctional Centres, dated 10 March 2010.

1.    Introduction
1.1   On 2 and 3  February  a  delegation  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
      Correctional  Services  undertook  an  oversight  visit  to   Mangaung
      Correctional  Centre,  one  of  South  Africa’s  two  public   private
      partnership  (PPP)  correctional  centres  and   the   New   Kimberley
      Correctional Centre which was near completion at the time of the visit
      and was designed for delivery  on  the  detention  and  rehabilitation
      ideals contained in the White Paper on Corrections  (White  Paper)  of
      2005. Both centres are  located  in  the  Department  of  Correctional
      Services’ (DCS) Free State/Northern Cape region.
1.2    Concerned  about  the  large  number  of  sentenced  and  unsentenced
      children and juveniles imprisoned, the Committee paid a brief visit to
      the  juvenile  section  at  the  Grootvlei  Correctional   Centre   in
      Bloemfontein  to  assess  the  conditions  of  detention  these  young
      sentenced and unsentenced inmates are subjected to.
1.3.  As stated in the Committee’s report on its  first  official  oversight
      visit to the Pollsmoor and  Malmesbury  correctional  centres  in  the
      Western Cape, most of South  Africa’s  correctional  centres  pre-date
      1994 and their structure is not conducive to the implementation of the
      rehabilitation and reintegration ideals and  strategies  contained  in
      the White Paper. Central to the success of these  strategies  is  unit
      management, which requires the division of a correctional centre  into
      small manageable units ensuring appropriate supervision and monitoring
      of  offenders.  This  not  only  limits  security  risks,   but   also
      facilitates  the  implementation  of  the  necessary  development  and
      rehabilitation programmes, while ensuring that detention is  safe  and
      secure and that the treatment and care of offenders  did  not  violate
      South Africa’s human rights framework.
1.4   The Committee is committed to  seeing  the  entirely  state-owned  New
      Kimberley Correctional Centre, with  its  promise  of  the  successful
      rehabilitation of offending behaviour and reintegration of  offenders,
      become the embodiment of the objectives contained in the White  Paper.
      It has agreed to ‘adopt’ the centre, and will accordingly  follow  its
      progress very closely, particularly given that future centres will  be
      modelled on it.
2.    Delegation
2.1   The delegation that visited Mangaung Correctional Centre  on  Tuesday,
      2 February comprised the following Members:
      Mr V Smith (ANC, Chairperson), Ms W Ngwenya (ANC), Ms M  Mdaka  (ANC),
      Ms N Phaliso (ANC), Ms F Nyanda (ANC), Mr Z Madasa (ANC), Mr  A  Fritz
      (DA), Mr J Selfe (DA) and Ms C Blaai (COPE).
2.2   The delegation that visited the New Kimberley Correctional  Centre  on
      Wednesday, 3 February comprised the following Members:
      Mr V Smith (ANC, Chairperson), Ms M Mdaka (ANC), Ms N  Phaliso  (ANC),
      Ms F Nyanda (ANC), Mr Z Madasa (ANC), Mr A Fritz (DA), and Ms C  Blaai
      (COPE).

3.    Context
3.1   In October 2009 the Committee met with both the  Mangaung  and  Kutama
      Sinthumule correctional centre management as well as  the  DCS  to  be
      briefed on the PPP centres’ operations and challenges. It  was  agreed
      that site visits to both centres would be invaluable as far as gaining
      a better  understanding  of  their  operation  and  the  treatment  of
      offenders detained there. Due to time constraints the Committee  could
      however only visit one of these centres in February, and the  Mangaung
      Correctional Centre was selected partly due  to  a  number  of  inmate
      uprisings it had experienced in recent months.
3.2   Construction of the  New  Kimberley  Correctional  Centre  started  in
      November  2006  and  has  been  plagued  by  numerous  delays  in  its
      completion, which made completion  by  November  2008  impossible.  It
      finally started admitting offenders  on  11  January  2010,  and  will
      continue doing so in phases as from 16 February 2010 when  the  centre
      is expected to have been handed over by the contractor. The centre  is
      expected to have been filled to capacity by 15 May 2010. The Committee
      thought it necessary to visit the centre to  gauge  its  readiness  to
      start operating fully, and given that it may become the prototype  for
      future prison construction in South Africa, to assess to  what  extent
      it would deliver on the White Paper’s rehabilitation and reintegration
      ideals.
3.3    Given  the  large  numbers  of   children   detained   at   Grootvlei
      Correctional Centre, and its proximity to  the  Mangaung  Correctional
      Centre, the Committee agreed to also pay a short visit to that Centre,
      specifically to assess the conditions under which child  and  juvenile
      offenders are detained.

4.    Mangaung Correctional Centre
4.1   The Mangaung Correctional Centre  is  situated  outside  Bloemfontein.
      The PPP correctional centres are managed by a holding company, in  the
      case of Mangaung, G4S, with  2  Department  of  Correctional  Services
      (DCS) controllers on site to ensure the holding  company’s  compliance
      in terms of the Correctional Services Act  of  1998  as  well  as  its
      contractual obligations. The Head of the Centre as well as  all  staff
      are G4S employees. The contract between the  DCS  and  G4S  is  for  a
      period of 25 years after which the centre will be owned  and  operated
      by the State. The  Centre  took  14  months  to  complete  and  became
      operational in July 2001.
4.2   Mangaung Correctional Centre is a maximum security facility housing  2
      928 sentenced adult male offenders (agreed  to  in  the  contract  and
      therefore never exceeded). 1 217 offenders are serving sentences of 20
      years or longer, 800 of them are “lifers”.
4.3   The Centre operates on the concept of unit management and  is  divided
      into housing blocks, accommodating inmates in either single or  double
      cells. Each unit is managed  by  a  single  warder.  Units  and  other
      facilities are linked through a number of  “streets”  used  to  access
      workshops, educational facilities, sports fields, kitchens etc.
4.4   Offenders are transferred from centres across the country and  all  of
      them are assessed upon admission to ensure that they  are  assigned  a
      structured day programme best suited to their rehabilitation needs.

5.    New Kimberley Correctional Centre
5.1    Unlike  the  Mangaung  Correctional   Centre,   the   New   Kimberley
      Correctional Centre, which falls in the DCS’ management area is  fully
      state-owned and managed.



5.2   The medium security centre will  accommodate  3  000  male  offenders,
      serving sentences of 5 to 40 years. The centre comprises three 1  000-
      bed housing units. Talks are underway to have one  of  the  1  000-bed
      units accommodate female  offenders,  and  the  other,  male  juvenile
      offenders. At the time of the visit the Centre accommodated  237  male
      offenders in a single cell block. These inmates  were  transferred  as
      part of a trial-run to  determine  the  prison’s  readiness  to  start
      filling and running the centre.




5.3.  In line with the objectives  of  the  White  Paper,  the  centre  will
      operate  on  a  unit  management  system,  and   has   been   designed
      specifically to make that possible. In addition to the  state  of  the
      art educational, vocational, health and other facilities,  the  centre
      comprises three housing units, each divided into twelve  240-bed  cell
      blocks. Movement between housing units and other facilities happen via
      a central “street”, which is closely monitored from the centre’s state
      of the art security control room.



6.    Grootvlei Correctional Centre

6.1   At the time of the visit the Grootvlei Medium A  centre,  where  child
      and  juvenile  sentenced  and  unsentenced   offenders   are   housed,
      accomodated 7 sentenced boys under the age of 18,  and  540  sentenced
      juveniles. The Centre housed 1 200 unsentenced juveniles, accommodated
      in cells of up to 80 each.



7.    Observations
7.1   Mangaung and New Kimberley Correctional Centres
7.1.1 Apart from the weekly  meetings  around  operational  matters  between
      Mangaung Correctional Centre’s Head and the DCS controllers  on  site,
      G4S and the DCS have monthly ‘high level’ meetings to  discuss  issues
      related to service delivery. These interactions  notwithstanding,  the
      Managing Director reported that communication between his company  and
      the DCS could still be improved  particularly  to  facilitate  greater
      stakeholder involvement and more frequent exchange of ideas to  ensure
      that best practices on both sides are shared.
   2. The Mangaung Correctional Centre  ascribed  the  incidents  of  unrest
      experienced  over  recent  months  to  the  reclassification  process.
      According to Section 29 of the Correctional Services Act  of  1998  an
      inmate’s security classification is determined by the extent to  which
      he or she  presents  a  security  risk,  and  determines  whether  the
      sentence or remainder of the sentence would be served in a maximum  or
      minimum security centre. Reclassification is  determined  via  a  tool
      introduced to correctional centres in August 2006.  In  November  2008
      the National Overcrowding Task Team (NOTT) reported that the tool  was
      not  being  utilised  at  Mangaung,  and  recommended  its   immediate
      implementation. This was not done and in July 2009 inmates embarked on
      a hunger-strike in protest. At  the  subsequent  consultation  process
      between the DCS and the private contractors it  was  agreed  that  the
      tool would be implemented. The Centre is confident that it  has  dealt
      with the unrest and would in future be able to  avoid  such  protests,
      but could not confirm that the reclassification challenges at Mangaung
      have been addressed. The Committee was  assured  that  no  unnecessary
      force was used in containing and suppressing inmate protests.

   3. The Mangaung Correctional Centre expressed concern about  its  ability
      to implement in line with the President’s announcement on  World  Aids
      Day 2009 that anti-retroviral drugs would now be available to all  HIV
      positive  persons  with  CD4  counts  of  350  or  lower.  While  this
      development is welcomed in  the  fight  against  HIV/AIDS,  there  are
      concerns about how it would be implemented and the  costs  associated.
      At the time of the visit the DCS and G4S had not reached an  agreement
      as to who should bear the cost of the implementation.

   4. Mangaung Correctional Centre employs one social worker for  every  300
      offenders and reported that their retention is much better  than  that
      of DCS correctional centres where the  working  conditions  and  heavy
      workload often result in an inability to attract and retain  such  and
      similar professionals.

   5. At the Mangaung Correctional Centre all offenders  are  assessed  upon
      admission to  ensure  that  structured  day  programmes  allowing  for
      school, work programmes,  vocational,  rehabilitation  programmes  are
      developed according to the rehabilitation needs of each offender.

   6. All offenders incarcerated at the New  Kimberley  Correctional  Centre
      will  have  sentence  plans  designed  to  map  their   rehabilitation
      programmes. Corrections Assessment Officers will assess offenders upon
      admission and will compile sentence  plans  for  the  case  management
      committee’s  approval.  Once   approved   correctional   interventions
      officers will be responsible for ensuring implementation  of  sentence
      plans. The Committee was assured that this process  will  be  followed
      once phased admission of offenders commenced after  the  hand-over  of
      the centre.

   7. The Committee was impressed by the general cleanliness of the Mangaung
      Correctional  Centre’s  grounds  and  facilities.   Each   inmate   is
      responsible for keeping his  cell  clean  and  tidy  and  graffiti  is
      strictly prohibited.

   8. The Committee was pleased to see that inmates  at  both  centres  were
      involved in work activities. At the New Kimberley Correctional  Centre
      inmates were tending the gardens while others were busy with  cleaning
      duties in and around the correctional  centres.  The  facility  has  a
      fully-equipped kitchen that will make extensive use of  inmate  labour
      and no nutrition services will be outsourced.

   9. The delegation is concerned that on the day of the visits to  the  New
      Kimberley Correctional Centre, there was evidence of offenders smoking
      in areas other than  the  designated  smoking  zones,  with  officials
      apparently having very little ability or inclination to prevent it.

  10. At the time of the visit  most  of  the  financed  posts  at  the  New
      Kimberley Correctional Centre had been filled. The majority  of  staff
      members were employed from the areas surrounding the  centre,  largely
      because, apart from the  head  of  centre  and  his  deputies,  it  is
      unlikely that officials will be accommodated on the prison grounds.

  11. Nutrition services at the New Kimberley Correctional Centre  will  not
      be outsourced, and although the soil at the centre is not conducive to
      agriculture, vegetables will be provided by the other  centre  in  the
      vicinity.

  12. As is the case at the Mangaung Correctional Centre, the New  Kimberley
      Correctional Centre  will  be  cashless  with  neither  officials  nor
      inmates being allowed any money, thus  limiting  the  opportunity  for
      bribery and other forms of corruption.

  13. The Regional Commissioner agreed that the  Judicial  Inspectorate  for
      Correctional Services (JICS)  played  an  important  role  as  far  as
      reporting on deaths and gangsterism, ensuring the humane treatment  of
      offenders, the diversion of juveniles and the addressing of the  needs
      of unsentenced offenders. The New Kimberley Correctional Centre’s Head
      of Centre reported however that officials felt that their conduct  was
      reported on, and that their efforts  at  maintaining  discipline  were
      frustrated at times.  There  were  also  complaints  that  independent
      correctional centre visitors (ICCVs)  were  not  performing  and  were
      compiling fraudulent reports.


7.2   Grootvlei Correctional Centre
7.2.1 The delegation was alarmed by the conditions in  which  sentenced  and
      unsentenced children and juvenile  inmates  were  accommodated.  Apart
      from the overcrowding, cells were dirty and  in  a  state  of  serious
      disrepair with leaks, faulty taps and broken toilets.  The  conditions
      were unhygienic and likely to contribute to the spread of disease.
7.2.2 Although kept in cells separate from  those  of  the  adult  sentenced
      population, child offenders are wearing the same orange uniform  meant
      for adult sentenced offenders.

8.    Recommendations
8.1   Category of offenders incarcerated at the new generation prisons
8.1.1 Both new generation  centres  visited  were  designed  to  accommodate
      adult male offenders serving relatively long to life sentences.  While
      all offenders should be provided with care and development programmes,
      the roll-out of such programmes to juvenile and  those  serving  short
      sentences should be prioritised, as they stand to benefit most,  given
      that such programmes are designed to reduce recidivism. The region has
      already  submitted  a  proposal  that  one  of   the   New   Kimberley
      Correctional  Centre’s   housing   blocks   be   converted   for   the
      incarceration of juvenile offenders, and the Committee eagerly  awaits
      the outcome of that process. The DCS accordingly explore  all  avenues
      that  would  enable  them  to  accommodate  juvenile  and   short-term
      offenders at both the PPP  correctional  centres,  the  New  Kimberley
      Correctional Centre as well as all future new generation centres.
8.1.2 Concern was raised that the centres visited only accommodated men  and
      that therefore male offenders only will benefit from the state of  the
      art rehabilitation services offered at the centres. Cognisant  of  the
      fact that women make up a small percentage of  South  Africa’s  prison
      population and that correctional centres accommodating  women  had  to
      adhere to the United Nations Minimum Standards for  the  detention  of
      women, and  that  such  adherence  would  require  certain  structural
      adjustments, the Committee nevertheless recommends that ways in  which
      women can also be accommodated at the centres  be  explored,  so  that
      they too could benefit from the programmes offered there.

8.2   Transfers
8.2.1 Interactions with the  offenders  transferred  to  the  New  Kimberley
      Correctional  Centre  since  11  January  revealed  that   many   were
      transferred without having been adequately prepared for the experience
      of incarceration at the new Centre, or without being given  sufficient
      opportunity to communicate  their  transfer  to  their  families.  The
      Committee accepts that the delays in the installation of the telephone
      lines may have contributed to the latter, and recommends that  regions
      transferring offenders to the new centre will  ensure  that  offenders
      are adequately briefed and that they have opportunity  to  communicate
      with their families in order to  ensure  that  family  contact,  which
      forms an integral part of their rehabilitation and  reintegration,  is
      not compromised. Transfers should be managed responsibly  as  inmates’
      understanding of the benefits of incarceration at the centre is key to
      the  success  of  the  care,  development,  rehabilitation  and  other
      programmes offered. In addition, everything should be done  to  ensure
      that  the  7  offenders  who  have  to  write   supplementary   matric
      examinations and who were transferred to the  centre  from  Mpumalanga
      have the opportunity to do so.

8.2.2 Inmates at both centres complained of long waiting periods before  the
      outcome of their transfer requests are communicated to them, and  that
      often such requests are rejected. Most transfer requests are motivated
      by inmates’ need  to  be  closer  to  their  families  for  visitation
      purposes. The DCS should ensure that all transfers to any  centres  in
      the country are done within the prescribed rules and  regulations  and
      that  as  far  as  possible,  such  transfers  should  not  jeopardise
      rehabilitation and reintegration efforts.

8.3   Inmate Labour
8.3.1 The Committee remains ardent  advocates  of  inmate  labour  which  it
      believes will not only curb idleness,  but  could,  if  managed  well,
      result in greater  self-sufficiency  at  centre  level.  More  inmates
      should be involved in productive activities for the  greater  part  of
      the day. The  Committee  recognises  that  the  legislation  currently
      places certain limitations on the DCS as far as its ability to enforce
      participation in  work  programmes  and  educational  programmes,  and
      recommends that future  reviews  of  the  legislation  consider  these
      sections carefully to ensure  greater  productivity  on  the  part  of
      offenders.

8.4   Development, Care and Rehabilitation
8.4.1 While the programmes  intended  for  the  New  Kimberley  Correctional
      Centre are most impressive, their success will rely entirely upon  all
      offenders at the centre having tailor-made sentence plans catering  to
      their rehabilitation needs. Such plans and their  implementation  rely
      on the DCS’ ability to attract and retain the necessary  professionals
      and artisans to do assessments and run education and work  programmes.
      The Centre should ensure that, in line  with  the  objectives  of  the
      White Paper, all offenders admitted are assessed in order  to  develop
      the sentence plans which will  inform  the  types  of  programmes  and
      interventions they need for their rehabilitation.

8.5   Personnel
8.5.1 The Committee agrees that staff  at  the  New  Kimberley  Correctional
      Centre should as far as possible be new to the correctional system  to
      ensure that the correctional culture envisioned  in  the  White  Paper
      thrives and is not corrupted. Measures should however be put in  place
      to ensure that the largely new and inexperienced warders are  equipped
      to manage an offender population that is likely to  be  very  familiar
      with incarceration and may attempt to manipulate and take advantage of
      warders’ lack of experience. Special care should be  taken  to  ensure
      that gangsterism does not take root among offenders.

8.6   Number-gangs
8.6.1 While the Committee appreciates the management of  the  New  Kimberley
      Correctional Centre’s reluctance to acknowledge the  influence  prison
      gangs may have once gang members are transferred to  the  centre,  for
      fear of giving gangs more  authority,  it  believes  a  more  detailed
      strategy for how to  deal  with  the  influence  of  prison  gangs  is
      necessary, particularly given that most of the staff employed  at  the
      centre are new recruits who could potentially be manipulated and taken
      advantage of by the hardened criminals likely to be transferred to the
      centre.

8.7   Health care
8.7.1 The DCS -G4S dispute about who should pay for the  provision  of  ARVs
      to offenders with CD4 counts lower than 350 should be  resolved  as  a
      matter of urgency, to ensure that service delivery is not compromised.
      The Department of Health should also be negotiated with  to  determine
      to what extent it can assist to lower  the  DCS’  costs  in  terms  of
      health care provision.

8.8   Delays in completion of the New Kimberley Correctional Centre
8.8.1 The construction of the  centre  has  been  plagued  by  a  number  of
      delays. The Department has been assured that  the  facility  would  be
      handed over by 15 February 2010 and is  committed  to  completing  all
      transfers to the centre three months thereafter. The  Committee  hopes
      that there will be no further delays,  and  that  the  Department  and
      offenders will be able to reap the benefits of a centre that is likely
      to, at completion, cost more than R890 million, as soon as possible.
8.8.2 Delays are ascribed to weather conditions, scarcity of steel  as  well
      as labour unrest but the Committee is  unconvinced  that  these  could
      have resulted in a two-year delay in the completion of  the  facility.
      Care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that  future  projects  are   not
      unnecessarily delayed as these delays have huge cost implications  for
      the State. Furthermore, the exact causes  of  the  delay  in  the  New
      Kimberley  Correctional  Centre  should  be  investigated,  and  those
      responsible should be held accountable.

8.9   PPPs’ accountability
8.9.1 In the  past  the  PPP  centres  reported  directly  to  the  national
      Department, but would now, like other correctional centres, report  to
      the region they fall under. The DCS controllers on  site  at  the  PPP
      centres should ensure that contractual and legislative obligations are
      adhered to.

8.10  Children and Juveniles detained at the Grootvlei Correctional Centre
8.10.1      Children should be diverted or where there is  no  other  option
      detained in secure care centres designed especially for them  so  that
      their  specific  needs  can  be  met.  While  the  Committee  welcomes
      interventions put in  place  to  reduce  the  number  of  incarcerated
      children, there remains a need for  greater  cooperation  between  the
      departments  of  Social  Development,   Justice   and   Constitutional
      Development and Correctional Services.
      At the Grootvlei Correctional Centre children did not  participate  in
      any programmes. While the Committee accepted that children should  not
      be incarcerated and that the provision of programmes and education  to
      them was not the DCS’ responsibility, the fact that they were  in  its
      care, requires the DCS to partner with  departments  that  shared  the
      responsibility for caring for  delinquent  children,  to  ensure  that
      their needs are met,  and  that  incarceration  did  not  damage  them
      further. It is hoped that the Child Justice Act, that is to come  into
      operation in April  2010,  will  result  in  greater  coordination  of
      efforts to ensure better care for children in conflict with the law.

8.11  Care and maintenance of facilities
8.11.1      The Committee observed leaks in the roofs of some of  the  units
      visited at the New Kimberley Correctional Centre. The  departments  of
      Correctional Services and Public Works should  ensure  that  all  such
      repairs are completed prior to the facility  being  handed  over,  and
      that maintenance is not neglected after.
8.11.2      In addition everything should be done to ensure  that  offenders
      do not contribute to the destruction and  tarnishing  of  the  centre.
      Grafitti should be prohibited and penalties  imposed  for  destruction
      and defilement of cells.
8.11.3      The Head of Centre should ensure that the  Centre’s  no  smoking
      policy is strictly adhered to, and that smoking only  takes  place  in
      designated areas. Non-adherence not only poses a  risk  to  lives  and
      safety of inmates and staff, but also  compromises  discipline  within
      the Centre.
8.11.4      Concerns were  raised  about  the  absence  of  toilets  in  the
      hospital wards  and  the  security  risk  that  it  poses.  While  the
      Committee is  satisfied  with  the  interim  measures  to  manage  the
      situation, it recommends that the installation of toilets in the wards
      be prioritised.

8.12  Parole
8.12.1      The 237 offenders currently incarcerated at the  centre  include
      offenders sentenced before 2004, who are  eligible  for  consideration
      for parole after having  served  a  third  of  their  sentence.  These
      offenders should be processed as a matter of urgency  to  ensure  that
      they appear before the parole board as soon as possible.

8.13  Reclassification
8.13.1      The reclassification of inmates  at  the  Mangaung  Correctional
      Centre should be addressed as a matter of urgency particularly because
      it is prescribed by law and one of the requirements contained  in  the
      White Paper, and also  because  inmate  uprisings  such  as  the  ones
      experienced at the centre, pose a security risk. All centres should be
      compliant in that regard.

8.14  Judicial Inspectorate for Correctional Services
8.14.1      At the time of the visit the JICS was unfortunately not  present
to comment on allegations of misconduct  on  the  part  of  the  ICCVs.  The
Committee does feel however that ICCVs should  be  screened  or  vetted  and
their performance assessed on a regular basis.  Furthermore  a  relationship
of mutual cooperation should be encouraged between JICS  and  DCS  officials
to ensure that the ICCVs’ necessary presence  is  understood  and  does  not
cause unnecessary strain and suspicion.

9.    Acknowledgements
The Committee would like to express its appreciation  for  the  co-operation
of the management of the Department’s Free State/Northern  Cape  region  and
specifically that of the officials at the centres visited.

Report to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 16 MARCH 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Tourism

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Tourism for 2010/11 –
        2014/15.

1. The Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities

    (a)     Strategies Plan of the Department for Women, children and
        Persons with Disabilities for 2009 - 2014

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Letter dated 11 March 2010 from the Minister of Health,
       explaining the delay in submitting the strategic plans of the
       National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS), South African Medical
       Research Council (MRC), and Council for Medical Schemes (CMS) for
       the financial year 2010-13.


                          WEDNESDAY, 17 MARCH 2010


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister in The Presidency: National Planning Commission

      (a)   General Notice No 101 published in Government Gazette No 32928
        dated 2 February 2010: Publication of the Revised Green Paper on
        National Planning Commission.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      (a)   Petition on the withdrawal of  subsidies  to  six  Eastern  Cape
        independent schools, submitted in terms of Rule 312 (Dr Z Luyenge).
        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education for
        consideration and report.


                           THURSDAY, 18 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral of Bill

    (1)     The Protection of Information Bill [B 6  – 2010] (National
         Assembly – proposed sec 75), introduced on 9 March 2010, has been
         referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Protection of Information
         Legislation of the National Assembly (see House resolution in
         Minutes of Proceedings of 18 March 2010).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the oversight
visit to the Eastern Cape from 1 – 3 February 2010, dated 02 March 2010

   1. Introduction

The Department of Public Works was tasked by the President of the Republic
of South Africa to create 500 000 work opportunities by the end of December
2009 through phase two of the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP 2).
Pursuant to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works’ legislative mandate
and through the Committee’s interactions with the Department of Public
Works (DPW), the Committee decided to undertake an oversight visit to the
Eastern Cape Province to monitor progress made and experience the
challenges faced by that Province in the roll out of the EPWP 2 programme
and also in the eradication of mud schools and other unsafe structures.

A multi party delegation undertook an oversight visit to the Eastern Cape
Province on the from1 – 3 February 2010. The delegation was composed of:

Hon G G Oliphant (ANC), Chairperson and leader of the delegation, Hon C D
Kekana (ANC), Hon N M Madlala (ANC), Hon T H Magama (ANC), Hon N D
Ngcengwane (ANC), Hon N T November (ANC), Hon N J Masango (DA), Hon W
Rabotapi (DA),
Hon L Gaehler (UDM), Hon P B Mnguni (COPE).

The following support staff from Parliament accompanied the delegation:
Miss A Busakwe (Committee Secretary), Miss S Goba (Committee Assistant) and
Miss I Stephney (Committee Researcher).

The following officials also accompanied the delegation: Mr G Moso:
Parliamentary Liaison Officer in the Office of the Minister, Ms M Motumi:
Parliamentary Liaison Officer in the Office of the Deputy Minister, Ms C
Mavi: DPW Intergovernmental Relations Unit, Mr X Nkwali: Independent
Development Trust (IDT) Regional General Manager, Mr M Makupula: Eastern
Cape Programme Portfolio Manager from the IDT, Mr E Masibi: Contractor
Registrations Manager at the Construction Industry Development Board
(CIDB), Mr R Raphiri: Procurement Manager (CIDB), Mr S Ndamase:
Parliamentary Liaison Officer in the Office of the MEC (Eastern Cape
Provincial Department of Public Works), Mr B Makhwabe: Senior Manager EPWP,
Mr K Kostile: EPWP Assistant Manager, Ms N Ndlela: EPWP Assistant Manager,
Mr J Lloyd: Communications Manager, Mr X Mkiwane: EPWP Unit, Mr W Tutani:
EPWP Unit and Ms Y Stengile.

2. Terms of reference

The overall objective of the oversight visit to the Eastern Cape Province
was for the committee to exercise its oversight mandate over the Department
of Public Works with regards to the performance of the Expanded Public
Works Programme phase 2 (EPWP 2); the eradication of mud schools and other
inappropriate structures and thereafter compile a report with findings and
recommendations to Parliament for the Minister of the Department of Public
Works to take the necessary actions in assisting the Province.


3. Summary

The Committee met with the MEC for Public Works, Ms P Majodina, the Head of
the Public Works Department in the Province, Mr B Gxilishe and other Senior
Managers in the Eastern Cape Department of Public Works.  A presentation on
EPWP 2 and a progress report on the eradication of mud schools were
presented.

Members of the Provincial Standing Committee on Public Works could not be
part of the Portfolio Committee’s oversight visit due to their Provincial
Parliament Programme.

The MEC announced that as of 1 April 2010 the Department’s name will change
to the Eastern Cape Department of Roads and Public Works. This is in an
effort to group together the infrastructure departments.

Day one of the oversight visit of the Portfolio Committee coincided with
the first day of training for the National Youth Service (NYS) recruits in
the Province. These young people had an opportunity to meet with the
members of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works who motivated them into
working hard in improving their skills by furthering their studies and by
being dedicated in their jobs.  The NYS programme in the Eastern Cape was
launched in November 2009 and 500 young people were recruited to be part of
the programme from 27 000 applicants. The programme is a joint venture
between the Department of Public Works, the then Umsobomvu and the National
Youth Commission which have since changed and collaborated to form the
National Youth Development Agency (NYDA). These young people will be
trained over a period of three months and thereafter be dispersed to
different government buildings in the Province where they will be working
as general workers. The Department is committed into skilling these young
people and study bursaries will be offered to them.

Presentation on EPWP 2:  The Province reported an achievement of 78% on
work opportunities reported against target in the infrastructure sector.
Out of the allocated R83, 551.00 incentives grant only R 22, 889.00 were
used by the Province at the time of the visit. Performance at Public Body
level was reported to be uneven both at Municipal and Departmental levels.
The challenges faced by Public Bodies in implementing EPWP 2 were
highlighted and measures to address these challenges were also identified.
The Provincial Department of Public Works will complement the technical
staff provided by the National Department of Public Works in collaboration
with the Development Bank South Africa (DBSA) Siyenza Manje programme in
supporting municipalities technically. Provincial Department of Public
Works staff is deployed to capture information on sites and partnerships
are to be created with the National Department of Public Works to train
officials in labour-intensive methods of construction.

Presentation on the eradication of mud schools: This programme is
responsible for assisting the Department of Education with the eradication
of mud and unsafe structures on a project basis as allocated to the
Department of Public Works by the Department of Education. The schools
built by the Department of Public Works are EPWP compliant. Challenges
faced by the DPW are delays in payment from the client departments, budget
constraints, insufficient resources, late submission of project list,
delays in electricity connection and delays due to weather conditions.

The Committee visited various EPWP projects in the Amathole, O R Tambo and
Alfred Nzo District Municipalies. Profiles of these projects will be given
in detail in the report under findings and the challenges which were noted
by the Committee will also be outlined in this report followed by the
Committee recommendations.

4. Findings

4.1 Amathole District Municipality

Due to the ANC Lekgotla in the Province from 1 – 2 February 2010, the
Executive Mayor and team were not available to meet with the Portfolio
Committee on Public Works.

4.1.1 Ngcingcinikhwe Access Road

This is an EPWP Kamoso awards best innovative project in the infrastructure
sector for 2009. The road is approximately 2.1 km between Ngcingcinikhwe
and Evotini Villages, approximately 54 km’s from Butterworth in the Mnquma
local Municipality. In 2007, the Eastern Cape Department of Roads and
Transport identified the requirement for all weather vehicular access to
Ngcingcinikhwe village under the inaccessible roads programme. Previous
attempts to build a road in this area failed because the road is fairly
steep.
Previously the only access for the community was a badly eroded track, too
steep for vehicles. Labour intensive construction methods were employed
providing training and local work opportunities for 109 local unemployed
people. The project had six committee members, seeing to the smooth running
of the project.
This was a R3 million project. Road has concrete and paving blocks which
guarantees that it will not wash away easily.

Requests from the Ngcingcinikhwe Community members:

    • That the road be built another kilometer further so that it can reach
      the last village;
    • There are water taps in the area but they are not getting any water
      from those taps and they request access to clean water from the
      government;
    • They request a clinic in their area, a school, electricity and
      sanitation;
    • This village of about 700 households complained that they will not be
      able to view the Soccer World Cup that will be hosted by South Africa
      as they do not have access to television;
    • They requested fencing for their communal garden so that they can
      start planting vegetables and benefit their community;

4.2 O R Tambo District Municipality

Councillor S Ntuli and the Chief Executive Officer of the O R Tambo
Academic Hospital welcomed the members of the Portfolio Committee on Public
Works in the O R Tambo District Municipality and the Hospital.

4.2.1 Bityi Ventilated Improved Pit (VIP) Sanitation Project (Ebhokisini
Village)

The O R Tambo District Municipality signed the Memorandum of Understanding
with the Department of Public Works in 2006. This project is under the
Vukuphile learnership programme. The project started in June 2009. The
initial contract with the 15 contractors who were awarded the tender by the
District Municipality required construction of 515 VIP toilets per
contractor and at the value of R3, 1 million per contractor. Specifications
changed as the size of the toilets needed to be increased which means extra
costs and that reduced the number of toilets to be constructed by each
contractor to 414 structures. Training was provided for both the
contractors and the supervisors. The supervisors received technical
training equivalent to NQF level 4 and the Contractors received managerial
training equivalent to NQF level 2. In learnership programmes prices get
negotiated unlike the normal tendering process. The learners are paid
R65.00 per day.

The workers in this project did not have the Personal Protective Clothing
and the contractor the Committee met insisted that in the original tender
document, the requirement to provide the personal protective clothing was
not specified and was later included. The Committee observed that safety
standards were not met on site. The contractor complained about the two
months delay in payment. The community members had a number of complaints
and some of the complaints were a result of poor communication between the
District Municipality Officials and the community members.  There were
problems and uncertainty around the standard of the toilets seats used, the
digging of holes and payment for doing that, the type of soil these toilets
are built in and the size of the toilets. Some of the residents claimed
that these toilets were not safe and the toilet pits were shallow. The
project facilitator from the District Municipality claimed that a
geotechnical investigation was done in the area and the toilets are built
according to the results of the assessment done.

4.2.2 King Sabata Dalindyebo (KSD) Clean Up Campaign

The project has employed 50 people, 18 males and 32 females who are
responsible for cleaning the Umtata CBD and the surrounding areas (Mqanduli
and Coffee Bay). These people do refuse collection and clean the refuse
that has been illegally dumped. The project beneficiaries belong in one of
two groups, one group is an initiative of the Department of Environmental
Affairs called DEDEA and the other is Buyisela/Ndaloyethu concept. Those
that are in the DEDEA group each earn R1 600.00 per month and the Buyisela
beneficiaries earn R50.00 per day. The Dedea project started in June 2009
and the Buyisela project started in December 2009.

Some of the project beneficiaries were working without protective clothing
due to procurement challenges within the Municipality. The Municipality was
faced with a challenge of having an old fleet that was as old as 18 years
and the Municipality budget could not accommodate the three year tender for
the lease of transport. The land fill site used is not a permitted site and
a new site given to the Municipality is under land claims and cannot be
used until the land claim issue is sorted.
The workers asked for an increase in their stipend, for safety boots,
vests, gloves and overalls and that the project be extended to be over six
months.
The KSD Municipality was asked to compile a file with the necessary
documentation supporting the challenges they have around acquiring of the
landfill site.

4.2.3 Ruze Junior Secondary School

The school was one of the unsafe structures. It was built of prefabricated
material and had no windows and as a result most parents took their kids to
better schools in the area. The school has 17 teachers and 600 learners.
The new structure had 14 classrooms, toilets and a reception room.

The School Principal mentioned that they still needed furniture in the form
of desks, chairs, tables, cabinets, security clerk and computers.

The community requested an access road to the T173 road, a traditional
council hall and a resident for the Chief of the area with all the
resources needed for the Chief to carry out his duties.

Dokodela Senior Primary School at Mhlanganweni location also needs
renovations, the school is built in prefabs and it does not have decent and
adequate furniture. The school has 175 learners and five teachers who teach
Grade R to Grade six.

4.3 Alfred Nzo District Municipality

The Councilors in this District Municipality promised to take a step
further in service delivery. There was a concern about the Department of
Education not fully utilising their allocated budget which impacts
negatively on the community. The Councilors promised to submit a list of
schools and the EPWP 2 projects that need attention. A request was made
that the rural municipalities should be given more funds for them to speed
up service delivery.

4.3.1 Alfred Nzo VIP Sanitation Project
This Municipality was placed under an intervention in terms of Section 139
of the Constitution and after the interventions a new Senior Manager for
Infrastructure Development and Municipal Services was hired in October
2009.

The district has been divided into seven zone centers where material is
produced for the construction of VIP toilets. Two service providers were
awarded the contracts, one service provider served five municipalities and
the other served two municipalities. This project uses the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant (MIG) funds. The District Municipality acknowledged
their failure to claim the R 28 million of the incentive grants.
The project visited by the Committee employed 150 people and machinery is
used to produce bricks, one machine produces 6000 bricks per day. Slabs and
toilet seats are also produced on site.

The project beneficiaries earn a stipend of R65.00 per day. There were also
labourers who were paid R14.00 per task and that was viewed by the
Committee as problematic as there were no clear measures in place to
measure a task. The labourers on site did not have protective clothing.

The contractor building VIP toilets was asked to devise a method of
changing the staff he employs, staff members should know how many months
their contracts would be instead of continuous change which at times would
come as a surprise to some of the people working in this project.

4.3.2 Msukeli Arts and Culture Centre

The Msukeli Arts and Culture Centre is a state of the art centre which was
built to house different cooperatives and small businesses in the area. The
centre was built and funded by the Alfred Nzo District Municipality at a
cost of R10 million. The project started in the year 2006 and as time went
on, they started to experience problems around management of the centre.
The manager of the centre resigned and the community accused her of
mismanagement of funds.

The centre owed Eskom and their electricity supply was cut. They can no
longer afford diesel to pump the water and as a result most of the
facilities in the centre are closed e.g. the restaurant, internet café, the
hydroponics’ project, pottery, bead work and sewing centre.

The tunnels used for the planting of tomatoes were destroyed by the storm
in 2009. There are 15 staff members who get paid stipends of R500.00, a
caretaker who earns R3 500.00 and a gardener who earns R1000.00 per month.

When the project was fully functional, their arts and crafts used to be
exhibited in different arts festivals including the Grahamstown arts
festival.

On the 17 February 2010 a new board will be elected that will be
responsible for the management of this facility.

The Mayor of the Alfred Nzo District Municipality together with the Alfred
Nzo Development Agency were asked to assist in the management of the
Msukeli Arts and Culture centre until a new board has been elected. The
project must be run in a manner that would raise funds for the project and
make it self sustainable by reviewing its revenue model from their business
plan.

4.3.3 Brooksnek Junior Secondary School

The project started in October 2008 and will be completed on the 31 March
2010. This was one of the unsafe structures; the first school building was
a mud structure which was later changed into a prefabricated structure. By
the time of its eradication it was already collapsing and unsafe. The
project consisted of 15 classrooms, 26 toilets and an Administration block.
Project beneficiaries were trained in bricklaying, plastering and painting.


5. Conclusion

The Committee decided that it will do a follow up visit in the Province.
The incentive grants given to Provinces under the EPWP 2 were under
utilized by the Eastern Cape Province.

Capacity problems were noted in the Municipalities and in the Provincial
Department of Public Works as this was also proved by the inability to
fully utilise the incentive grants of the EPWP 2 programme. The Committee
Chairperson emphasised government’s commitment in fighting poverty, rural
development and ensuring good education for the children of our Country.

6. Recommendations

    • The Committee recommends that the social protection and community
      development cluster which comprises of a number of Government
      Departments should take into consideration and act upon the situation
      of the people of Ngcingcinikhwe village in Ndabakazi, Butterworth.

    • The Portfolio Committee on Public Works recommends that this report be
      adopted as the record of the House, the findings on it must be
      considered by the Eastern Cape Provincial Department of Public Works
      and the National Department of Public Works for improvement on the
      implementation of EPWP 2 projects. Municipal projects to be monitored
      and municipalities are encouraged to report on their EPWP projects and
      communicate their challenges in writing with the Provincial Department
      of Public Works.

Report to be considered.


