---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 20 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-20
---

THURSDAY, 20 MAY 2010
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The House Chairperson (Mr R J Tau) took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr Z MLENZANA: House Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I will move:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with interest that the coming by-election in Ward 44,
         Gugulethu, in the Western Cape is a mere test of strength between
         the ANC and the DA;


      2) further notes that Cope has taken a decision not to participate in
         these by-elections, despite calls from the ruling party that Cope
         should participate so as to split votes, which would give the
         ruling party space to win; and


      3) therefore hopes that the best party wins and acknowledges that Cope
         will not persuade its members and supporters towards either side.

Qhude maniniki, zindala zombini, zoqhudelana, thina siyiCope sodl’ efileyo.
[Go ahead and fight to the death. We as Cope will celebrate with whoever
wins.][Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Order, order, hon members!

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I will move:

  That the Council –


      1) notes that the department of transport in the Eastern Cape has
         fallen behind in the apartheid dispensation with road maintenance,
         especially in the Ciskei and Transkei;


      2) further notes that all rural economic development projects are
         doomed if the road links are not maintained and social, health and
         police services will not be provided to rural communities and
         education would also be adversely affected due to road conditions;
         and

      3) calls on the Minister to review the equitable share model for
         transport for the province and to adjust the current formula of the
         equitable share for roads to address the conservative estimate of
         maintenance backlogs of R18 billion.

             SIX-YEAR-OLD GIRL LOCKED AWAY FOR OVER THREE YEARS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes with absolute shock and dismay reports of a six-year-old girl
         who was tied up and locked away for over three years;


      2) further notes that both parents of the girl have since been
         arrested and that she was taken into protective custody by social
         welfare;


      3) takes this opportunity to express its profound appreciation to the
         community for reporting this blatant violation and abuse of such a
         young life, who is most likely going to suffer lifelong trauma and
         scars and calls on parents to ensure that they seek help for
         children who suffer from any mental or physical disabilities rather
         than locking them behind closed doors; and

      4) calls on the departments responsible for social welfare and
         development and the rights of children to launch robust campaigns
         that will educate our people about assistance available for
         children with disabilities and those needing physiological
         assistance.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   MBULAENI MULAUDZI’S FIRST INTERNATIONAL VICTORY IN IAAF WORLD CHALLENGE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that Mbulaeni Mulaudzi secured his first international
         victory of the season at the IAAF World Challenge meeting in Daegu,
         South Korea on Wednesday, where he won the men’s two-lap 800 metres
         race in 1:45:01; and


      2) conveys the message that South Africa is very proud of him and we
         hope that ASA invests more in such talented athletes, with more
         support, especially towards the upcoming Commonwealth Games.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

            UNIT FOR MULTIDRUG-RESISTANT TB PATIENTS TO BE BUILT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that the Department of Health has budgeted R14 million to
         build a 40-bed multidrug-resistant, MDR, unit for TB patients and
         establish a comprehensive support system that will ensure the
         support of community-based management of the spread of multidrug-
         resistant TB; and


      2) takes this opportunity to welcome the province’s commitment to
         improving the province’s TB cure rate and encourages communities
         not to default on their medication until the completion of their
         treatment period.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             ANC TO LAUNCH IMVUSELELO CAMPAIGN AT NATIONAL RALLY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B L MASHILE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that the ANC will launch the Imvuselelo campaign at a
         national ANC rally at KaMhlushwa Stadium in Nkomazi, Mpumalanga
         this coming Sunday, 23 May 2010, under the theme “Building and
         consolidating the unity of the Movement towards 2012”;


      2) further notes that President Jacob Zuma will be the main speaker
         during the rally where he will also welcome new and former members
         of the ANC; and


      3) takes this opportunity to call on all the people of Mpumalanga and
         surrounding areas to join the ANC as it prepares for its 100-year
         celebration since its establishment in 1912.

[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In the light of the objection, the
motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will become a
notice of motion and will be printed in the next Order Paper.

                          CONFIDENCE IN GOVERNMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL (Mr S S Mazosiwe): Chairperson, I move
without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that a leading economist of the International Monetary Fund
         or IMF, Abebe Selassie, has described South Africa as “a classic
         case of a country building buffers in the good times and using
         those buffers when the crisis hits”, predicting three per cent
         growth in the country’s economy this year;


      2) takes this opportunity to welcome this important recognition by the
         IMF of the ANC government’s good leadership during the recent
         global financial crisis; and

      3) acknowledges that this is yet another confirmation that the country
         has, for the past 16 years of constitutional democratic rule, been
         in capable hands under the ANC.

[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In the light of the objection, the
motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will become a
notice of motion and will be printed in the next Order Paper.

     NEWLY APPOINTED ADMINISTRATOR OF NALA MUNICIPALITY UNDERMINING NCOP
                                 RESOLUTION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council –


      1) notes that the newly appointed administrator of Nala Municipality
         in the Free State is undermining a resolution by this Council,
         namely -


          a) that he immediately review the appointment of a very
             controversial municipal manager, who was also the Chief
             Financial Officer, CFO of this municipality; and


          b) that serious allegations of corruption and fraud are being
             investigated against him; and


      2) calls on Minister Shiceka to immediately act against the
         administrator and remove the Nala Municipality manager immediately.

[Interjections.]


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In light of the objection, the motion
may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will become a notice
of motion and will be printed in the next Order Paper. Order, hon members!

  FARMS PURCHASED THROUGH LAND BANK NOT PRODUCTIVE AND EMERGING FARMERS IN
                             NEED OF ASSISTANCE

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I move without notice:
   That the Council –


      1) notes that in a reply to a written question, the Minister of
         Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries stated that there are 98 farms
         purchased through the Land Bank in the Free State province alone,
         which are not productive;


      2) acknowledges that this shocking state of affairs must be rectified
         to ensure food security for South Africa’s growing population; and


      3) calls for technical support and training to be given to assist
         emerging farmers who are eager and serious about farming and do not
         merely wish to possess ground.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is there any objection to the motion?
Can you lift up your hand, hon member, so that I can see you?

In light of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will become a notice of motion and will be printed in the
next Order Paper.

 READINESS OF DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS TO DEAL WITH INFLUX OF SOCCER FANS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the declaration of readiness by the Department of Home
         Affairs to issue free visas to thousands of soccer fans expected to
         visit the country next month for the 2010 Fifa World Cup that kicks
         off on 11 June 2010;


      2) further notes that the Department of Home Affairs has already
         issued 3 500 work permits to Fifa employees, delegations and teams;


      3) acknowledges that the department has also placed airline liaison
         officers at various airports to help clear passengers and enable
         the police to screen visitors long before they arrive; and

      4) takes this opportunity to congratulate the Department of Home
         Affairs and all the outstanding compatriots who are working
         tirelessly to make sure that our nation is ready. Feel it, it is
         here! Ke nako!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
     POWER SUPPLY TO CHRIS HANI BARAGWANATH HOSPITAL IN SOWETO DISRUPTED

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, I move without notice:
   That the Council -

      1) notes with dismay that the power supply to Chris Hani Baragwanath
         Hospital in Soweto has been disrupted for two days because of cable
         theft;


      2) further notes that the problem of cable theft is a perennial
         problem with very serious consequences for our institutions and our
         economy; and

      3) urges government to forbid any trade in any cables and to
         effectively police both the buyers as well as the suppliers so that
         transgressors can be brought to book.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   DEATH OF SIX BABIES AT CHARLOTTE MAXEKE JOHANNESBURG ACADEMIC HOSPITAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes the passing on of the six babies at Charlotte Maxeke Academic
         Hospital in Johannesburg, Gauteng on Tuesday, 17 May 2010;


      2) supports the initiatives taken by the office of the MEC, Ms Qedani
         Mahlangu, to investigate this unfortunate incident; and

      3) conveys its condolences to members of the families.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

      MAYOR OF MOPANI IN LIMPOPO GIVES SCHOOL UNIFORMS TO POOR LEARNERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes the show of goodwill and gesture of humanity displayed by the
         district executive of the Mopani District Municipality in Limpopo,
         mayor Joshua Matlou, who handed school uniforms to 220 poor pupils
         from 11 schools in the Mopani district;


      2) further notes that the majority of the learners were from poor and
         unemployed households and some from child-headed households; and

      3) takes this opportunity to extend its profound appreciation to the
         district mayor for his gesture of goodwill and commitment to
         increase the municipality’s annual bursary scheme from R500 000 to
         R1 million in the next financial year.

[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In the light of the objection the
motion may not be proceeded with. Therefore the motion without notice will
become a notice of motion.

                            SEARCH FOR FISHERMEN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C J DE BEER: Voorsitter, ek doen die volgende voorstel sonder
kennisgewing:

   Dat die Raad —
      1) kennis neem dat agb Sylvia Lucas – LUR vir Omgewingsake en
         Natuurbewaring in die Noord-Kaap – die polisie van Hondeklipbaai,
         die watereenheid van die polisie in Upington, sowel as die
         maritieme-eenheid in Kaapstad, sedert gistermiddag betrokke was by
         ’n soektog wat geloods is na vissermanne wat 15 km die see ingevaar
         het nadat die wind hulle daar ingedryf het;

     2) kennis neem dat hulle ’n uur gelede, 26 km suid van Hondeklipbaai,
        gevind is;

      3) sy dank uitspreek teenoor die rolspelers wat gehelp het om hierdie
         mense aan wal te bring.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C J DE BEER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that the hon Sylvia Lucas, MEC for environmental affairs and
         tourism in the Northern Cape, the police of Hondeklip Bay, the
         water unit of the police in Upington, as well as Cape Town’s
         maritime unit have been involved in a search for fishermen which
         was launched yesterday afternoon, after a wind had pushed them some
         15 km out into the ocean;


      2) further notes that one hour ago they were found, 26 km south of
         Hondeklip Bay; and

      3) expresses its gratitude to the role-players for assisting in
         bringing these people back to shore.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

          STUDENT MIDWIFE ASSISTS COMMUTER WITH BIRTH OF HER CHILD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the brave and quick thinking of Susan Hendricks, a student
         midwifery nurse when she helped a woman, Nopinki Ntshono, with her
         sudden labour of her child in a Bellville taxi rank;


      2) further notes that she immediately assured the dignity and privacy
         of the woman from the peeping eyes of the bystanding commuters by
         asking other women to form a circle around her;


      3) acknowledges that Nopinki Ntshono successfully delivered her baby
         and could then go to a hospital for further medical assistance; and

      4) recognises the brave and unconditional service of Susan Hendricks
         who saved the lives of the mother and child and thanks her very
         much for this deed.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       MALADMINISTRATION IN ANC CAUCUS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with immense concern and total dissatisfaction that there are
         numerous rumblings within the ANC caucus stemming from unilateral
         action of the leadership of the Whippery, enormous amounts of money
         unaccounted for from the caucus fund, and secretaries who were
         unceremoniously and unexpectedly fired from their jobs;


      2) further notes that the report on the monies gone missing has not
         been dealt with transparently and that no statement of
         clarification has been made as ought to have happened in a
         constitutional democracy; and


      3) therefore challenges the government not to try and bury any
         maladministration, fraud or crime perpetrated by its leaders, but
         in the spirit of the Constitution to deal with the issues frankly,
         openly and ethically to keep the trust of South Africa.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much, hon member. Is
there any objection to the motion? In the light of the objection, the
motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will become a
notice of motion. Thank you very much, hon members.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 19-Sport and Recreation:

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, molweni maMpondo
[greetings to you, Mpondos], Deputy Minister of Sport and Recreation
director-general, members of this august Council, MECs from the various
provinces, hon members, when we are not here, Gert and I always skinder
[gossip] about the NCOP.

What we say is that it always exhibits the fact that members of this House
are direct representatives from the provinces. Debates here are always
marked by empirical evidence that is always evinced during those debates. I
am absolutely thrilled to have been scheduled on a date when I could
personally be here again.

South Africa and the world will never forget their exhilaration when on 15
May 2004 the Fifa President, Mr Blatter, announced that South Africa would
be hosting the World Cup in 2010. However, immediately after that
exhilaration, South Africa was inundated by a chorus of cynics and
malcontents, from within South Africa as well as abroad, who already
prognosticated the fact that the World Cup was not likely to take place in
South Africa.

The Plan B prophets of doom and securocrats, who appointed themselves as
experts on our expertise on security matters, had started the lobbying from
Australia in the south, right up to Canada in the north, and across to the
USA and Western Europe. They were trying to lobby other countries to take
over the hosting of this very important event.

Of course, they all failed because, on the basis of scientific and
empirical evidence, Fifa was not convinced. Furthermore, other nations that
have always been on our side refused to be lobbied into these negative
initiatives.

The question in 2010, just three weeks before the biggest event in the
world takes place, is: Which buzz is bigger - the buzz of 15 May 2004, or
the one of May 2010? Which one is of a better quality? I leave that to the
members to ponder on the basis of empirical evidence.

One thing is for sure, hosting the 2010 World Cup infused our people with
invigorated enthusiasm for their nationhood. It has also unleashed a kind
of energy we have not seen before – that of wanting to be part of the
building of that nationhood. We have seen the fulfilment of what our
leaders have said – the 21st century will, indeed, unfold as the African
century.

The Fifa World Cup presents us with the golden opportunity - and I have
said this before - of hosting this prestigious event. This golden
opportunity is not likely to be repeated during the lifetime of any of us
in this Chamber. It presents us with an opportunity to market ourselves as
a people, a country, a continent and as legitimate members of the
international family of nations.

It presents us with an opportunity to remove Afro-pessimism and replace it
with confidence in ourselves as a people and in our country as a possible
place for investment. It presents us with an opportunity to broaden tourism
opportunities and also to strengthen the preference of those who want to
build the economy of the world through us. The South African economy and
tourism are already recipients of this great initiative.

In 2009, when we went for the Confederations Cup, many cynics were already
pontificating on what should be done to avert a crisis. But by the time
they left our shores they were all looking forward to the World Cup in
2010. The reason is that the Confederations Cup opened a window of what we
can be as a nation. The Confederations Cup also showcased what this
nonracial nation that we have been speaking about can really do for the
rest of the world.

The President attested to what the 2010 World Cup does for the government
and the people and South Africa. He mentioned the hard work that we had to
endure; the fruits that are now visible in the form of the beautiful stadia
that everybody sees at home and on international television networks, the
beautiful roads and the transport systems that have been refurbished or
introduced to provide a better mode of transport for our communities.

The President also alluded to the upgrading of airports and airstrips,
communication systems and a whole range of infrastructure. We can also
allude to the local turfs that we have cultivated and continue to
cultivate, as well as the various initiatives that we will refer to just
now.
The 2010 World Cup has also introduced our children to other people; the
culture and language of other people; and the flags and the national
anthems of South Africa and those of other countries of the world. Indeed,
it has inculcated a spirit of internationalism and nonracialism. It has
also done much to banish xenophobic attitudes. I will not mention the
cynics that accompanied us all these seven years; I think that is common
knowledge.

I would now like to get to what we are doing as a department, over and
above the co-ordination of all the initiatives of preparing for the 2010
World Cup. Our people must just open their hearts and hands, take out their
pots and plates, and get ready to welcome the world. Our people can do this
either with a “smiley” [a cooked sheep’s head] here or a hushpuppy
[trotters] there, boerewors or the skilpadjies [liver wrapped in fat] of
the Northern Cape, and so on. All of those dishes will excite our visitors
because they don’t have them in their countries.

Our fundamental responsibility continues to be part of the national agenda
of reconstruction and development – an agenda which seeks to attain a
transformed South Africa. This would be a South Africa that has been
articulated by most of us in our dreams and currently in our programme.

I have said before that there is not one South African that I know of who
is opposed to the agenda of transforming South Africa into a nonracial,
democratic, nonsexist, prosperous and peaceful country. Not one of us has
ever articulated opposition to this agenda. Even with regard to those who
are sometimes labelled as right-wing, when it comes to the nature of the
society that we want to establish, they don’t disagree on this issue. What
we disagree on is, of course, the modus operandi. How do we get there? How
do we achieve this nonracist and democratic South Africa?

As the ANC, we have consistently said that it is not going to happen of its
own volition. It has to be assisted through the intervention of the state,
hence we came up with the concept of a developmental state.

Chairperson, I am sure that when you read your newspapers this morning you
would have been surprised and encouraged to see that Chancellor Merkel of
the German Republic is reported to have announced yesterday that Germany is
sick and tired of being pontificated to by the International Monetary Fund,
IMF, which has been giving us the impression for all these years that
market forces will intervene in these things and that they can correct
themselves. Merkel says Germany will regulate the economy because market
forces driven by profit motives are not able to effect changes; they are
not able to introduce sustainable communities.

I am excited that such a strong leader from Western Europe is reiterating
what we have been saying for so many years, and nobody would listen to us.
We have to intervene because it is not by accident that many parts of our
country continue to be deprived of certain amenities and facilities, and
you will hear more about this today. Everybody would have seen this,
especially the hon members coming from the provinces.

This is not by accident. It is a direct product and legacy of a number of
Acts. One of them that I always refer to is the separate amenities Act,
which was based on the Group Areas Act which, in turn, was based on the
Population Registration Act, and so on. These disparities are the product
of a deliberate programme of distorted planning and distorted access to
resources. It is common knowledge that our communities continue to be in
that distorted order even today.

It is also common knowledge, as Chancellor Merkel would agree, that unless
we deracialise and regulate the ownership of the means of production or the
ownership of the economy, it is not going to happen overnight. We have to
make sure that in education, health, housing, etc, money is made available.


However, we also have to make sure that, in terms of sports facilities and
amenities, there is a special dedicated fund to do that or it’s not going
to happen. We do not have the bank account that the Ford Motor Company had
to build the Ford stadium in New Brighton. We don’t have the bank account
which General Motors, Mercedes Benz and all these private sector companies
had to build the facilities that we have, albeit in a distorted way.

Facilities that are located in a distorted way were not necessarily built
by government, even under the old order. They were built by the so-called
patriotic businesspeople. So we must make a call to the patriotic
businesspeople of the current juncture to make a contribution in this
respect.

We are not complaining as if nothing is being done in this respect. A
number of partners have been able to assist us to make do with the small
budget that we get from Parliament in terms of building facilities,
something which Gert will be elaborating on just now. We make do by
stretching the little bit that we have together with other state
departments like, for example, Health, Education, Social Development,
Correctional Services, and so on. We must continue to lobby for more
assistance.

In the past five years we have been reporting on the growth of the mass
participation programme. We are satisfied that participation of our people
in sport has improved. This is not my view, but that of the researchers of
both the Centre for Information Systems Research, CISR, as well as the
University of Pretoria. It has improved precisely because of our efforts in
mass participation.

With regard to that, however, we have had to deal with the issue of
developing that to a higher level because they can’t just remain at a
recreational level. Our people must also be part and parcel of the elite
performance in all spheres of sport. Our strategy, which was announced in
May 2004, is that we should start with school sport. Thereafter we have to
go to community sport and rebuild the clubs with the basis being the
schoolkids, who will go across to community sport.

I’m glad that hon MEC Kgothule from the Free State is here to hear what I
have to say. I dub him “the gold medallist” in the delivery of our
programmes in the development of sport. [Applause.] I know that his
neighbour from Gauteng will contest the fact that they were the first
province to have the co-ordinating sports structure launched by me. That is
true; however, Free State will also say that we allowed them to be the
first even though we were ready ahead of them. So Gauteng leads and others
must just follow.

A few weeks ago I had the pleasure to go to Gauteng to launch - the first
in the country – a school sports co-ordinating structure. I don’t know how
many people were there, but I know how enthusiastic and excited those
people were. Again, MEC Kgothule, our congratulations to you and to Premier
Ace Magashule for identifying you as MEC.

Communities in the Northern Cape continue to be plagued by the distances
between places. One has to spend the whole day travelling from Kimberley to
Upington. When one gets to Upington, one has to struggle to go back to
Okiep and so on. But, nonetheless, they are doing a sterling job in terms
of mobilisation and organisation. I have no doubt in my mind that the next
school sports structure that we will put in place – no, it will not be the
Western Cape – will be in the Northern Cape.

We want to make a call and a plea to all members of this august House to
please go and help with the establishment of these structures. They are not
going to be established by ghosts; they are going to be established by us
in our communities and constituencies.

Our partners are also found outside state departments. They include the
local authorities, international bodies like the European Union, UK Sport
and the UN. Again, the Deputy Minister will talk about that.

All these partners have been able to release some funds for us to build
facilities in areas like Ikhwezi in Jansenville, at Qunu in King Sabata
Dalindyebo Municipality, Batho location in Mangaung Local Municipality,
Winterveld in the City of Tshwane, Melville in KwaDukuza Local
Municipality, Gamanamela in Polokwane Local Municipality, and Lekgalong
village in Rustenburg Local Municipality. With the little that we have, we
are making a difference in those communities who never had much
development.

In Vhembe we have just opened the largest indoor sports facility which will
focus on boxing and related activities. This facility is rated as the
largest south of the Sahara. It is a very important facility for that
community and we have no doubt that it is going to produce more champions
than old man Baloyi is already producing.

We have 11 students who are studying for qualifications in physical
education and sport administration in Cuba. They come from all nine
provinces. We can only make a call to the provinces to make use of them
when they graduate. Some of them will graduate this June. I know MEC
Kgothule will definitely make use of them to assist in the implementation
of the physical education programme that we introduced in 2005. This
programme is not taking place in 2010 because nobody will do it. But this
time there will some people to do it.

We have always reported in this House that we are meeting a brick wall with
respect to accessing the municipal infrastructure grant, MIG. These
provinces and the local authorities are stealing that grant. All of them
will agree - they steal that grant. When there is pressure to pave the
streets, human-resource-related issues, or electricity problems they go for
the MIG. However, I can announce that, at least from the side of the
National Lottery, we now have a Minister and a national chairperson who
seem to be in tandem with us in trying to use those funds for national
development strategies.

The MIG is an embarrassment because if one compares it with the Building
for Sport and Recreation project, which was terminated in 2004, one will
see that over four years we had built over 364 facilities. During the years
of the MIG, we have only built 155 facilities.

We are agitating and lobbying for this august House to stand with us in
insisting that the MIG be reverted to a poverty alleviation grant, just as
the Building for Sport and Recreation grant was. We were able to manage the
Building for Sport and Recreation project grant according to our
prerogatives.

Our concern is also that sports facilities are not going to be sustainable
without provinces and local municipalities budgeting for their maintenance
when they are fully constructed. Even though we have the plans for
everybody for whom we are building a facility, we also do need the
provinces to make follow-ups on this.

In the field of sport and science, we must accede to the fact that gone are
the days when you and I ran on the road, pulling a tractor tyre with two
boulders in our hands, trying to be fit so that we could perform better.
Today our children need proper scientific support and advice.
To this end, we are strengthening that advisory service. We are not going
to give those scientific support services but we will co-ordinate the
scientists and institutions that have them for the purpose of providing
those resources to our children. We pay the money, they provide the
expertise.

To this end, we also pay for the Commonwealth Games. I heard somebody in
the motions talking about the Commonwealth Games in India; we paid for
that. We paid for the preparation, conditioning, transport and everything
related to those games. All federations are recipients of that grant.

Chairperson, I have to report on Caster Semenya. I know you agree. Caster
Semenya has been a model of what science can do in the field of sport.
Instead of people talking in general terms, specialists say what needs to
be done. I am glad to report that the third world war that we declared has
been won. I know people don’t think there was a war. There has been a war
for the last five months and we won 99% of the issues that we went to war
for.

The last battle, which I have no doubt will be won in the next three weeks,
is the announcement that Caster will go back to the track. [Applause.]
Scientists in South Africa and abroad agree on what should be done and they
will make an announcement in due course. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, I have a question. I am sure the Minister
would like to take a question.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, I will not allow a question. Hon Minister,
you can take your seat. Hon member, you can see the Minister privately and
ask your question. [Applause.]

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister, hon members in
the House ...

... a kwa tshimilogong ke tlhalose gore go na le dikgang tse Tona a di
gatisitseng tse a di buileng mme jaaka modulasetilo wa komiti ke tlile go
di gatelela le go feta. [... let me start by explaining that there are
issues that the Minister spoke about and emphasised, and as the chairperson
of the committee I’m going to overemphasise them.]

Today the Department of Sport and Recreation presents its Budget Vote, 22
days before the actual commencement of the first Fifa World Cup tournament
on the African continent. It is time to welcome the world, time to do the
Diski, time to fly the South African flag and blow vuvuzelas. Indeed, as
Sepp Blatter, President of Fifa, said:

   Plan A is South Africa; Plan B is South Africa and Plan C is South
   Africa.

Media suggestions were floating around that some countries were literally
already standing by to take over this responsibility from us, since they
were certain that we would fail to do the things Fifa required of us to
ensure that the 2010 Soccer World Cup would take place in our country.

Certain desperate people went as far as to suggest a close proximity and
correlation between the death of the AWB leader and the Royal Bafokeng
Stadium. This reminded me of a similar technique used in the pre-1994 era,
when the same AWB leader was given the freedom of Schweizer-Reneke by the
AWB, and Comrade Joe Modise was given the freedom of Ipelegeng on 7 August
1993.

All the armed forces were deployed and the media galvanised by the
anticipation of bloodshed, but this anticipation was unsuccessful, futile
and worthless. These events confirmed that South Africans are peace-loving
people.

Although South Africa has successfully hosted a number of events like the
Rugby World Cup in 1995; the African Cup of Nations in 1996; the All Africa
Games in 1999; and the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002, to
mention but a few, the Fifa Soccer World Cup 2010 is clearly different. One
needs to take domestic and international attention and interest into
consideration.

More extensively, on the legacy issue it is worth noting that the economic
legacy, according to the research by Grant Thornton, is that the 2010 Fifa
World Cup will contribute R55,7 billion to the South African economy,
generate about 450 000 jobs and contribute R19,3 billion in tax income to
the government. There are also firm estimates that about 483 000 tourists
will spend around R8,5 billion during their stay in South Africa.

The African economy in general will surely change in a more positive
direction. It will display the continent’s positive values, and the world
media will relay these values to the entire world in a way that will surely
attract foreign investors to our continent.

Regarding mass participation, I’m happy that the Minister talked about
this, but the time has arrived for all of us to scrutinise the impact and
link of sports development, not only from a school sport and professional
leagues perspective, but also from that of the broader principle agenda of
transformation. This should occur through assessing the impact of
programmes such as mass participation and sport support services.

We cannot shy away from asking the following: How is school sport linked to
mass participation? What is this programme producing in terms of national
goals? How is mass participation linked to rural activities? How is mass
participation linked to high performance? How is mass participation linked
to the production of professional players? Why do we struggle to replace
players like Bryan Habana, Makhaya Ntini and Benni McCarthy on our national
teams?

I’m raising these questions because the mass participation programme
conditional grant allocation has increased at an annual rate of 45,1%
between 2006-07 and 2009-10. This programme is the major consumer of the
department’s budget.

The municipal infrastructure grant, MIG, is a consolidated grant mechanism
incorporating various programmes which were managed by different
departments and was targeted at the provision of municipal infrastructure.
The primary aim of the MIG is purely to provide basic infrastructure for
the poor and to all South Africans.

The introduction of the MIG in 2004 saw a sharp decline in the number of
sport and recreation facilities implemented, compared to the period of the
Building for Sport and Recreation Programme, BSRP.

In 2004-05, for example, under the Building for Sport and Recreation
Programme, compared to the MIG, the following facilities were built: In
2003-04, the BSRP had 114 facilities and the MIG 0 facilities; in 2004-05,
the BSRP had 109 and the MIG 0 facilities. Based on the above information,
it can be deduced that sport and recreation is not well catered for through
the MIG.

The MIG funds for public municipal infrastructure, which includes, amongst
other things, public transport such as bus shelters, children’s facilities,
cemeteries and local sport and recreation facilities are not adequate to
address all these needs. However, the manner in which it is used prompts us
to suggest that it be retrieved from the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs.

There are further constraints due to the fact that in terms of MIG policy,
MIG funds can only be used for basic levels of service whilst most
municipalities, except for some metropolitan and larger municipalities, do
not have funds for intermediate and higher-level services, which are
necessary for the development of sport.

The MIG funds are also only for services to the poor. Areas which are
classified as not poor, but which may not have access to sport and
recreation facilities have to source alternative funding. This funding is
currently nonexistent, except in some metropolitan municipalities and
provincial departments that receive allocations for sport and recreation
facilities from their provincial treasuries. It is therefore evident that
the sport and recreation facilities backlog, which is estimated at
R14 billion, will not be met unless a different approach is employed in
this country.

Mind you, the facilities co-ordination programme receives an allocation of
R6,6 million. According to the annual report, some of the money in this
programme is used for the compensation of departmental employees and other
personnel-related costs. This obviously indicates the long way we still
have to go if we are to make significant changes in the provision of basic
facilities for our children.

So, as members of this Council, it remains crucial that when we embark on
our oversight role we consider the following: firstly, make practical
follow-ups on the unsatisfactory revelations shared by the committee of
public accounts in the annual report; secondly, conduct oversight on basic
facilities built and upgraded to have first-hand evidence on public
spending; thirdly, monitor the success and weaknesses of mass
participation; and lastly, elaborate on an integrated and comprehensive
antipoverty strategy, which addresses sections of the population most
affected by the scourge of poverty such as youth, women, children, people
living in informal settlements and people with disabilities. Ke Nako. [Now
is the time.] Thank you. Ayoba!

Mr W F FABER: Chair, Minister, Deputy Minister, MEC Williams of the
Northern Cape, and hon members, it is indeed a pleasure to announce that
tomorrow we will be counting down the 21 days before the kickoff between
South Africa’s Bafana Bafana and Mexico.

All the stadiums are ready and waiting for the biggest event ever held in
this beautiful country of ours. I am sure that it is going to be a unique
and spectacular event that the world has never seen before or expected from
Africa, and in particular South Africa.

It is also a pleasure for Kimberley and its people to be able to host the
Uruguayan soccer team; and we thank you, Minister, as well as our MEC, that
you assisted us with that.

In die jaar dat Suid-Afrika die grootste skouspel ter wêreld, die
Sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi, aanbied, is dit egter teleurstellend dat die
departement wat ten nouste hierby betrokke is ’n gekwalifiseerde
ouditverslag gekry het. Ons pluk nou die vrugte van die aanstel van persone
wat nie bekwaam genoeg was vir hul poste nie.

Ek hoop dat die huidige direkteur-generaal, mnr Petersen, nie dieselfde
fout sal maak as sy voorganger nie. Ek vertrou dat die nuwe aanstellings
wat deur hom gemaak is, die gevolg sal hê dat die departement op die vorige
gekwalifiseerde ouditverslag sal verbeter. Hoor jy, Freddie?

Die DA kan u verseker dat waar die DA in die Wes-Kaap regeer, hy hom nie
sal skuldig maak aan wanpraktyke wat tot ’n gekwalifiseerde ouditverslag
sal lei nie. Freddie, jy moet mooi luister. Na 2014 se nasionale
verkiesing, sal die Noord-Kaap provinsie, waar die DA dan ook sal regeer,
hom by die Wes-Kaap aansluit om goeie bestuurspraktyke te bevorder.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Voorsitter, een van die grootste tragedies wat hom ook hierdie afgelope
jaar in sport afgespeel het, is die Caster Semenya-fiasko. Op ’n hartelose
en onverantwoordelike wyse is een van ons mees belowende atlete se lewe,
sowel as haar sportloopbaan, verwoes. Die optrede van mnr Chuene, die oud-
president van Atletiek Suid-Afrika, ASA, en sy mede-raadslede was
onaanvaarbaar.

Die DA is verlig dat die regering van hom en sy trawante ontslae geraak
het, en dit na vele vrae aan die Minister deur die DA en druk van die
publiek. Wanpraktyke in ASA vier ongelukkig steeds hoogty, en die DA is ook
dan verheug dat die Suid-Afrikaanse Sportkonfederasie en Olimpiese Komitee,
SASKOK, nou besluit het om die bedrywighede van ASA te ondersoek.

Die begroting is heelwat kleiner as vir die vorige boekjaar met ’n bedrag
van R1 245 miljoen teenoor die vorige jaar se R2 872 miljoen. Hiervan gaan
R558 miljoen vir die Fifa Wêreldbekersokkertoernooi. Van dit wat oorbly,
neem administrasie R88 miljoen. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[In the year that South Africa is hosting the most spectacular event in the
world, the Fifa Soccer World Cup, it is rather disappointing that the
department which is so closely involved in this received a qualified audit
report. We are now bearing the consequences for employing individuals who
were not competent enough for their positions.
I hope that the current director-general, Mr Petersen, will not make the
same mistake as his predecessor. I trust that the new appointments that
have been made by him will result in the department improving on the
previous qualified audit report. Did you hear, Freddie?

The DA can assure you that wherever the DA is governing in the Western
Cape, it will not be guilty of corrupt practices that would lead to a
qualified audit report. Freddie, you should pay attention. After the 2014
national election the Northern Cape province, which the DA will be
governing by that time, will join with the Western Cape in the promotion of
good governance. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, one of the biggest tragedies that also took place this past
year in sport is the Caster Semenya fiasco. In a heartless and
irresponsible manner the life of one of our most promising athletes, as
well as her sporting career, were destroyed. The conduct of Mr Chuene, the
former president of Athletics South Africa, ASA, and his fellow board
members was unacceptable.

The DA is relieved that the government got rid of him and his henchmen, and
this after numerous questions to the Minister by the DA and pressure from
the public. Corrupt practices in ASA are unfortunately still rampant and
the DA is therefore pleased that the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic
Committee, Sascoc, has now decided to investigate the activities of ASA.
The budget is considerably less than that of the previous financial year,
with an amount of R1 245 million as opposed to the R2 872 million the
previous year. Of this R558 million will be for the Fifa Soccer World Cup.
Of that which is left, R88 million is taken up by administration.]

Contrary to what is done in a country like Australia to become a top
sporting nation, very little effort in terms of assistance is being put
into sport to get ultimate achievements from our athletes. This is evident
from the amount for sport support services, which has decreased by R21
million.

Of the R102,1 million, R28,7 million goes to loveLife, which doesn’t
contribute to the success of our country’s sporting achievements, as it is
more geared towards social services. I am very concerned about the lack of
accountability that also plagues loveLife. This is also a Department of
Social Development programme.

Die bedrag van R28,7 miljoen is meer as wat al die sportfederasies
gesamentlik kry, naamlik maar R27,6 miljoen. Ek beveel aan dat die loveLife-
program uitgeskakel en die fondse vir ander programme aangewend word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The amount of R28,7 million is more than that jointly received by all the
sports federations, namely just R27,6 million. I would suggest that the
loveLife programme be phased out and the funds be allocated to other
programmes.]

This will ensure that the objectives for sport support services can be met.
We are nearing the 2010 Commonwealth Games where we want our teams to win
medals. In the 2012 Olympic Games, we want our athletes to perform, but
little is being done to prepare them thoroughly.
Finally, I would like to draw your attention to the National Lottery’s R6
billion that has still gone unspent. It is unacceptable that sport projects
around the country suffer because of a lack of funds when such large
amounts go unallocated.

The DA would like to see a portion of these funds ploughed into creating
opportunities for talented sportsmen and women to thrive. We believe that
the best way to do this is through the establishment of a South African
sporting academy that would develop a national programme of action across
as many sporting codes as possible; identify and recruit those with genuine
sporting potential; pursue a programme of excellence in developing talent
and, thus, assist the next generation of sportsmen and women to compete at
the highest level; and finally place South Africa on par with the
superpowers of the sporting world.

South Africa is a nation of sport lovers. As citizens, we deserve more for
our sporting institutions. I hope that the department takes this criticism
to heart and has the courage and, especially, the political will to make
the necessary policy changes. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, MECs, and
hon members, our new stadiums are a source of pride. Will they become a
source of grief tomorrow? That is the R1 billion question.

I therefore want to ask whether the department has a properly envisioned
strategy plan to keep the stadiums viable for the future. Two months ago,
speaking in London, Mr Danny Jordaan said:

  We need to make the stadiums viable. The central issue is whether rugby
  will move to the new stadiums. I think it will. Their stadiums were built
  in the 1950s.


Is this wishful thinking or a done deal? What if rugby does not move to the
new stadiums; what will happen then? Is there a Plan B and a Plan C? A
particular concern to all of us is Mbombela Stadium with a capacity of 64
000 seats. How will this stadium be kept viable after the Fifa Soccer World
Cup?

I now come to the question of ownership of Bafana Bafana rights. According
to the media, things are hidden behind opaque shareholding structures
comprising shelf companies, complicated indirect stakes and confidential
licensing agreements. The pointed question to the Minister is whether Mr
Smidt had indeed acquired a 49,9% stake in Slam Holdings, which controls
the Bafana Bafana trademark, through a series of secretive deals. We would
also like to know whether Smidt and Kaizer and Bobby Motaung are going to
rake in millions out of the secret deals.

In terms of school sport, many youngsters in our country are already caught
up in the football fever. Is the Department of Sport and Recreation co-
operating with the Department of Basic Education to ensure that all schools
have coaching manuals and DVDs to encourage learners not only to take up
sport but to master the basics early in life?

The ideal, however, is to appoint coaches. In the absence of coaches,
printed and audiovisual coaching materials should be available to schools
so that all educators can play a role in teaching learners the essentials.

This brings me to the second point, which concerns sports grounds. Many
schools do not have a surface suitable for playing sport. In South Africa,
with an increasing number of children becoming obese, it is vitally
important for sport to be taken up by children everywhere in the country.
It is far better to invest in healthy children than in health per se.

We all know that the coming of the Fifa Soccer World Cup concentrates our
minds on football. What is now going to happen after the games are played
and the event moves on? How is the interest in sport going to be kept red
hot? Is the government viewing the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup as an event
or a process? If it is viewing it as a process, how will this process
unfold?

Sport science and coaching are pivotal to our country’s future. Whilst
there are many overseas-trained coaches willing to conduct clinics, we do
not have any suitable venues. Talented young people will therefore not be
able to develop their potential. There is much that needs to be done. Now
that the Fifa Soccer World Cup will soon be behind us, let us concentrate
on stepping back and filling in the gaps. I thank you.

Mr I JENNER (Western Cape): Chairperson, Minister of Sport and Recreation,
MECs, members of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, it gives me great
pleasure to address you today, and I am thankful for this opportunity.

The vision of my department is one of a social, cohesive, active and
creative Western Cape. There are many factors which mitigate against us
achieving this vision, but there are many factors which assist us. Today, I
want to talk about some of the progress we have made in this regard.

Social cohesion is a measure of the extent to which people live together
harmoniously, feel a sense of belonging and ownership as citizens and
participate in the civic and social life of their communities.

As practitioners of sport and recreation, it is our challenge to try
meeting these conditions and make our people feel that they are meaningful
contributors to our society.

Research suggests that the advent of technology, the high penetration rate
of television and other electronic communications forms and a worldwide
emphasis on high-performance sports have all contributed to a shift by
citizens of the Western Cape from being active participants in sport and
recreation to being consumers of sport and recreation.

The decline in the economy has also impacted on the ability of citizens to
participate in sport and recreational activities. In addition, a decreased
emphasis on school sport, a lack of adequate opportunities to engage in
sport, the advent of professional sport and the crowding out of amateur
sport have all conspired to making our task even more challenging.

These factors have resulted in the decline of participation rates in the
fields of sport and recreation. The socioeconomic implications of these
shifts are important since it means that more effort and more emphasis has
to be put into improving healthy lifestyles whilst at the same time
involving youth in social life, including sports and recreational
activities.

The challenge for the government is to build a socially cohesive Western
Cape community by creating opportunities for all to unite and fully
participate in society at large. Sport is a tool that can be used to assist
in building this united and cohesive Western Cape community.

We have determined the following main indicators for measuring progress
made by the department of cultural affairs and sport, DCAS, in providing
opportunities for social cohesion: the increase in the number of
participants in sport and recreation; the increase in the number of
beneficiaries of the services of DCAS; and the increase in the number of
learners participating in school sport. We have a plan to achieve these
outcomes. I want to share some of them with you today.

We believe that excellence in sport and culture arises where talent meets
opportunity and is nurtured, supported and sustained. We believe that
talent is evenly spread across all communities, but that opportunities,
facilities, structures and support are unevenly distributed. We know that
our past inequalities and resource allocation live on in our current
circumstances, and that these inequalities limit our talent pool
dramatically.
Therefore, we commit ourselves to creating conditions for talent to emerge
from across all communities in an equitable manner and to be nurtured and
supported so that excellence can flourish.

According to the current statistical analysis, 36,1% of the population of
the Western Cape can be classified as youths. It is this area of the
population that needs to be targeted to ensure a healthy lifestyle, social
cohesion and the building of a responsible society which is productive,
active, goal-directed and has a sense of belonging.

Therefore, the nucleus of our efforts will be engaging the youth in
meaningful sport and cultural activities. The DCAS has developed an
idiomatic saying, “A child in sport is a child out of court” – and I noted
yesterday that the Northern Cape is following us!

Whilst we believe that our first objective should be to get our people to
participate in sport, be it as athletes, coaches or administrators, we also
believe that having our youth involved in some kind of meaningful activity
will give direction to their lives, whether such activity is physical or
not.

This view has seen us also engage in strategic activities which boost our
spectator numbers in sports: the promotion of fan clubs and fan support;
making provision for nonphysical sport and recreational games, for example
mind games, war games, board games, etc. In particular, we will use the
following programmes, projects and activities to help us achieve more
outcomes and achieve social cohesion.

With regard to sport development, we will use the Siyadlala programme; the
mass participation programme, MPP; Club Development Sport and Recreation
2010; the Social Legacy programme; and school sport.

With regard to events, we will use sports event to ensure demographic,
regional and language integration and to build a shared appreciation for
the things that bind us together as a nation and as a society.

In combating substance abuse, we will utilise school sport and sport
programmes to raise awareness of the dangers of substance abuse, messaging
around social inclusion.

I want to take this opportunity to thank Minister Stofile and his
department for the R40 million funding which was made available via the
sport conditional grant. We could not have executed these programmes to the
extent that we have without that assistance. We thank you, Reverend.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup is a mere 21 days away, and the Western Cape is
working hard to ensure that all our citizens do touch the World Cup. We are
aware that eight games will take place at the Cape Town Stadium. People
from the City of Cape Town will view these events either from inside the
stadium, at the fan fest at the Grand Parade or from four other public
viewing areas dotted around the metro.

Our focus as a province has been on the peri-urban and rural areas and
consequently we have provided five public viewing areas, one in each
district of our province. In the Western Cape, we call them “fan jols”.
These are places where our people can watch soccer, have a good time and
feel the spirit of the World Cup. These five fan jols will be held in the
towns of George, Beaufort West, Worcester, Bredasdorp and Vredenburg.

We will use our local football ambassadors to entertain and teach kids the
skills of football during these fan jols. Our province will also display
and host three teams, namely Japan, Denmark and France, who have chosen to
base themselves in the Eden district of our province.

If you manage to visit this area, you can feel the excitement of the World
Cup with flags, street banners, vuvuzelas and kuduzelas being the order of
the day.

My department has entered into a partnership with the South African
Football Association, Safa, and the Dutch coaching programme called “Stars
in their Eyes”. This programme has trained 40 coaches and they have
ploughed what they have learnt back into the sport of football.

My department also ran volunteer training, referee, and sport
administration courses, all of which have seen the sport of football being
put on the map. These activities have built, and continue to build, sport
and football as well as developing our young people in general, and
deepening democracy in particular.

More importantly, all of these actions and activities have assisted our
people to touch the World Cup, and will help us to achieve our vision of a
socially cohesive, active and creative Western Cape. I am confident that
with your assistance and our effort, we will bear fruits.

In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity to wish our team, Bafana
Bafana, all the best for this Cup. The nation’s hope, dreams and
aspirations are riding on them. May they achieve the highest possible
success. Qala, gqiba qhubeka [Start, finish and keep going]. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mof M L MOSHODI: Ha ke nke monyetla ona ho dumedisa Motsamaisi wa
Dipuisano, ke dumedise Letona le Motlatsa Letona, Matona ohle, ka ho
qolleha ntate Kgothule ho tswa mane porofensing ya Foreisetata, ke dumedise
maloko a rona a hlomphehang a Palamente. Ke tlotla ho nna ho nka karolo
Ditekanyetsong tsena tsa lefapha.
Maemo ao batjha ba naha ya rona ba  Maaforika ba iphumanang ba le ho ona, a
ntse a hlobaetsa ha o a bapisa le a merabe e meng. Moo eleng tokelo
merabeng e meng, ho batjha ba rona ba Aforika ke monyetla oo ba e so kang
ba o fihlella hohang. Ditekanyetso tsena di tlamehile ho qala tumellanong
ya rona hore ngwana e mong le e mong o tswalwa a na le bokgoni ba ntho efe
kapa efe ka boemo bo hodimo. Ha feela a ka fuwa monyetla wa ho ipabola le
ho fumana kwetliso e nepahetseng.

Re utlwisisa maemo ao re tswang ho ona a kgethollo le kgatello moo
Maaforika re neng re sa fumantshwe monyetla wa ho bontsha bokgoni ba rona
ka lebaka la maano a kgethollo a mmuso o fetileng. Leha re ke ke ra lebala
bohloko ba moo re tswang teng, empa boikarabelo ha jwale bo mmusong wa ANC,
ho lokisa moo kgethollo e sentseng teng.

Ngwana e mong le e mong a kgothalletswe ho nka karolo dipapading hobane ho
molemong wa bana ho etsa jwalo, le hore dipapading tsa matjhaba ba tla
phahamisa lebitso la naha ebe tlotla e kgolo ho rona. Ditekanyetso tsena di
tlamehile ho hlokomela ka ho qolleha bohlokwa ba ho bokella batho ba tswang
merabeng e fapaneng mmoho, mme ka lebaka la dipapadi merabe e fapaneng e
kgona ho ithabisa mmoho.

Monyetla o moholo o tlamehile ho lebiswa dikolong moo bana ba bangata ba
dilemong tse tlase ba leng teng. Dikolo di tlamehile ho ahelwa mabala a
boikwetliso le boithapollo, mme mesuwe e lokela ho fuwa kwetliso ya maemo a
hodimo e tla ba fa tsebo e tjhatsi ya ho hlwaya le ho kwetlisa bana ba nang
le thahasello. Mefuta e fapaneng ya dipapadi e tlamehile ho rutwa bana ba
sa le dilemong tse tlase hore ha ba ntse ba hola, ba bontshe bokgoni le
boiphihlelo dipapading tseo ba di rutuweng. Mabala ana a boikwetliso a
tlamehile ho ba teng le dibakeng tsa mahae hore le bona, ba se ke ba
lebalwa. Bana ba sa itekanelang le bona ba tlamehile ho fuwa monyetla wa ho
nka karolo.

Ditjhankane tsa rona di tletse bana ba banyane mme ba fetohile mashodu
hobane ho se letho leo ba le etsang le ba tswelang molemo. Mananeo a
tlhabollo ditjhankaneng a tlamehile ho kenyelletsa kwetliso le thuto ya
dipapadi. Sena, se etswe e le hore ba tloswe mekgweng e mebe e sa lokang,
ba tsebe ho iphedisa ka dipapadi. Ntle le dipapadi tse kotsi bakeng sa bona
tse jwaloka, ho sesa, kolofo, kerikete, ditebele, karate le tse ding.

Ho bohlokwa hore ditekanyetso tsena di kenyelletse dipapadi tsa setso.
Setso sa rona se ruile dipapadi tse ngata tse thabisang, tse ka thusang
bana ba rona ho ba ntsha mekgweng ya boshodu le ho ba tataisa ba sa le
dilemong tse tlase, jwaloka morabaraba, kgati, diketo, molamu, dibeke,
tshipo, ho tsoma, mokgibo le tse ding. Ke tse ding tsa dipapadi tse ngata
tsa setso tseo re ka di bontshang baeti ba tlileng ho tshehetsa mohope wa
lefatshe.

Naha ya rona e bile le monyetla wa ho tshwara dipapadi tsa matjhaba e leng
rakebi, kerikete, mohope wa kolofo ya basadi, mohope wa kopanelo wa dinaha
tsa Aforika le mohope wa Fifa wa lefatshe. Re thoholetsa mmuso wa rona ka
dithuso tsa ditjhelete tse entseng hore ho ahwe mabala a bolo le ho lokisa
a mang a ntseng a le teng, ho lokiswa le ho ahwa botjha ha boemafofane le
mebila. Tse ding tsa dintho le ha re eso ka re di fihlella, re tshepa hore
re tla di fihlella.

Re kopa sepolesa ho fana ka tshireletso e nepahetseng ho baeti ba rona. Ho
kwalla ditlokotsebe tse tla beng di hweba ka batho, dithethefatsi le dintho
tsohle tse sa lokang tseo e leng tlolo ya molao. Re tshepa hore re tla
ithuta dintho tse ngata mohopeng ona wa lefatshe mme ho baahi ba naha ena
re re: “Tshireletso ya baeti ke boikarabelo ba rona baahi, ka
tshebedisanommoho le sepolesa”.

Re leboha le bahlophisi ba mohope ona hore o tle mona naheng ya rona re sa
ntse re phela, mme re re: “E utlwe, e mona”.

Ha ke tla dihela dikgala, Motsamaisi wa Dipuisano, ho Bafana Bafana ke re,
le lwane ya sedula matswapong, le lwane kgakgaulane molamu wa tshepe. Re
tlo le tshehetsa ho fihlela motsotsong wa ho qetela. Ya kgaola ya ya. ANC e
tshehetsa Ditekanyetso tsena. Ke a leboha Motsamaisi wa Dipuisano.
[Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Ms M L MOSHODI: Let me take this opportunity to warmly greet the hon
Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister, all the delegates, especially
hon Kgothule from the Free State province, and Members of Parliament. It is
a great honour for me to take part in the Budget Vote debate of this
department.

The situations in which our African youth find themselves are still a cause
for concern when they are compared to their counterparts from other races.
That which was a right for other races is a privilege for our African
youth, a privilege that they have not achieved yet. This Budget Vote should
complement the view that every child has the ability to be anything
extraordinary in life if they are given the opportunity and necessary
guidance to prove themselves.

We understand the conditions we have gone through of discrimination and
oppression where we as Africans were not given the opportunity to show our
capabilities because of the apartheid government. It is presently the
responsibility of the ANC government to repair the damage caused by
apartheid, although we won’t forget the pain of where we come from.

Every child must be encouraged to take part in sport because it is to their
advantage to do so, and they would be promoting the country in
international sport and this would then be an honour for us. This budget
must address specifically the importance of bringing people of different
races together and allowing people to celebrate because of sport.
Many opportunities must be created in schools where a lot of young people
remain. Sport and recreational facilities must be built at schools and
teachers must be given adequate training of a high standard to enable them
to identify learners who have potential. Learners must be taught different
types of sport while they are still young so that they can show their
ability in sport as they grow up. These training facilities must be made
available in rural areas so that the people there are not forgotten.
Disabled children must also be given the opportunity to take part.

Our prisons are full of young children who have become criminals because
there is nothing they can do that is beneficial to them. Correctional
programmes in prisons must include training and sport education. This must
be done to keep them out of trouble and to teach them to make a living out
of sport, with the exception of dangerous sports such as swimming, golf,
cricket, boxing, karate and others.

It is important for this budget to include cultural activities.  Our
culture has a number of entertaining sports, which can help keep our
children away from criminal activities and guide them from a young age,
such as morabaraba [African board game], skipping, diketo [game played by
putting stones in a hole], stick fighting, dibeke [game played with tins
and a ball], tshipo [jumping kangaroo game], hunting, mokgibo [Basotho
women dancing on their knees] and others. These are just some of our many
cultural sports that we can show visitors who come to support the World
Cup.

Our country has had the opportunity to host international sports events
with regard to rugby, cricket, women’s golf, the African Confederation Cup
and the Fifa World Cup. We commend our government for making budget
allocations that enabled the construction and renovation of soccer
stadiums, airports and roads. Even if we have not been able to achieve some
of the things yet, we trust that we will.

We plead with the police to provide the necessary safety for our visitors.
They should arrest those involved with human trafficking, drugs and
everything that is illegal. We hope that we will learn a lot from the World
Cup and we say to the citizens of this country, “The safety of our visitors
is the responsibility of us all, in co-operation with the police”.

We also thank the organisers of this World Cup for bringing it to our
country while we are still alive, and we say: “Feel it, it is here”.

In conclusion, Chairperson, I would like to say to Bafana Bafana, they must
go and fight these battles, they must fight until the very end. We will
support them until the last minute. The ANC supports this Budget Vote.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon
members, hon MECs, and hon Minister Mfundisi, before I go to my prepared
speech, I would like to draw the attention of hon members to something.
What we say here is recorded by Hansard for coming generations to read.

I’ve been listening to hon member Feldman from Cope. I can understand, when
following the media, that he is a bit confused and can’t cope with the
figures, facts and audits. However, I want to tell him that we didn’t build
a 64 000-seater in Mbombela; it was a 48 000-seater. But when I read the
newspapers, I can understand why he is confused; he can’t cope with that.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Minister, will you take a question?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: If I have time at the end,
with pleasure.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: He will not take a question now, but he will
take a question at the end, if he still has time.

Mr D B FELDMAN: I will wait. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: In 2009, there was also a
21–day period. The 21 days we had was to ensure as a country that we were
ready to host the IPL cricket tournament. It took place amidst our election
campaign, while India had their election, which they claimed posed a
security threat. We know today that we successfully hosted that event in 21
days, and we had no incidents whatsoever.

Today, we are 21 days from the opening of the World Cup and our country is
abuzz with excitement. Our media has dedicated programmes and space to
showcase the build-up to the tournament. The private sector is fully behind
all campaigns such as Football Friday, Fly the Flag, and the 2010 Countdown
programme. We see South Africans united in hosting the best ever Fifa World
Cup. In fact, we are united in our diversity.

We have no doubt that the socioeconomic impact of the Fifa 2010 World Cup
will be felt long after the event. During the construction phase of our
preparations, we were clear as government that low-income households should
benefit from the infrastructure development programme.

We now know that more than 100 000 workers have been employed either
directly or indirectly through the 2010 construction programme. We also
know that many workers moved from being unskilled to semiskilled, and from
being semiskilled to skilled. We now know that more women have entered the
construction industry.

With the games being hosted in 10 venues, we were able to spread the
benefit of this investment, reaching far and wide across society. It is to
this end that the African Six Pack project requires strong support from all
corners of our country and the rest of the African continent.

Each of the six African countries that participate in the tournament must
treat each of the stadia as their home ground and feel at home. As South
Africans, we must provide home-crowd support to our brothers and sisters in
our quest to restore the dignity of our continent’s people.

It is in this context that we have to caution those who are using the World
Cup as a bargaining stick for benefits and service delivery. The vision
should not be, “What is in it for me?”. The attitude should rather be,
“What is in it for our country and our continent, and what are the long-
term prospects and benefits to us as Africans?” Ke Nako is not to introduce
challenges. Ke Nako [Now is the time] is to celebrate Africa’s humanity, it
is to live the spirit of ubuntu for a better future for all.

Sport at the elite level, as well as at community level, is increasingly
being used in a wide variety of ways to promote social cohesion, to prevent
conflict, and to enhance peace within and among nations. In this regard,
the UN General Assembly has adopted a series of resolutions on sport and
development for peace.
Although sport alone cannot prevent conflict or build peace, it can
contribute to broader, more comprehensive efforts in a number of important
ways. Sports equipment provides a positive and accessible alternative to
the guns of internal conflict. As a strategic initiative, our department
will carefully look at ways and means to use sport and recreation as a tool
in promoting development and peace.

Our work with the UN goes beyond the programme of sport for peace and
development. One other initiative in which we are working with them is the
One Goal for co-operation on the Establishment of an African Fund for
Education. The UN, through its office for drug control, Unicef and the
International Organisation for Migration, IOM, has also been working
closely with the office for sexual offences under the National Prosecuting
Authority, NPA, on issues of human trafficking. This includes the Red Card
campaign, which is aimed at discouraging foreign visitors from getting
involved in activities that may get them into trouble when visiting the
country.

In line with the Millennium Development Goals, MDGs, the UN involved eight
African artists, such as Hugh Masekela, to write a song entitled 8 Goals
for Africa, authored and recorded by the eight artists. They each sing
about a specific goal. We launched this project on 14 May in Alexandra. We
did this mindful of the fact that the Fifa World Cup presents us with an
ideal forum to globally renew our commitment to the MDGs. For the benefit
of members, the song can be downloaded free from the website up to the end
of the World Cup.

We are grateful for the support we are receiving from our partners, who
give generously to enable us to better the lives of our people. The
existing relationship between our department and German Technical Co-
operation, GTZ, has been a good catalyst that has encouraged the EU to
support our development programmes. Amongst the areas of agreement is
capacity-building, developing a toolkit for sport as a catalyst for
development and peace, and as skills in project management.

We have recently signed the implementation agreement on the Youth
Development Through Sport programme with the GTZ. The project is in line
with our mass participation programme and supports three of our key
strategic objectives: to contribute to a healthy nation by increasing the
number of participants; to raise the profile of sport and recreation
through addressing issues of national importance; and to contribute to
making the 2010 Fifa World Cup the best ever.

The programme will take physical activity to poor, disadvantaged
communities across South Africa and will help to promote both ownership of
and leadership in beneficiary communities. The empowering of youth in rural
areas will, without doubt, contribute positively towards the improvement of
school sport, which is in most cases still being dominated by urban
schools.
Another partner with whom we directly impact on grass-roots sport through
the Youth Development against Violence through Sport programme, is KfW, the
German development bank. The overall objective of this programme is to use
sport, specifically football, as a catalyst for transmitting life skills to
children and youth in order to reduce violence and social ills. Children
get off the streets, learn about rules and fair play and practice conflict
resolution without violence.

Within the framework of the programme, it is envisaged to construct or
rehabilitate over 100 kick-abouts - modified small-sized pitches that could
be used for various codes - and full-sized pitches, as well as to provide
basic football equipment to children in townships and poor rural areas of
our country. At the request of the municipalities and communities, the kick-
abouts and pitches can also be designed as multipurpose sites for various
sporting codes.

In addition, the concept of the programme foresees the involvement of NGOs
and other development partners to provide training and educational
activities for the children who participate in the programmes. The training
will cover, among other things, life skills, specifically with regard to
violence prevention and conflict resolution, and also HIV and Aids.

The Minister spoke about and named the seven areas that will benefit from
fast-tracking the erection of some of these facilities. We will see that
this is done before the kick-off of the World Cup.

Let me to inform the House that we have also conducted a legacy audit of
whatever we will have after the World Cup. This audit should be completed
by the end of August this year and will inform us on the broad spectrum of
all the initiatives taken so that we, as a country, can be informed and, as
a department, be able to direct what we want to leverage for a better
legacy for our people.

The hon Minister also referred to our agreement with Cuba, where we have
students graduating. May I urge the provincial departments to ensure that
we employ these students when they come home on leave and ensure we employ
them once they have graduated.

The Minister also deliberated on lottery funds. Let me stress that we are
absolutely excited that the National Lotteries Board, the Minister and the
chairperson there share our vision. Therefore, in this regard, we must also
support them as they try to bring the Lotteries Act onto the right track.
We must encourage them to introduce required amendments so that the sport
distribution agency of the Lotteries Act falls under Sport and Recreation
South Africa, SRSA, where we believe it rightly belongs.

We unpacked the municipal infrastructure grant, MIG. Our fight to access
the sport and recreation portion of MIG seems far from over. The stark
reality presented by the delivery records of our Building for Sport and
Recreation Programme, BSRP, which was our programme in the department, in
comparison to those of the consolidated MIG, motivates us to continue the
debate which will see SRSA receiving our share of the MIG funds.

For the record, since the inception of the MIG in 2005 until the end of
March 2010 - I’m talking five financial years - a total of 155 sport and
recreation facilities were completed, compared to 364 projects implemented
over only four years under our BSRP.

This, in essence, means that the MIG projects over five financial years
represent only 43% of what we did in four years with our BSRP. We are not
willing to give up this fight, even if it makes us a lot of enemies.

Our concern is also that sport and recreation facilities projects in the
top-spending provinces are concentrated in the bigger municipalities. The
cumulative amount committed to sport and recreation facilities projects
from 2005 until the end of March 2010, is R2,6 billion. This relates to
projects that are either completed, under construction, being designed, on
tender or have been registered.

The highest share of this amount goes to Gauteng at 40%, and the lowest to
the Northern Cape at 2%. KwaZulu-Natal, for example, spends R482 million on
105 projects while Gauteng spends more than double that amount on only 68
projects. The implication is that while some provinces are for wider reach
and accessibility, others are for big projects such as stadia, which may
not necessarily be easily accessible to grass-roots sport.

I want the hon Faber from the DA to listen now. The 2008-09 annual report
shows a significant decline in the number of audit queries – in fact we
only have one - and a reduction in qualified reports from three to one,
compared to the previous financial year. In our determination to further
improve the internal control environment, a risk management policy was
approved. A risk committee became operational, introducing in the
department a new vibrancy with regard to the identification, assessment and
mitigation of identified risks.

We have come a long way since the staff of the department amalgamated with
the staff of the SA Sports Commission and it is time that we examine how we
are organised as a department. We are about to commence with the public
participation process to review the White Paper. This must culminate in a
national sports plan. All sectors must buy into the plan and commit to the
strategic direction that will emerge from this process. To gear the
department to respond to these developments, we have started a parallel
process to develop a functional organisational structure.

We must admit that the previous structure did not sufficiently take into
account the mandate and specific functions of the national department. We
envisage that the process will be followed by job evaluation, competency
assessment and, where needed, the retraining of staff. Let me assure staff
that we do not anticipate that any staff member will become redundant.
These processes are necessary to ensure better results and outcomes for our
sport and recreation sector.

In conclusion, I wish to place on record the ground-breaking work done by
Minister Stofile in international bodies such as the World Anti-Doping
Agency, Wada. After five long years, during which he served as a board
member, South Africa will now be succeeded for one year by Tunisia.

No doubt, we can be proud of the contributions and the role played by
Minister Stofile at this level. We also know that he will use the extra
time to take up responsibilities in the Southern African Development
Community, SADC, and the African Union, AU. These are leadership roles we
have to play for the benefit of our region and continent.

I wish to thank the following entities for their support and co-operation:
the select committee, MECs, leaders in the sports movement, NGOs and the
media. A big thank you also goes to our managers, staff and administrators,
who are the foot soldiers and implementers. Working together, we can do
more. Ke Nako! Let us celebrate Africa’s humanity. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms W G THUSI (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Ministers, my colleagues, MECs and hon members of the Council, thank you,
Chairperson, for inviting us as KwaZulu-Natal to come and contribute to the
budget debate.

I wish to start by thanking the Minister and congratulating him on the
informative report he gave us this afternoon. I’m sure that the cynics know
that South Africa is ready for 2010. Indeed, Minister, the provinces are
ready. You have seen the iconic Moses Mabhida Stadium and our beautiful
King Shaka International Airport. We are really ready as KwaZulu-Natal.

The KwaZulu-Natal department of sport and recreation has placed a greater
emphasis on sport development and recreation programmes in disadvantaged
and rural communities, and on programmes aimed at creating more
opportunities for the youth, women and people with disabilities.

Programmes are aimed at fostering strong partnerships between government
departments, nongovernmental organisations, sports federations and
community organisations. The department remains committed to supporting the
development of a sustainable and diverse sport and recreation system in
KwaZulu-Natal, one that encourages participation, develops talent, and
contributes to the health and wellbeing of individuals and groups
throughout the province.

The department is committed to the attainment of priorities outlined in the
new government’s programme of action. In KwaZulu-Natal we have begun a
process of co-ordination, joint planning and implementation initiatives
with other provincial government departments.

The department is committed to the provincial flagship programme that is
responsible for the co-ordination and integration of service delivery
across the spheres of government and social partners. The campaign is aimed
at profiling wards and then households and identifies their needs.

I will quickly inform the Council about the achievements of our department
in 2009 and 2010 and what we are doing in this current financial year. The
department created 1 770 jobs in the mass participation programme and
targeted unemployed youth. The department’s development programme has
focused on sustainable development and capacity-building programmes
conducted with sports federations. The programme is aimed at increasing the
skill levels of coaches, administrators, volunteers, technical officials
and referees.

To date, the department has capacitated 4 069 individuals. In spite of its
limited budget, the department of sport and recreation has delivered 22
sports facilities in 2009-10 to mostly disadvantaged communities in the
deep rural areas.

The total investment in facilities over this period amounted to
R22 million. Four sports facilities were renovated over this period with an
additional two carried over to 2010-11. Combination courts were completed
with 12 carried over and a total of 12 futsal courts with a budget spend of
R1,6 million were completed.

The department will invest in 71 sports facilities in this financial year,
ranging from the development, upgrade and repair of sports fields,
combination courts, and futsal courts to kick-abouts, as well as legacy
parks in disadvantaged and rural communities. The department has set aside
R36 million from its facilities programme and a further R7,7 million from
the Fifa 2010 World Cup budget towards the development of facilities,
including combination courts providing for netball, basketball and
volleyball.

In addition to the provision and development of facilities, we will be
investing in the provision of gym equipment to four municipalities.

The sustainability of facilities that have been erected and developed at
considerable cost has proven to be an insurmountable challenge for the
department. The provision of maintenance equipment and maintenance support
grants to identified municipalities is expected to go a long way towards
eradicating these challenges and ensuring that communities make maximum use
of these facilities.

The mass school sport programme was successfully delivered to 645 schools
and focused on the promotion and development of sports amongst learners. A
total of 262 338 learners benefited from this programme. The community mass
participation programme seeks to address the modern daily ills facing
communities and reduce the levels of poverty by employing youth aged 18 to
35 years. The number of activity hubs to implement this programme rose to
106 and were located in 61 local municipalities throughout KwaZulu-Natal.
Over one million people in mostly rural communities were exposed to the
programme.

A total of 40 new clubs were formed in the club development programme
bringing to 169 the cumulative number of clubs formed. The club development
programme focuses in the promotion and development of clubs in previously
disadvantaged communities with priority given to rural areas.

In preparation for the 2010 Fifa World Cup, the department has invested
heavily in the development of football in partnership with each of the 11
South African Football Association, Safa, regions. A total number of 7 000
players, out of an annual target of 5 000, have benefited from being
involved in sustained leagues.

A total of 172 high-performance athletes, out of a target of 60, benefited
from intensive coaching and specialised training programmes. A total of 120
Safa level-one coaches have been trained in the province with these coaches
being identified by the Safa regions.

Successful mass mobilisation campaigns have been held in Marburg,
Gamalakhe, Esikhawini, Ezakheni and at the Qokololo Stadium in Imbali. Mass
mobilisation events in Nkandla and Enseleni, in partnership with Sport and
Recreation South Africa, SRSA, also included a public viewing of Kaizer
Chiefs and Orlando Pirates; so, we are really taking the 2010 World Cup
fever to the rural areas.

The department successfully hosted, on behalf of SRSA, the South African
Schools Winter Games and the National Indigenous Games at the University of
KwaZulu-Natal. Recreation programmes targeting an active and healthy
lifestyle have benefited more than 360 people across the province. Mostly
rural communities were targeted.

In the mass participation programme, the following individual successes are
worth a mention: A head teacher, three educators and 10 learners from
Inyakanyaka High School, Nkandla, have been invited to the United Kingdom
as part of a UK Link programme funded by St Mary’s School in Leeds.

Sihle Mngomezulu from the Manyiseni cluster has used his volunteer’s
stipend to pay for his studies in sport management. He is in his third year
of studies at Varsity College and we will definitely give him a post to
work with us in the department.

Bongiwe Msomi, an MSP assistant from Emaxulwini Primary School in
Mpumalanga, represented South Africa in the under-21 Netball World Cup in
Iceland.

Nontobeko Mabizela from Inyanyezi special school represented South Africa
in the International Cross-Country Championships in Hungary, where she won
two silver medals and one bronze medal.

A success story in recreation worth mentioning is that of Nkululeko Kunene,
who was identified in the Rural Horse Riding Programme as a horseman, pro-
driver and farrier in harness racing. In partnership with the Harness
Racing Association, the department succeeded in sending him to Sweden,
where he trained and qualified with professional trainer Johan Nilsson. Now
he is an accomplished driver and farrier, and his skills will be extremely
valuable to both his community and the equine industry.

The focus areas for the 2010-11 mass school sport programme will target 645
schools. By the end of the year, this programme is expected to reach 250
learners. Some 95% of the learners are females and 1 200 of them are
learners with disabilities. The success of the mass school sport programme,
funded through the Division of Revenue, Dora, grant, has increased
participation in sport and has developed sports champions.

Many learners from the schools in the programme are now representing their
provinces in the schools national championship. This calls for stakeholders
in sport to work together to intensify the development of sport at local
delivery points such as schools, clubs and communities and sports academies
and high-performance centres in the province to deliver support to learners
who display talent. Hon Minister, we are busy holding talks with the
department of education with regard to a co-ordination structure. We will
take lessons from the Free State.

To address government’s call for creating healthy and sustainable
communities, the department will focus on delivering on the Community Mass
Participation and Recreation Programme. The department’s recreation
programme with a budget of R8,7 million will be delivered in seven key
ongoing recreation programmes.

Among other things, the key programmes are Recre-Hab, an active
rehabilitation programme for prisoners and street children; active seniors
delivering innovative programmes aimed at ...Oh, my time has expired. Thank
you.

I wish to say to Bafana Bafana that this is your opportunity; take it!
[Applause.] [Time expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am sorry, hon MEC Thusi, we do it the nice
way; we do not want to shout at you.
Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon MECs and
special greetings to our MEC from the Northern Cape, the hon Pauline
Williams - welcome to the House. The Department of Sport and Recreation has
received a qualified audit report for two consecutive years. We, in the ID,
are hoping that 2010 will be different.

It is our belief that this department should use the opportunity of hosting
a world-class sporting event like the 2010 Fifa World Cup to become a world-
class department. If we have the ability to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup,
then, surely, we can get an unqualified audit report.

Sport het die vermoë om ons kinders te help ontwikkel en om ’n toekoms vir
hulle te kan bou. Dit maak ’n kind bewus dat omstandighede jou nie kan
terughou om dit te kan bereik wat jy graag wil bereik nie. Sportgeriewe by
ons voorheen benadeelde skole, is glad nie na wense nie en dit maak sommige
kinders mismoedig. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Sport has the ability to help with the development of our children and to
build a future for them. It makes children aware of not allowing conditions
to prevent them from achieving what they really want to achieve. Sports
facilities at our previously disadvantaged schools are not up to scratch
and this makes some children discouraged.]

We, as the ID, are mindful that the 2010 Fifa World Cup has the ability to
boost the department’s morale, which has suffered over the past few years.
I would like to quote former Presidents. Firstly, let me quote the words of
former President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela:

   The World Cup will help unify our people. If there is one thing on this
   planet that has the power to bind people together, it is soccer.

Let me quote the former President, Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki:

   The Soccer World Cup in Africa reaffirms our common humanity and proves
   we all belong to one family.

I would like to repeat what I have said many times before: In a nation with
the highest inequalities in the world, the real challenge will be to
translate the billions we have spent on the 2010 Fifa World Cup into
something tangible and sustainable for our people in the months and years
after the final whistle has blown.

The ID also supports the portfolio committee’s decision to summon the
department before each quarter to report back on the Division of Revenue
Act grant-spending progress in the provinces.

I am happy to announce here today that there is no need for me to say
anything negative about our team Bafana Bafana, who are putting in their
best; the coach, whom we have come to accept; the Gautrain, which is
basically ready; the vuvuzelas, which we are all going to blow very hard on
11 June; and the beautiful stadiums. The ID supports this Budget Vote. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D Z RANTHO: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, MECs, MPs,
officials, and distinguished guests, let me start by saying ...

... Mphathiswa, mna ndingowaseJansenville, uthe xa ukhankanya iJansenville
apha ndaziva ndonwabile, kuba kusekhaya phaya. Ndiyavuya xa nithe
nafikelela naphaya. [... Minister, I am originally from Jansenville. When
you mentioned Jansenville here, I felt happy because that is my home. I am
glad that you have even reached that part of the country.]

The ANC lives. The ANC leads. This Budget Vote could not have come at a
better time than this one. The year 2010 has been an exciting year since
its beginning. Everybody is looking forward to the World Cup, and we are
all full of hope that this is going to be a good year for all of us. Feel
it! It is here!

This year has kept us looking forward to the first World Cup ever held on
African soil. Today we mark the 21st day until our dream comes true. We
will be making history during our time as the ANC-led government. Our
promise to the nation will be honoured. We also hope that Bafana Bafana
will make us proud, and we wish them to win every match they play. But even
if they do not win, we will still remain proud of them.

Nyawuza, Thahla, Ndayeni, Hlamba ngobubende, eMpuma Koloni ... [Nyawuza,
Thahla, Ndayeni, Hlamba ngobubende, (clan names) in the Eastern Cape ...]

...we have produced many sportswomen and sportsmen, for example Makhaya
Ntini, who is from the Eastern Cape. Recently we produced Andile Jali who
has been selected to be part of the soccer national team. Our young
generation will share experiences with other people from other countries.
Our government takes decisive steps as we move forward.

Some of the government priorities are growth and transforming the economy
to create decent jobs and sustainable livelihoods; strengthening the
education, skills and human resource base; and building cohesive, caring,
and sustainable communities. If we work together we can do this and more.

We, as the people of this continent, will be able to show the outside world
our different cultures as Africans. South Africa is a diverse and
democratic country. Our democracy has extended outside this country. This
opportunity will uplift our economy, and, at the same time people will be
left with good and unforgettable memories.

Playing sport is a healthy way of living. It has to be considered fairly
because it is crosscutting. The health Minister will benefit as he has
already said that he is trying to make sure that everybody lives a healthy
life. The Minister of Social Development will also benefit because we will
have fewer street kids, and this would benefit safety and education as
well. The same applies to all other departments. We, as government, cannot
let provinces underspend on sport because there is a lot that needs to be
done in our provinces.

In our rural communities there are people known as sports veterans. They
also need to be brought back as sports trainers, as they have the
experience that we need. They also have the discipline that needs to be
instilled in our professional players.

They can help guide our children in taking up sport as a profession,
because some of our kids are not good academically, but can be good at
sport. There are also codes of sport that the country should focus on.
Those sporting codes are not regularly played in our country, such as
baseball, basketball and others.

School sport is also slowly fading away in our provinces through the lack
of resources in our schools. We need to revive the spirit of going to the
playgrounds every Wednesday and Friday afternoons, and even on Saturdays.
Seventy per cent of our grants need to be used to develop our youth so as
to take them away from drugs and alcohol. Indigenous games should also be
considered.

Men in our communities are misdirecting their energy, because they do not
have anything to do after hours. I think that if we put more emphasis on
sport, the rate of sexual offences would be reduced.

Tat’uThahla, iLusikisiki yenye yemimandla eyaziwayo ngokuxhatshazwa
ngokwesondo, kodwa kwakhona ikwayingingqi enabadlali abaninzi nasele
bebadala abanye babo, abangasetyenziswa ukuphuhlisa ulutsha kwezemidlalo
kula ngingqi. [Thahla, Lusikisiki is one of the areas not only notorious
for sexual abuse, but is also renowned for having many sporting
personalities, some of whom have already retired and could still be
utilised to develop youth in sport in that area.]

The programme of mass participation is also good, but is it really serving
a purpose? I know we are creating jobs, but these jobs must be relevant to
the economy of the country, because we have to create jobs and develop the
economy at the same time, as our focus is to ensure the accessibility of
sport to all.

Participation, development and excellence are key elements in building our
nation. They engender unity, discipline and reconciliation amongst
individuals and communities. They are also key elements to economic growth
as they generate employment and alleviate poverty.

As I have already said, participating in sport is a healthy lifestyle. We
therefore have to introduce it in our hospitals as well. People should not
be lying on beds the whole day. There should be time reserved for sporting
activities. We should help the Department of Health make sports grounds
available in hospitals, especially in TB hospitals, even if this is for an
indoor sport.

This government also needs to focus on developing women in sport. I salute
the three black women who are mountain climbers here in Cape Town. Their
skill and interest are very scarce within the black community. One of them
also actually declared on national TV that she is HIV-positive.

Chairperson and hon Minister, it would be good to see fewer funerals and
more sports activities during weekends in our communities. There are too
many young people being buried. I would just be sorry for the funeral
parlours, because this would mean less business for them! So, if we work
together, we will have more ideas for developing our communities. The ANC
supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

                   ALLOCATION OF TIME TO SPECIAL DELEGATES

                                 (Statement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hayi, bendisalinde ukuba bakubulise mama, nawe
uhlale phantsi kakuhle. [Kwahlekwa.] [No, I was waiting for them to greet
you, Madam, and please take your seat nicely. [Laughter.]]

Hon members, I just wanted to make one remark. I would like to plead with
the provincial Whips that when special delegates come to the House, and I
am insisting on this, they should be given an opportunity to say something
about their provinces.

We must not lose sight of the fact that we are here to represent our
provinces. Therefore, we would like to hear what the provinces are saying
about some of the issues taking place there. I was very disappointed that
an MEC from the Free State was not on the speakers’ list. There is another
MEC from the Northern Cape over there, who is also not on the speakers’
list. I don’t know why.

I would like to ask the provincial Whips to notify the Chief Whip of the
NCOP when our special delegates are coming, so that they can be allotted
some time to speak to us. We are dying to listen to them and hear what is
happening in their provinces. They cannot just talk to the Minister at the
Minmec. They should talk to us too. That is very important to us.

Hon premiers, I am sorry that maybe you did not notify them that you were
coming. But I am not sure. They were supposed to know that you were coming.
They were supposed to get it directly from the Constitution House that
monitors everybody who comes to the NCOP, so that you can be allocated the
space to talk.

I am sorry that you were not on the list. I don’t know why it happened in
that manner, but I would have loved to listen to both of you. Having said
that, I am going to allow the Minister to come and respond to the debate.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I would like to
reiterate what you have just said about the MECs. I have no doubt in my
mind that listening to the provinces giving blow-by-blow reports of what is
happening where they come from was very edifying for the hon members.

From our side, I can only indicate that we agree with them. We have been
there and we saw what happened. We were part of those activities and they
were not exaggerating. They were relating the realities of what was
happening where they come from. I really congratulate them on the way in
which they have done that.

Hon Thusi from KwaZulu-Natal has already warned the hon Kgothule from the
Free State that she is about to depose him from the gold medal position;
and I can believe that. That is one of the largest and most rustic
provinces in this country. It doesn’t matter if you go to Mgababa or
Mhlabuyalingana or Port Shepstone and Harding in the south, there is always
a high level of sporting activity abuzz in those areas.

Hon MEC, I am just warning you. They just don’t have the requisite
structures, and it was all Sumaya’s fault, but now we have relieved them of
Sumaya. Thank you very much indeed.

I am going to explain three things that were raised during the debate. The
first one, which was raised twice, was the audit queries on the Department
of Sport and Recreation. Hon members must desist from the syndrome of
“gogga maak bang” [the boogyman] rhetoric. We are not supposed to scare
people with our words. The truth of that matter has been explained over and
over again.

In 1996, the then National Sports Council, NSC, entered into an agreement
with the then SA Rugby Football Union, Sarfu - and cricket - and it was
agreed that they would pay dividends for using the logo that was owned by
the NSC.

I accept that in our overenthusiasm, perhaps to get things done, we went
around trying to collect the revenue. Since last year, I have raised it
with the DG and now we have a report from Deloitte and Touche. And I am
pleased that the DG agreed with me, that we can’t have two NGOs, the NSC
and Saru entering into a contractual agreement and it becomes the issue of
the department. What do we have to do with the NGOs’ agreements? And this
is what we are being questioned about.

Now I’m asking: How are we going to report on those revenue streams when we
do not even know how many jerseys, socks or whatever were sold? How do you
quantify what you don’t know – a percentage of what?

I am pleased that the DG, in his overenthusiasm, again defied my
instructions to cut this bushy tail off, and managed to get our money back
from the service provider who was supposed to deliver it. But it is not as
if there are some missing funds or that sort of thing; and this is the
“gogga maak bang” [the boogyman] politics that I was talking about.

The second thing I want to explain is the matter of the loveLife money.
That money is not from Sport and Recreation. There is a long history of a
contractual agreement between the Department of Health, the custodian of
the contract; the Treasury, the manager of the revenue flows; and a certain
foundation in America, on a 50/50, dollar-for-pound basis, to subsidise
certain programmes, specially HIV and Aids-related programmes.

We have nothing to do with that. It is an agreement between the government
and America; and a number of departments, including ours, were compelled to
contribute a certain percentage from their budget for that agreement to be
fulfilled.

We cannot be accused of giving more money to loveLife than to sports
programmes. We are simply complying with the contractual agreement. We are
debating with the Minister of Health and the new Minister of Finance on how
to get rid of that bushy tail, because we think that it is bushy and it is
not delivering according to our national strategic plans.

Thirdly, I would like to explain that we agree, and we have said so many
times, that there are no sports fields at some schools, and that will
remain the case until the donkeys come home. Let’s use Lusikisiki as an
example, seeing that hon Rantho mentioned something about Lusikisiki.

If you were to go there, you would find that the schools are built on top
of the hills. Where are you going to build a sports field there? The same
situation applies in northern KwaZulu-Natal and in a number of areas. Our
strategy, therefore, is to build district facilities where the children can
go down and participate where the services are available; and we have
stated this before. We did not build those schools on top of the mountains
- and I do not want to go into that history.

We fully agree with the issue on the role of sport; that of keeping people
out of mischief, and so on. As a matter of fact, it is an old thing that
was already articulated by Augustus Caesar 20 years before Christ was born.
It is not something new. It is a given fact. That is why we have all those
different, huge facilities that were were created in Rome and Greece. We
are saying we should also make this accessible to our children. As I have
already indicated, we have strategies and tactics for how we are going to
do it.

Lastly, I would like to talk about the indigenous games. By the way, all
sports are indigenous games. Soccer is indigenous to England, kung fu to
China, taekwondo to Korea, and so on. The problem here is the dominance of
colonial powers over others. That’s why we are now pretending that soccer
is indigenous to us; it is not.

Soccer only came here in the nineteenth century, just four years after it
was introduced to Brazil. It was not indigenous to us, but to the English.
We are promoting soccer as our own too, and at our peril - we should be
promoting gqaphu [rope skipping], morabaraba and so on.

At first, the Afrikaners came here with their jukskei and we included it.
Funny enough, the champion of the jukskei is not an Afrikaner, but an
African lady from Mpumalanga. She beat all the boer boys and everybody
else, and that’s a good thing! The Khoi and the Malay also want their own
indigenous games. That is fine, but it cannot be managed now; it is getting
bigger and bigger.

The countries south of the Sahara also want to participate in our
indigenous games because they discovered that most of them were the same as
theirs. North Korea invited us to Pyongyang to participate in their
indigenous games because they were impressed by some of our activities. The
things hon members have mentioned here are very important, and we are going
to move that forward.

I want to end by saying that the role of mass participation is to mobilise
the African communities, who were demobilised after 1976, back to sport. We
have succeeded in doing that. We cannot just retain them at the mass
mobilisation level, but we should move them up to the competitive,
organised level. The route there should be through schools, communities and
sports academies. That is exactly the route that we are now following and,
indeed, we are succeeding. We don’t have enough money, but we are
absolutely succeeding.

The last report was about Boxing South Africa. The much-awaited convention
took place last month. It was a very good and well-attended convention and
the debate was very good. One thing that came out of that was the fact that
the boxing Act should be changed in order to allow us to do what Chancellor
Merkel said we should; we should regulate even what is happening in sport,
because sport is not a sacred cow in these matters.

We are looking at the possibility of regulating all the combat sports under
one set of regulations. Boxing, karate, judo, taekwondo and kick-boxing
fall under one family and we think they should be under one set of
regulations.

I want to thank the members for their inputs. I also want to thank our
staff. Cabinet has extended the DG’s term by another five years precisely
because he did better than his predecessors. [Applause.] To assist him, we
have stolen Ms Sumayya Khan from KwaZulu-Natal, so that they can be a
successful team. We have a strong team and can assure South Africa that
things are going to be different henceforth. Ke Nako. [Now is the time.]
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The member is insisting that he would like to
ask a question.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I am prepared to answer the question.


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP Thank you very much. I ruled him out at the
beginning, but being in my position I have to try and be as democratic as I
should.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Hon Minister, my question is very short. Four years ago
both the NCOP and NA passed a budget, in particular dealing with the
building of stadia and road infrastructure.

The principle then from the Ministry of Sport and Recreation was that there
was going to be one member, two tickets. Unfortunately, now it seems as if
that principle has been revised to be one member, one vuvuzela. [Laughter.]
Therefore, I would like to know from the Minister if he would be able to
revert to the former principle that the Ministry wanted to implement - of
two tickets, one member. I thank you. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, that was a nice
question. It was not dissimilar from the questions our children ask during
Christmas when you are going shopping. There was no such decision. It might
be a principle in some heads, but there was certainly no such agreement.

As the department, with respect to all three spheres of government, we
would like to see how best we can facilitate accessing the seating
arrangements in the stadiums.

We are also encouraging members not just to focus on the opening and
closing events, but to identify in their area which games they would like
to watch. In KwaZulu-Natal all tickets are sold out. We don’t even have to
look in that direction. In Rustenburg tickets are almost sold out. Through
the Chief Whips, it will be helpful if members can indicate which games
they are more interested in.

Tickets for the opening and the closing games were sold out long ago I am
struggling to get former President Mandela and his wife a seat. Of course
they will get one, but I just wanted to show you the extent of the problem.
We are doing all we can because it is our money. The 2010 World Cup is
different from the 2006 World Cup. The 2006 World Cup was funded by the
Deutscher Fussball-Bund, the association of football in that country. With
this one, the major funder is government. Therefore, we think we have a
stake to share with them.
Debate concluded.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
       TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO UMHLABUYALINGANA LOCAL
                                MUNICIPALITY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
     TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO INDAKA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO OKHAHLAMBA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
       TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - DISSOLUTION OF NALEDI LOCAL MUNICIPALITY
Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, I will read one statement for all the Orders.
In an effort to make things happen where we live, Naledi local municipality
was dissolved in terms of section 139(1)(c) of the Constitution with the
implication that there are no public representatives or councillors as we
speak.

The department has severally implemented section 154, that of provincial
and national support. In spite of that, there were no improvements at all.
Instead, there was a deepening of the crisis in that municipality. We had
the situation of administrative incapacity, financial mismanagement,
disclaimers and divisions amongst councillors and amongst officials.

There is also a sub judice factor which led to the murder of the mayor, who
was buried just this Saturday; and the attempted murder of the municipal
manager.

This has been brought to the attention of the provincial MEC, and they have
been tasked with having the matter investigated by the Hawks. Precisely
because of the serious nature of this matter, we hope we will receive a
progress report in this regard.

Therefore, Chair, the committee recommends the approval of the dissolution
of the municipality and that within three months there should be a
municipal election in that area, as dictated by the law.

We would also want to see the situation being monitored regularly in order
to avoid many political, legal and other financial factors that might
hamper the dissolution of Naledi.

I now move on to the others. In the case of Umhlabuyalingana municipality,
this is a section 139(1)(b) matter. It is not a dissolution but the
assumption of executive authority as a result of the failure of the
municipality to perform its executive duties.

Amongst other things, that municipality failed dismally in terms of all the
council’s objectives of governance, service delivery and strategies. The
council does not even know how to account for the smallest payment that has
been made to it.

We are therefore saying, in the light of the observation by the committee,
with regard to the manner in which the councillors there have accepted the
situation, that they are ready. They say any form of assistance from
national and provincial government will be accepted. They have accepted
their mistakes.

That was the first time we saw leadership open up in that regard. So with
that background, we are saying the Council must approve section 139(1)(b).
The administrator there must fast-track the appointment of section 157
managers, even though we are running out of time.

Of course, there must be a quarterly report to this House, that the SA
Local Government Association, Salga, should, indeed, do its work, by
training councillors in that area, and not only councillors but the
officials who lack capacity in that regard.

In terms of this other municipality, Indaka municipality, the situation is
more or less similar. I am talking of municipalities in the hinterland, in
the remote rural areas of KwaZulu-Natal. The situation is the same, though
there is a special focus on supply chain management which has not been
adhered to. The other issue is that it also suffers from disclaimers and
the council does not have a turnaround strategy. Municipal governance is
also a challenge in these municipalities.

What we observed, which we said would have to be investigated by the
provincial legislature and the MEC, is that when we met the people, the
stakeholders, everyone who stood up praised the mayor, and yes, there was a
dissolution. It was as if it was a planned tactic - that when Parliament
comes, everyone must stand up and praise the mayor, irrespective of the
dissolution.

However, we were with the legislature, which will investigate why that type
of communication occurred. We therefore recommend the approval of section
139(1)(b).

We also say the administrator there must fast-track the question of a
labour-retention strategy. There must also be a quarterly report to this
House. Salga must do its work in terms of capacity-building for both
councillors and officials. We further say that the NCOP, after approving
the report, must send it to stakeholders as the stakeholders there
requested information on the decisions from the NCOP.

Follow-up meetings have to be held after completion of the dissolution in
that area. Furthermore, the MEC for co-operative governance must monitor
the situation thoroughly, and provide resources. In most cases, section
139(1)(b) is executed, but without resources in this regard.

So, we therefore call for the approval of the decisions on the three
municipalities, in terms of  section 139(1)(b); and that of Naledi, in
terms of section 139(1)(c), with regard to dissolution. However, there are
best practices that we have learned in the KwaZulu-Natal province. The
manner in which the MEC for co-operative governance and traditional affairs
consulted in this regard was best, precisely because all the people in each
municipality were involved.

It is, therefore, an approval, not only by the leadership, but together
with the community. The communities were involved and they approved the
section 139(1)(b) decisions in almost all these three municipalities. We
are saying this is one of the best practices that some of the provinces
have to learn.

The other thing is the way in which the legislature of KwaZulu-Natal
supported the committee. From day one, the chairperson of the co-operative
governance portfolio committee in this regard was with the committee until
the end and, therefore, they have all the facts that the people raised. Let
me rest my case. So be it.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Oversight visit to Umhlabuyalingana Local
Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern
Cape, North West, Western Cape.

KwaZulu-Natal did not vote.

Report on Oversight visit to Umhlabuyalingana Local Municipality
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Oversight visit to Indaka Local
Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga,  Northern
Cape, North West, Western Cape.

KwaZulu-Natal did not vote.

Report on Oversight to Indaka  Local  Municipality  accordingly  adopted  in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That  the  Report  on  Oversight  visit  to  Okhahlamba  Local
Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga,  Northern
Cape, North West, Western Cape.

KwaZulu-Natal did not vote.

Report on Oversight  visit  to  Okhahlamba  Local  Municipality  accordingly
adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Dissolution of Naledi, Local Municipality
be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga,  Northern
Cape, North West, Western Cape.

KwaZulu-Natal did not vote.

Report on Dissolution of Naledi Local Municipality  accordingly  adopted  in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:37.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS
National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of corruption and and irregular practices within
        Umlalazi Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (b)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of maladministration, fraud, and corrupt practices
        within Nongoma Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal.

        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.

    (c)     Progress Report on the Sundays River Valley Municipality
        Turnaround Plan in the Eastern Cape , issued in terms of section
        139(1)(b) of the Constitution, 1996.

        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Council of Provinces

The report below replaces the REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-
OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON THE DISSOLUTION OF NALEDI
LOCAL MUNICIPALITY, DATED 19 MAY 2010 published in the Announcements,
Tablings and Committee Reports of Wednesday, 19 May 2010

1.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON THE DISSOLUTION OF NALEDI LOCAL MUNICIPALITY –
    DATED 19 MAY 2010


    1. Introduction and Background
    1.1     The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs having considered the dissolution notice on the 14 May 2010
        and report on the intervention notice invoked in terms of section
        139 (1)(c) of the Constitution at Naledi Local Municipality by the
        Free State Provincial Executive Council (PEC), reports as follows:

   1.2      According to section 139(1)(c) of the Constitution, when a
        municipality cannot or does not fulfil an executive obligation in
        terms of the Constitution or legislation, the relevant provincial
        executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps to ensure
        the fulfilment of that obligation, including dissolving the
        Municipal Council and appointing an Administrator until a newly
        elected Municipal Council has been declared elected.

    1.3     The Constitution provides that the dissolution takes effect
        unless the NCOP or the Minister set it aside. In other words, the
        Constitution provides for a 14-day window period within which the
        national Minister and the NCOP have the opportunity to set aside
        the dissolution.


    2. Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality
    2.1     The rationale for the dissolution of Naledi Local Municipality
        is based on the major problems identified by the PEC related to the
        following:


        2.1.1    Assassination of the Mayor on 3 May 2010.


        2.1.2    Attempted murder of the Municipal Manager on 4 May 2010.
        2.1.3    Division amongst Municipal Councillors and their inability
              to convene Council meetings.
        2.1.4    Most reports generated by the administration could not be
              assessed and finalised by Council or signed off by the Mayor,
              to enable the administration to function effectively.
        2.1.5    The draft IDP, Budget and Turn-Around Strategy was not
              effectively consulted on with the community, owing to the
              Council’s poor public consultation processes.
        2.1.6    The CFO and Manager for Technical Services were suspended
              by the Municipal Manager without the ratification of the
              Council.
        2.1.7    Poor water management has led to the Municipality being
              indebted to the Water Board.
        2.1.8    The Municipality has received disclaimers for the past
              three years from the Auditor-General.


    3. Committee Observations and Opinion
    3.1     The Committee has observed that the Provincial Department has in
        the past years provided support to the Municipality in terms of
        section 154(1) of the Constitution. Section 154 of the Act mandates
        national and provincial government to support and strengthen the
        capacity of municipalities to manage their own affairs, to exercise
        their powers and to perform their functions. However, the Naledi
        Local Municipality demonstrated its unwillingness to fulfil its
        executive obligations owing to the administrative and financial
        mismanagement, and current political instability which was
        prevailing in the Municipality.


    3.2     Based on the reasons for dissolution provided by the Free State
        MEC for Co-operative Governance, Traditional Affairs and Human
        Settlements, Mr M Zwane, the Committee is of the opinion that the
        dissolution of Naledi Local Municipal is warranted by the Municipal
        Council’s conduct, which is the cause of the continued failure to
        comply with an executive obligation.


    3.3     Furthermore, the Committee is of the opinion that for the Free
        State Provincial Executive to intervene at Naledi Local
        Municipality, it is an integral part of the institutional framework
        for developmental local government. It is a necessary corrective
        measure when a municipality fails to govern and thus jeopardises
        the enterprise of development. It is also an aspect of
        intergovernmental relations and, as such, it must be exercised
        within the spirit of co-operative government as outlined in Chapter
        3 of the Constitution.


    3.4     The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs, in co-operation with the relevant Portfolio Committee in
        the Free State Provincial Legislature, would conduct an oversight
        visit to interact with internal and external stakeholders of the
        Naledi Local Municipality.


    4. Recommendations
    4.1     The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs recommends as follows:


           1. The NCOP approves the intervention as issued by the Free
              State Provincial Executive Council in terms of section 139
              (1)(c) of the Constitution.


           2. The Free State MEC for Co-operative Governance, Traditional
              Affairs and Human Settlements should table progress reports
              to the NCOP and the Provincial Legislature on the status of
              by-elections to be held at Naledi Local Municipality.


           3. The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional
              Affairs should approach the Hawks to pursue criminal
              investigation in all cases of financial irregularities and
              fraud in Naledi Local Municipality, as a matter of urgency,
              and a report be forwarded to the NCOP in this regard.

Report to be considered.

The report below  replaces  the  REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-
OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT  TO  TSWAING
LOCAL MUNICIPALITY, DATED 19  MAY  2010   published  in  the  Announcements,
Tablings and Committee Reports of Wednesday 19 May 2010
2.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
     TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO TSWAING LOCAL MUNICIPALITY –
     DATED 19 MAY 2010
     1.    Background and Overview


      1.1   The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
            Affairs having considered  the  request  made  by  the  National
            Council of Provinces (NCOP) on the 10 March 2010,   to  consider
            and report on  the  intervention  notice  invoked  in  terms  of
            section  139  (1)(b)  of  the  Constitution  at  Tswaing   Local
            Municipality by  the  North-West  Provincial  Executive  Council
            (PEC), reports as follows:


      1.2   In terms of  section  139(1)(b)  of  the  Constitution,  when  a
            municipality cannot or does not fulfil an  executive  obligation
            in terms  of  the  Constitution  or  legislation,  the  relevant
            provincial executive may intervene  by  taking  any  appropriate
            steps to ensure the fulfilment  of  that  obligation,  including
            assuming the responsibility for the relevant obligation in  that
            municipality.


      1.3   In terms of the NCOP Rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson  of
            the NCOP referred the notice of intervention in the  affairs  of
            Tswaing Local  Municipality  to  the  Select  Committee  of  Co-
            operative Governance and Traditional Affairs  for  consideration
            and reporting. On 5 May 2010,  the  Committee  took  a  decision
            during its meeting to conduct an oversight visit to  the  above-
            mentioned Municipality on 11 May 2010.


      2.    Oversight Purpose and Objectives

     2.1   The objectives of the oversight visit was to  determine  whether
           procedural requirements have been met and to verify whether  the
           PEC has used its discretion appropriately, before the  Committee
           can   approve/disapprove   the   intervention.    Through    the
           deliberation  and  interaction  with   internal   and   external
           stakeholders, the Committee wanted to determine how the PEC  was
           intending to restore the fulfilment of the relevant  obligations
           and ensure fulfilment in the long-term. The aim  was  to  ensure
           intergovernmental checks and  balances  aimed  at  guarding  the
           integrity and efficiency of the intervention process.


     3.    Composition of the Delegation


     3.1   The delegation of the Committee was composed  of  the  following
           Members of Parliament and Officials:  Hon  MH  Mokgobi,  Limpopo
           (ANC); Hon AG Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon DV  Bloem,  Free  State
           (COPE); Mr TM Manele, Committee  Secretary  (Committee  Section)
           and  Mr  V  Mfuniselwa,  Administration   Assistant   (Committee
           Section).


     4.    Introduction


     4.1   On 18 March 2010, the Premier of North-West  Province  tabled  a
           notice of intervention in  Tswaing  Local  Municipality  to  the
           Office of  the  Chairperson  of  the  NCOP.  Subsequent  to  the
           tabling, the notice was referred to the Select Committee on  Co-
           operative Governance and Traditional Affairs  for  consideration
           and reporting in terms of Council Rule 101. In  compliance  with
           the Council referral, the Committee resolved to undertake a fact-
           finding visit to the Municipality on the 11 May 2010.  In  terms
           of section 139 (2)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the  intervention
           must  end  if  the  NCOP  does  not   positively   approve   the
           intervention within 180 days, in this case before the end of  10
           September 2010, since the intervention began.
     5.    Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality
     5.1   The main issues identified by the PEC  for  intervening  in  the
           affairs of  Tswaing  Local  Municipality  related  to  the  poor
           management  of  the  Municipality;  poor  water  and  sanitation
           provision; poor standard of internal road infrastructure; uneven
           provision of services to  the  communities  and  project  delays
           owing to prolonged procurement processes;   and  possible  fraud
           and corruption activities.


     6.    Oversight Visit to Tswaing Local Municipality


     6.1   On 11 May 2010 the delegation of the Committee  had  interactive
           and  robust  engagements   with   the   internal   and   external
           stakeholders of the Tswaing Local Municipality. The main internal
           stakeholders the delegation interacted with in  the  Municipality
           included the Speaker, Mayor, Ward  Committee  Members,  Municipal
           Councillors, Administrator and the South African Local Government
           Association  (SALGA).  The   main   external   stakeholders   the
           delegation interacted with included members of the community, and
           business forums and non-governmental organizations.


     6.2   For the purpose of this report, the  submissions  made  by  both
           internal and external stakeholders are structured  based  on  the
           five key performance areas of the  local  government  which  are:
           Municipal Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local  Economic
           Development; Municipal Financial  Viability  and  Management,  as
           well as Good Governance and Public Participation.
     (A)   Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

     6.3    Municipal Council: The submissions made by  the  Mayor  and  the
            Speaker specified  that  the  Municipal  Council  supported  the
            placing of the Municipality under  section  139  (1)(b)  of  the
            Constitution,   and   the   subsequent   appointment   of    the
            Administrator in  fulfilling  the  executive  functions  of  the
            Municipality. The major progress reported by the Mayor prior  to
            the intervention and appointment of the  Administrator  included
            the development of a draft Integrated  Development  Plan  (IDP),
            budget and municipal turn- around strategy to be considered  and
            adopted by the Municipal Council.


     6.4    SALGA: The major  municipal  transformation  and  organisational
            development concerns raised by  SALGA  affecting  municipalities
            generally  and  specifically  the  Tswaing  Local  Municipality,
            related to the lack of  capacity in the North-West  Province  to
            monitor  and  support  municipalities  in  terms  of  personnel,
            funding, institutional knowledge and expertise.


     6.5    Administrator: The Administrator  reported  on  the  absence  of
            discipline among  municipal  officials;  performance  management
            system;  lack  of  staff  supervision;  bloated   organisational
            structure,  which  was  not  aligned  to  the   IDP;   irregular
            appointments of employees; problems with staff  placements;  120
            employees appointed within a period of six months, resulting  in
            a higher salary bill; poor record-  management  system;  a  high
            level of  employee  absenteeism  and  lack  of  commitment  from
            section 57 managers.


     6.6    Municipal Councillors: The concerns  raised  by  some  Municipal
            Councillors related to low work ethics of the  senior  managers,
            including  the  Municipal  Manager;  continual  absence  of  the
            Municipal Manager from work; head-hunting of unqualified  senior
            managers by the Municipal Manager; and the non- functionality of
            the Local Labour Forum (LLF).


     6.7     Organized  Labour:  Some  of  the  major  transformational  and
            organisational concerns highlighted by  the  representatives  of
            South African Municipal Workers Union  (SAMWU)  related  to  the
            lack of skills  development  programmes.  SAMWU  indicated  that
            there is a need to address  good  working  relations  among  the
            Office of the Mayor, Speaker and the Chief  Whip,  in  order  to
            ensure that effective and efficient municipal transformation and
            organisational development.


     6.8    Administrator: Part of the  turn-around  plan  reported  by  the
            Administrator in assisting the Municipality  to  deal  with  the
            challenges included the reviewing of all the existing  policies,
            development of new policies, reviving and training of  the  LLF,
            development of a disciplinary and grievance procedure,  training
            of  management  and  staff,  and  improving  staff  morale   and
            discipline by the end of September 2010.


     (B)    Basic Service Delivery


     6.9    Administrator: The collapse of refuse collection,  cleaning  and
            rehabilitation of streets, and provision of  potable  water  and
            sanitation  were  the  main  basic  service  delivery   problems
            reported. The Administrator indicated that the turn-around  plan
            would assist the Municipality  to  effectively  and  efficiently
            deal with basic service delivery challenges, including improving
            access  to  electricity  and  potable  water,  maintenance   and
            operation of infrastructure, ensuring solid waste  disposal  and
            refuse removal, and resolving housing project challenges  before
            the end of September 2010.
     6.10    Ward  Committees:  Concerns  raised  by  members  of  the  Ward
            Committees were connected to the Municipal Manager’s failure  to
            deal with the service delivery problems, political  interference
            in administration, and the non-implementation of the IDP review.


     6.11   Traditional Leaders: The challenges that needed to be  addressed
            according to  the  Traditional  Leaders  related  to  poor  road
            infrastructure, lack of street lightning, delays with regard  to
            the completion of the RDP houses, land occupation, and the  need
            to ensure that the terms of reference of the  Administrator  and
            the application of section 139 (1)(b) of the  Constitution  were
            clearly explained.


     (C)    Local Economic Development (LED)


     6.12   Administrator: The Administrator tabled a  plan  to  assist  the
            Municipality in dealing with  economic  development  challenges.
            This included the revival of the LED Forum and the promotion  of
            stakeholder engagement by the end of September 2010.


     6.13   Community-Based Organisation: The  Organization  raised  funding
            challenges  which  relate  to  youth  developmental  programmes;
            community-based  youth  projects,  including  co-ordination   of
            leanership programmes; lack of  an  intergovernmental  approach,
            especially with regard to the placement of community members who
            had participated in the learnership programmes.


     (D)    Municipal Financial Viability and Management


     6.14   Administrator: The major problems reported by the  Administrator
            included the salary bill of the Municipality which exceeded  the
            monthly income, general financial fraud and mismanagement,  non-
            payment of statutory deductions, poor  management  of  municipal
            assets, the disappearance of R90  000  without  trace  from  the
            municipal  primary  bank  account,  and   the   instituting   of
            disciplinary measures.


     6.15   The turn-around plan was aimed at assisting the Municipality  to
            deal with  the  problems  related  to  financial  viability  and
            management, development of a fraud prevention  strategy,  robust
            engagement with the Ratepayers Association, improvement of cash-
            flow management, promotion  of  compliance  with  the  Municipal
            Finance Management Act (MFMA)  and  the  financial  regulations,
            updating of asset register, and the completion and  adoption  of
            the budget by the end of September 2010.


     (E)    Good Governance and Public Participation


     6.16   SALGA: The representative of SALGA, who was also a Member of the
            Intergovernmental    Relations     Forum,     registered     his
            dissatisfaction which related to the absence of sound  relations
            within the Municipality.  It  was  pointed  out  that  political
            infighting and divisions were rife within the Municipal Council,
            and that there was also  political–administrative  conflict,  as
            well as failure to perform  legislative  functions.   There  was
            also political interference in the administration.


     6.17   Municipal  Council:  The  Speaker  of  the  Municipality  raised
            concerns with regard to the lack of resources and  stipends  for
            Ward Committee Members to facilitate  public  participation,  on
            matters relating to governance.
     6.18    Municipal  Councillors:  It   was   recorded   that   political
            interference in administration; implementation of  decisions  by
            the Mayor, without consultation with the Municipal Council,  was
            a major challenge  in  the  Municipality.  Furthermore,  it  was
            identified that there was political infighting,  non-tabling  of
            reports, and the lack of accountability to the Municipal Council
            by the Municipal Manager and Section 57 Managers.  In  addition,
            the Municipal Manager failed to co-ordinate the meetings of  the
            municipal portfolio committees.


     6.19   Administrator: The Administrator aims to assist the Municipality
            to deal with the problems related to good governance and  public
            participation, including the revitalization of Ward  Committees;
            the  improvement  of  communication  with  the  community;   the
            promoting of public meetings; the  reviewing  of  delegation  of
            authority; the  strengthening  of  political  oversight  on  all
            Municipal Council committees and administration; the creating of
            stability within the Municipal Council;  and  the  promoting  of
            good intergovernmental relations by the end of September 2010.


     7.     Committee Observations and Opinion


     7.1    The delegation of the Committee has observed that, owing to  the
            failure of the Municipality to perform legislative and executive
            obligations,  service  delivery  in  the  communities  had  been
            affected, and this resulted  in  poor  provision  of  water  and
            sanitation   services,   poor   standard   of   internal    road
            infrastructure, uneven provision  of  services  to  communities;
            delays in the completion of LED projects, prolonged  procurement
            processes, and allegations of fraud and corruption.


     7.2    Furthermore, the decision of  the  PEC  to  invoke  section  139
            (1)(b) of the Constitution and the subsequent appointment of the
            Administrator on 10 May 2010, has resulted in the development of
            a turn-around plan. This was aimed at assisting the Municipality
            to deal with the challenges and stakeholders’  concerns  related
            to the  IDP,  budget  formulation,  organisational  development,
            financial management, good governance, public participation, LED
            and service delivery.


     7.3     In  addition,  the  NCOP  should  note   that   Tswaing   Local
            Municipality has a bloated orgonogram of 19 section 57 managers,
            as well as irregular promotions of about 120 workers  to  senior
            management. It is also alleged that the  Municipal  Council  has
            one Gardener and one Cleaner.


     8.     Acknowledgement


     8.1    Having conducted the oversight visit to  the  Municipality,  the
            Committee delegation wishes to extend words of  appreciation  to
            all the internal and external stakeholders of  the  Municipality
            for  their  robust  engagements  with  the  delegation  of   the
            Committee  on  matters  related  to   the   placement   of   the
            Municipality under section 139 (1)(b) of  the  Constitution  and
            the appointment of the Administrator.


     9.     Recommendations


     9.1     Having  conducted  the  oversight  visit   to   Tswaing   Local
            Municipality  and  interacted   with   internal   and   external
            stakeholders, the Select Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance
            and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:
            9.1.1 The NCOP approves the intervention as issued by the North-
                  West Provincial Executive Council in terms of section 139
                  (1)(b) of the Constitution.


            9.1.2      The Administrator should fast-track  the  process  of
                  reviewing and developing a database of qualifications  of
                  all section  57  managers  and  table  a  report  to  the
                  Provincial Executive Council.


               3. The Minister for Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
                  Affairs should approach  the  Hawks  to  pursue  criminal
                  investigation in all cases  of  financial  irregularities
                  and fraud in Tswaing Local Municipality as  a  matter  of
                  urgency, and a report be forwarded to the  NCOP  in  this
                  regard.


            9.1.4 The Administrator should ensure the proper functioning  of
                  the  Local  Labour  Forum  and   the   co-ordination   of
                  consultative meetings between the offices of  the  Mayor,
                  Speaker and the Chief Whip.


            9.1.5 The Provincial Executive should provide quarterly  reports
                  to the NCOP on the progress made in  respect  of  service
                  delivery,    financial    viability    and    management,
                  transformation and organisational development,  LED,  and
                  good governance and public participation as contained  in
                  the turn-around  strategy  tabled  during  the  oversight
                  visit on 11 May 2010.


            9.1.6  The  Administrator  should  fast-track  the  process   of
                  ensuring  that  all  section  57  managers  complete  the
                  signing  of  their  performance  contracts,  and  further
                  ensure that those contracts  are  aligned  with  the  key
                  performance areas of the Municipality.


            9.1.7 The MEC for Developmental Local Government and Housing  in
                  North-West  Province  should  table  quarterly   progress
                  reports to the NCOP and the Provincial Legislature on the
                  status of the intervention in the Municipality, including
                  challenges encountered.


            9.1.8 The South African Local  Government  Association,  in  co-
                  operation with the Local Government Sector Education  and
                  Training  Authority,  should  facilitate   training   and
                  capacity   building   for   Municipal   Councillors   and
                  officials, in order to further deepen their understanding
                  of the legal  framework  and  policies  that  govern  the
                  activities of the Municipality.


               9.  The  South  African  Municipal  Workers  Union  and  the
                  Independent Municipal Allied Trade Union should work  co-
                  operatively with the Administrator in order to strengthen
                  personnel discipline that is aimed at promoting municipal
                  integrity.


              10. The Provincial Executive should investigate and report to
                  the NCOP, why Tswaing Local Municipality is at grade  six
                  level, which is inconsistent with the recommendations  of
                  the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB).

              11. The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and
                  Traditional Affairs, in co-operation  with  the  relevant
                  Portfolio  Committee   in   the   North-West   Provincial
                  Legislature, would  conduct  a  follow-up  visit  to  the
                  Municipality three  months  after  the  intervention  has
                  ended, in order to monitor the progress made  in  respect
                  of the intervention in the Municipality.


Report to be considered.

