---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-18
---

THURSDAY, 18 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:07.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members  to  observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC:

 Opportunities created for, and contribution to be made by, South Africa in
                         designing a new world order

  19. Dr G W Koornhof (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What (a) opportunities have been created for South Africa as a  result
      of his recent visits to  Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China  and  (b)
      contribution can  South  Africa  make  to  the  developing  agenda  in
      assisting to design a new world order?       NO3904E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, many opportunities were created
during our state visit to Brazil last year. The state visit served to
strengthen the existing sound relations between the two countries. The
reciprocal visit by His Excellency President Lula da Silva in July this
year further cemented our relations. The two countries have ongoing co-
operation in the areas of social development, trade and industry, health,
education, science and technology, governance and energy, to mention just a
few.

The two countries also have in place a memorandum of understanding on trade
co-operation in an effort to lower tariff and nontariff barriers. This will
enable us to further reach our goals of opening the Brazilian market for
better access for our products and services. This speaks to our strategic
priority of creating better quality lives and decent work through improved
export opportunities.

The state visit also allowed the two countries to take relations forward at
the level of India-Brazil-South Africa Forum, which enables us to advance
South-South co-operation. During the two visits, we also undertook to make
available to Brazil any assistance relating to expertise gained during the
2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup, as they will be hosting the tournament in the
year 2014.
The visit to the Russian Federation put a strong emphasis on bilateral co-
operation as well as economic and trade issues. We discussed and agreed to
develop concrete joint ventures, particularly in the energy, mining and
agricultural sectors.

Amongst the key issues that were addressed were access for South African
meat products to the Russian market, Russian anti-dumping penalties on
South African steel exports, as well as other trade matters. Some of the
agreements signed included an agreement on visa exemption for diplomatic,
official and service passports to promote people-to-people co-operation and
co-operation amongst space agencies of the two countries.

There was also the signing of a contract between Eskom and Tenex to supply
nuclear fuel to South Africa, which contributes to the imperative of a
reliable and stable energy supply. The visit also focused on international
development issues such as meeting the Millennium Development Goals, reform
of the global financial architecture, and South Africa’s wish to join the
Brazil-Russia-China formation called Bric.

During our state visit to China, the two countries signed the Declaration
on the Establishment of a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership. The Vice
President of China, Mr Xi Jinping, was this week hosted by our Deputy
President, hon Kgalema Motlanthe; an indication of strong ties between the
two countries. This week’s visit served to concretise and put into action
many of the agreements reached during the August state visit, using the
South Africa-China Bi-National Commission as a mechanism.

During our visit to China, we agreed to focus on working towards more
balanced trade. The two countries also undertook to provide mutual
technical support in the areas of the green economy, skills development and
industrial financing.

Sixteen private sector contracts were also signed between local and Chinese
companies. The private sectors of both countries were encouraged to explore
co-operation opportunities in infrastructure construction projects such as
roads, ports, power generation, airports and housing. China has also
committed itself to support - within the Nepad context - the North-South
infrastructure development corridor which South Africa is championing.

The visit was also used to co-ordinate and align the positions of South
Africa and China on international issues, particularly with regard to the
G20, climate change, reform of the United Nations system and the Bric
Forum.

The 16th of November marked the 150th anniversary of the arrival of the
Indian community in the country, which was the beginning of the strong ties
between India and South Africa. The state visit to India succeeded in
further strengthening the strong bilateral relations that both countries
share, at cultural, economic, political and social levels. The two
countries agreed to work towards increasing bilateral trade to at least
$12 billion per annum by 2012.

The business forum of the two countries met in Johannesburg following the
state visit, taking forward the agreements reached at the level of trade
relations. The two countries will also co-operate on education and skills
development, something which bodes well for South Africa’s human resource
development needs.

South Africa is working closely within the UN and the Ibsa Forum to promote
a new world order, as well as to ensure that the voice of the developing
world is heard and carries weight with regard to development issues. The
world we live in today has changed significantly since the end of the Cold
War. The countries of the South such as Brazil, India and China are rising
and are challenging the global economic landscape.

We want to take advantage of these new developments, while also working to
enhance existing relations with the developed North, the United States, the
European Union and other regions. We also use international forums to
promote the reform of international financial institutions to ensure the
participation of Africa and the developing world in decision-making. We
also work towards more equitable trade relations in the world, hence the
call for the Doha Round to be concluded in a manner that enhances
development and does not perpetuate global inequalities. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr President, thank you for your comprehensive response. I
fully agree with your response with regard to the opportunities which have
been created for our country following your visit to Brazil, India, Russia
and China, as well as the contribution that South Africa can make to the
global agenda, as a leading developing country in the world.

We must congratulate the President for his visionary initiative to
strengthen the relationships between South Africa and the four countries he
has visited. The policy of the ANC is to create a better world, and it is
therefore important to interact continuously with these countries, but also
with others, as part of our international agenda.

My question, Mr President, is: What do you think can be done to inform our
people and make them understand and appreciate the potential benefits that
may flow to South Africa, benefiting our people in creating a better life
for all? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, for our people to appreciate
and understand this, we first need to find a way of communicating with our
country’s citizens. We should inform them about what the benefits are of
the visits we have made to these countries. One way of doing it is through
Parliament, because they listen to what Parliament discusses. It is
important to do so, so that people will appreciate the reasons why these
visits are made.

We cannot develop relations and our economy if we are not in dynamic
contact with other countries, particularly if we want to be a country
amongst countries that are economically developed. Paying these visits is
in fact doing the job of this country so that we therefore create more
possibilities for economic and political relations that open up economic
activities between the countries. This also enables us to learn from these
countries about how they solve their own problems, particularly in the
changing world of today where the emphasis is no longer just on relations
between the South and the North, but where South-South is also important.
We need to communicate all of that to people so that they understand what
it means.

We need to see many of the channels that we have. That is the reason why
the public broadcaster, for example, monitors and follows these visits.
This is so that even whilst both the Deputy President and I are visiting,
they are able to communicate and indicate what is happening as we are in
these places. We should do more of that so that our people can understand,
including utilising Parliament. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Mr President, it appears that you are being ambushed by
the Koornhofs, but I will not be rude to you today. It’s a very interesting
initiative for South Africa to join the so called Bric countries. From
Cope’s side, I would just wish for all the best.

Firstly, I would like to know if you envisage this to happen? Secondly, in
view of the fact that most of the countries that you have visited are
normally keen only to obtain our raw materials or minerals, have any
agreements been reached with these countries? Such agreements should be to
outsource any manufacturing to South Africa, but in such a way that they do
not come here bringing their own workforce and skills, but that they employ
South Africans and make use of our skills.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, don’t worry about the
Koornhofs; I know them very well, even if they ambush me. Yes, that issue,
including the beneficiation that we believe is important, has been
discussed with the countries, because we have engaged quite extensively.
They’ve got the capacity to do so. There is an agreement with these
countries that indeed our relationship should be beneficial to both. The
comprehensive agreement that we have already signed with China actually
embodies that element of ensuring that there is beneficiation and job
creation in the relationship that we have. We have engaged strongly the
Russians and particularly the strong countries. So, that matter has been
catered for. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon President, of the countries
visited, Brazil probably has the most similarities to South Africa. And
most observers agree that Brazil’s emergence and recent surge can be
attributed to political leadership. Since the 1990s, the sequencing of
tough reform targeted social policies and the commodity boom.

The ACDP believes that all these developments have important lessons for
South Africa, and we are grateful for their link with Brazil. But would you
agree with the further widely held observation that the most instructive
aspect of Brazil’s ascent is the strong consensus and common vision that
has developed between government and business over the past decade? If so,
how can a similar consensus and common vision be developed in South Africa
between government, business and labour, particularly regarding economic
growth issues? I’m referring now to beyond the Nedlac process. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, certainly, yes, Cuba engaged
social partners and discussed a number of issues with them. I don’t think
it resolved any other issue but certainly made good progress, and it is a
country to learn from. We are engaged in the process, as you know.
You have already quoted one example, Nedlac, which has been there all the
time where these social partners had to exchange views. We have also been
consulting on challenges with all social partners. You will recall that
when the world was struck by the financial crisis, we were the only country
that utilised that structure of social partners to emerge with a plan that
no country ever had. That indicates our commitment to that process.

You would also appreciate that we have said in public that, economically
speaking, with the new growth path we are going to engage social partners
as well. So, from our point of view, we are always discussing with business
and labour to find common ground on what we are doing. Certainly, there is
room to do more, and I’m sure we will continue to do so. That is what we
believe in, as Brazil also did. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Mr President, for your response. A bilateral
relationship with any other country is a good thing for both parties. We
must be guarded that we don’t sometimes open our doors too wide. I say this
in the context of the thousands of job losses in the clothing and textile
industry in the South African situation. Many businesses have closed down,
and thousands of ordinary people have lost their jobs due to cheap imports.
We do know that in the case countries like India and China in particular,
with their low productivity costs, their products come here in the form of
millions of items.
What are we going to do, or is there any agreement or arrangement or any
discussion that has taken place, in particular with those two countries?
This would be to ensure that we protect the jobs of people in our country,
and that they adhere to proper rules and regulations when producing goods
in their respective countries.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, as we engage with these
countries, that issue is not outside of the engagement. Those are some of
the matters that we have discussed. Certainly, we cannot determine what
countries individually do. However, we certainly believe that as we develop
relations, we are able to deal with those matters so that we can have
better regulations in terms of how goods move between the countries. That
is one issue and, as you know, it has been an issue about which there has
been a lot of concern - particularly from the labour movement - that it
must be corrected. Certainly these relations will remedy that as well.
Thank you. [Applause.]

         Particulars regarding applications for presidential pardon

20.   Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   With reference to the 384 applications for  presidential  pardon
           in  terms  of  section  84(2)  of  the  Constitution  that  were
           submitted with the  assistance  of  a  certain  political  party
           (details furnished), when will he make  available  his  decision
           regarding the remaining 154 applications;


      (2)   whether, with  reference  to  the  149  applications  that  were
           recommended  for  presidential  pardon   by   the   Presidential
           Reference Group (details furnished), he will make the  political
           affiliations of each of these applicants available; if not,  why
           not;    if    so,    what    are    the    relevant     details?
                                  NO4019E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I will consider the remaining
154 applications for pardon at the time that I consider the other
applications made in terms of the special dispensation process. This will
be done once effect is given to the decision of the Constitutional Court in
the matter of Ryan Albutt and Others v the President and Others. The
applicants will be informed of my decision in due course.

The number of applicants is, of course, very long. The party-political
affiliations have been categorised as follows: ANC, 53; Afrikaanse
Weerstandsbeweging, 13; Azapo, 2; Bophuthatswana Defence Force, 2; Civic
Association, 1; Former South African Police, 5; FF Plus, 3; IFP, 21; PAC,
34; Simunye in Christ Organisation, 1; UDM, 11; and those not affiliated,
3. A more detailed list is available, but may be too lengthy a response for
this oral answer. However, the balance is as I have put here.

The majority of the prisoners who have applied are ANC members, and all
others are small numbers. Surely, the ANC should be making more noise and
asking more questions on this question, but I think the ANC understands the
procedure. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Somlomo, ngiyabonga mhlonishwa uMongameli ngezinombolo lezi
onginike zona. Bengicela ukusho mhlonishwa uMongameli ukuthi lolu daba
unguMongameli wesine siluxoxa. Ngeke siluyeke futhi siyoqhubeka ngokuluxoxa
luze lufike ekugcineni. Ukuthi uKhongolose uyathanda ababo bahlale
ngaphakathi noma abathandi, okwabo labo. [Uhleko.]

Okumqoka yikuthi siyafisa engathi umhlonishwa uMongameli angashesha
afikelele esinqumeni salaba bantu, ngoba ngeke kwakuhle ukuthi abantu
badonse izikhathi ezide, behleli laphaya ezindlini ezimnyama, ekugcineni
bese kuthiwa baxolelwe nguMongameli kanti bese vese bezophuma ngakusasa.
Lokho kungeke kwaba yigama elihle, okokuqala lokho.

Okwesibili, ngicosha ithuba lokuthokoza mina ukuthi kukhona nalaba okuthiwa
usimunye. Angimazi usimunye kodwa angifuni ukubakhulumela ngoba
banenhlanhla yokuthi bakucoshe lokho. Bengifisa Mongameli ukuthi lezicelo
zonke zingenziwa masishane ukuze abantu bangagugeli emajele, nalaba
abafanele ukuthi bathathe, bathathe besebancane, bangaze befele khona.
Ngiyathokoza. [Uhleko.]

UMONGAMELI WERIPHABHULIKHI YASENINGIZIMU AFRIKA: Ngiyazibongela Somlomo,
lungu elihloniphekile lesishayamthetho, Gatsheni, ngiyakuzwa baba kodwa
engifisa nje ukuthi ngikuqaqambise kakhulu ukuthi akubambezele uMongameli.
Njengoba wazi ukuthi lwathi lolu daba luphethwe, kwase kubakhona
abaluthathayo balusa enkantolo.olwalunesibalo esithile salabo abenze
izicelo.

Uma-ke udaba seluphambi kwezinkantolo awukwazi ukululokotha noma ngabe
unguMongameli. Kufanele ukuthi ume, ulindele inkantolo ize ikhiphe
isahlulelo, futhi-ke le nkantolo ebiphethe lolu daba inkantolo okuyiyona
enkulu kunazo zonke yomthethosisekelo. Inkantolo yasikhipha isinqumo. Ithe
seyisikhiphile, laba abakhuluma lolu daba, abafisa ukuthi lwenzeke ngoba
inkantolo ithe labo abathintekile maqondana nokuthi isihlobo zalaba
abangaphakathi abenze izicelo, nalabo ikakhulu okuyibona abalahlekelwa
abantu babo, kufanele ukuba babe nezwi lokuthi bathini bona. Baphume laba
bantu na noma bangaphumi, kusho inkantolo.

Ngithe sengilungiselela ukuthi ngiyakwenza-ke lokho njengokuqondiswa
yinkantolo, kwase kuthi laba ababizwa ngokuthi izinhlangano ezingekho
ngaphansi kukahulumeni, zafisa ukuthi nazo zafisa ukuthi ulwazi noma
imiqulu equkethwe imininingwane zafisa ukuyibona nazo mathupha. Nazo lolu
daba zaludlulisela enkantolo ukuthi zifisa ukulubona.  Yilokho
okulibazisile Gatsheni, ukuba kuyangathi ngabe izinqumo kade sizithathile
ngoba nathi sifisa ukuthi umthetho uma uthi asenze into, siyenze.
Singaphikisani nomthetho kodwa nalabo abafisa ukuthi umthetho
usetshenziswe, bathathe amanyathelo athile athinta umthetho. Kuthiwa–ke
into uma isemthethweni awukwazi ukuyisukela nje, ungaboshwa nokuboshwa.
Abafundile bayaye bathi udaba olubucayi olusezithebeni zenkantolo.
Ngiyabonga Somlomo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Speaker, I thank you, hon President for the numbers you
gave me. I would like to state, hon President, that you are the fourth
president with whom I am raising this issue. We are not going to give up;
we will continue raising it until it is concluded. Whether or not the ANC
wants their people to remain incarcerated is their business. [Laughter.]

What is important is that we wish for the President to quickly reach a
decision with regard to these people, because it won’t be good for people
to serve long sentences, locked up in dark cells, and eventually it will be
said the President pardoned them whereas they were about to be released.
That won’t be right; that is the first thing.

Secondly, I want to take this opportunity to appreciate that there are
those who are said to be single. I don’t know any person who is single, but
I don’t want to speak on their behalf because they are lucky to be like
that. I just wish, hon President, that these applications could be
processed quickly so that people do not reach old age inside the prison.
And also allow those who deserve to get married to do so while they are
still of good age, rather than letting them die in prison. I thank you.
[Laughter.]]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I thank you, hon Speaker. Hon member of the
National Assembly, Gatsheni, I hear what you are saying but I want to
clarify that it is not the President who is delaying the matter. As you
know, while this matter was being discussed, some people took it to court.
A specific number of people applied.

When the matter is before the court, you cannot deal with it even if you
are the President. You must wait for the court to decide, and this matter
was sent to the highest court in the land, the Constitutional Court. The
court decided. After the court had decided, those who talk about this
matter did not want  the court’s ruling to be implemented,  that being that
those who are affected by the matter, especially those who lost their
relatives, must have a say in the matter. They had to indicate whether the
prisoners should be released or not, as per the court’s decision.

As I was about to do what was directed by the court, the NGOs indicated
that they wanted to see documents with information. They too took the
matter to court. That is what caused the delay, Gatsheni - if it were up to
us, we would have decided on the matter a long time ago because we want to
obey the law when it orders us to do something. That’s what we do. We don’t
want to work against the law, and then have some people take legal steps.
It is said that when the matter is before the court, you can’t even start
to deal with it because you could be imprisoned. The educated ones say that
when the matter is before the court of law, it is very critical. I thank
you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS:  Hon President, we commend the disclosure of the political
affiliation done here today in reply to that question. We also commend the
fact that you have invited the victims of persons applying for pardon, as
required in terms of the Albutt judgment. We wish, however, to raise a more
difficult question of disclosure, and it is an associated question of
disclosure.

The political pardon process was presented as the unfinished business of
the TRC, but it is being perceived as an unfinished business of political
parties. How will the hon President satisfy himself that the convicted
criminals recommended by the Presidential Reference Group were indeed
politically motivated to commit serial murder, theft, bank robbery and
bombing?

When the reference group had its terms of reference changed on 6 February
in 2008 to relieve the political parties of any obligation to confirm
factual allegations made by the pardon applicants, did the former Director-
General of the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, in
addition, tell the reference group that it was not necessary for applicants
to identify those who gave commands? The question is important because
political motivation and commands are really the only thing that separates
common crime from offences pardonable under this post-TRC process.

Therefore, my question is: How will the hon President satisfy himself and,
secondly, will he give reasons in due course in the same spirit of
disclosure? Will he give reasons for each decision to pardon, including
demonstrable motivation on the part of the applicant, to avoid the
arbitrary granting of what otherwise becomes a politically motivated pardon
and which then brings justice into disrepute since all of these people are
in prison after four judicial processes?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon speaker, the reference group, I think,
was very important for the very reason that it was important for political
parties at least to confirm whether they knew the applicant. Otherwise
anyone could have made a claim and yet it could have been just an ordinary
criminal case.

I have dealt with some of the cases and I have paid specific attention to
that issue. I must say that in a number of cases I have dealt with, I have
found very vague evidence; at times no evidence at all. At times it looked
like somebody was just claiming.

In some cases, there has been very strong evidence. This has been
available, so I don’t think at the moment there is even a problem in
finding out, because the applicant will actually explain that he belongs to
a particular organisation and, therefore, it is easy to check with that
organisation, regardless of a decision taken by somebody that you should
not do it. It is more logical to do it; otherwise how do you determine the
facts?

This is what I have been doing in my method of dealing with this matter,
and I have taken a number of decisions on the basis of this very issue. So,
at the moment I don’t think there is any difficulty in handling that one. I
have found quite a lot of them; it is very difficult to prove that this was
a political somebody. In fact, in some cases, even the parties were not
able to say, “Yes, this was a card-carrying member of our organisation”.
So, at the moment that has not become a difficulty and I am sure even that
decision that was taken — I think — was not a decision taken by a court. As
you have said, it was a decision taken by a bureaucrat in terms of just
working. I don’t think it’s something that binds me from taking a decision.
So, be happy with that. Thank you.

Mnu J B SIBANYONI: Mhlonishwa Somlomo, Mongameli siyabonga incazelo yakho
isiza kakhulu emphakathini ngoba abantu soloku bayabuza ngalezi zindaba.

Engifuna ukulandela ngako Mongameli yiloku ukuthi lawa magama ayi-149 ngabe
ngamagama lawa ithiba elibhekelela ukuxolelwa elawaveza ngakuMongameli
yathi ibona ukuthi laba abanikezwe ushwele wezepolitiki. Loko ngikubuza
ngoba sebebonke cishe abafaka izicelo bafikela cishe eziyi-2000.

Okunye futhi okwenza ukuthi ngibuze ngaloku, lawa magama ithimba
elibhekelela ukuxolelwa elawaveza ngaphambili lancoma, kwabanzima,
kwabanamagama asala ngaphandle ngoba kungekho ukuvumelana ethimbeni,
kwashuba impela bephikisana. Umbuzo wokuqala lowo. Okwesibili umbuzo
Mongameli, umayelana nesikubone kwenzeka eVulindlela enkundleni
yezemidlalo, lapho bekuhlangene khona esakubona ukuthi cishe kufana
nendlela yokushanela amabala, ukuthi mhlawumbe uma sekukhishwa abantu bebe
beshayisana ngamakhanda ngezikhathi zepolitiki, kutholakale ukuthi la
emphakathini sebeyamukeleka.

Kodwa Mongameli kukhona abasala ngaphandle abazange bawuhambele umcimbi
waseVulindlela bathi kukhona okusalenga. Manje umbuzo uthi ngabe uMongameli
uyokwenza yini ukuthi uma kuhlanganiswa imiphakathi kanjena ikakhulukazi
khona kwelikaMthaniya kungabi abasalela ngaphandle kube Mongameli sakubona
uphumelela wenza ukuthula koBurundi abantu baxhawulana ? AbakwaMthaniya
bazakuxhawulana.yini bona ekugcineni? [Isikhathi Siphelile][Ihlombe.]

UMONGAMELI WERIPHABHULIKHI YASENINGIZIMU AFRIKA: Somlomo, lungu
elihloniphekile lesishayamthetho, ngiyabonga umbuzo wakho. Wonke lamagama
esikhuluma ngawo ayilesibalo alethwa yithimba elibhekelela ukuxolelwa.
Kusho ukuthi lawa amanye asala uma senza amanye - maningi esawenza njengoba
kade ngenza isibonelo nje la ukuthi kunezinqumo esengazithatha kwamaningi.
Asala lawa ngenxa yokuba kwabakhona imibandela ethile – ngakho yiwo wonke.

Angiwutholanga umbiko othi kukhona amagama asala ngaphandle, ngoba ithimba
elibhekelela ukuxolelwa alishongo ukuthi liletha lawa nje kukhona
eliphikisane ngawo kwaze kwasekugcineni langavumelani. Ngathatha lokho
osekuphambi kwami ngasebenzela phezu kwako.

Maqondana nodaba lwaseVulindlela olulanda ngoba ubeka ukuthi kuyekufuneke
ukuthi abantu bathelelane amanzi uma kuthiwa kukhona uxolo. Isenzo leso
esenziwe abantu baseVulindlela abazisukumela phansi ngoba udlame
olwalukhona lwaluyizinhlobo ezahlukahlukene. Kwakukhona ukulwa kwezigodi,
kukhona nokulwa ngokwezepolitiki. Kwasukuma izinsizwa ezasukunyiswa laphaya
ngoba ngangikhona ngaleli langa, okuyizona ezisungule ukuthi akuxoxwe, kube
khona ukuzwana.

Kanti futhi ngenkathi kwindaba kwashiwo ukuthi bakhona abasasele
ngaphandle. Lokho phela kusho ukuthi kuwumsebenzi wethu sonke ukuthi
makusekhona okulengayo, sikwehlise emqadini sikubeke phansi, sikhulume
ngakho ukuze wonke umuntu abe noxolo, kube khona uxolo phakathi kwabantu.
Ngicabanga ukuthi isenzo saseVulindlela sibeyisenzo esihle, engicabanga
ukuthi siyakhona ukuthi kuyoze kuxoxwe futhi abantu baze baphelele. Phela
isiZulu sithi:”Impandla iqala ngenhlonhlo.” [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follow.)

[Mr J B SIBANYONI: Hon Speaker, hon President, we thank you for your
explanation, which will help the public a lot because people always ask
about these matters.

What I want to do proceed to do is to find out if these 149 names are the
names that were submitted to the President by the presidential pardon
committee members to be considered for pardoning. I ask this question
because the total number of applicants was almost 2000.

I am also asking this question because when these names were revealed by
the committee and recommendations were made, it was tough because some
names were omitted because no agreement was prevalent and things got
complicated as they disagreed. That is the first question.

The second question, hon President, is about what we saw at the Vulindlela
sports grounds. There was a gathering that we could describe as a peace
initiative, so that upon their release from jail all these people, who had
previously been in conflict politically, would live together harmoniously
as a community. But, hon President, some people opted not to honour the
gathering, saying there were still outstanding issues. The question is,
would you try to ensure that everybody attends these gatherings, especially
in KwaZulu-Natal, and that nobody is left out, since we have seen you
succeeding in brokering peace deals in Burundi and have also seen people
shaking hands? Are the people of KwaZulu-Natal going to eventually shake
hands? [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker and hon member of the Assembly,
thank you for your question. All the names we are mentioning are the names
which were submitted by the pardon committee. This means that insofar as
those that were omitted are concerned – there are many that we did like
that - I have made an example that there are decisions I have already made
regarding some of those. And these were left out because of certain
conditions – therefore it is all of them.

I did not get the report indicating that there were names omitted. When the
pardon committee brought these names to me they did not indicate that some
names had been omitted because they could not reach an agreement regarding
those. I took what was placed before me and started working on it.

With regard to the issue of Vulindlela, which you narrated because you want
to highlight that it is imperative for the people who had quarrelled before
to reconcile in order to reach a peaceful solution, this act was initiated
by of the people of Vulindlela, who came up with the idea on their own
because the violence there was multifaceted. There was infighting between
people from different areas, and a political war. In that gathering there,
in my presence, some young men were asked to stand up - the young men who
initiated peace talks to bring about harmony.

It was also mentioned in the news that some still have been left out. So,
it becomes our task to ensure that if there is any outstanding issue, we
must tackle that to bring about peace for everyone, and peace among people
in general. I think what happened in Vulindlela was a good act, which I
think we are going to eventually talk about and everybody will be present.
IsiZulu says it well: “There are small beginnings to big things.”
[Applause.]]

   Particulars regarding improved service delivery to be brought about by
                             changes to Cabinet

  21. Mr P J Groenewald (FF Plus) asked the President of the Republic:

      With reference to his statement on 31 October 2010 that he has changed
      his  Cabinet  in  order  to  ensure  improved  service  delivery   and
      strengthen existing Ministries, in what way will these changes to  his
      Cabinet     bring      about      improved      service      delivery?
                                   NO4015E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The composition of the Cabinet and the
appointment of Deputy Ministers is the prerogative of the President. The
President is under no obligation to explain the reasons for his actions in
this regard. However, I did indicate on 31 October, when we announced
changes to the national executive, that, having spent 17 months in
government, we have had time to study the functioning of the current
administration and we were able to ascertain what works and what needs to
be changed or strengthened.

We were guided by the mission of our government, which is to improve the
quality of life of all South Africans, especially the poor, working with
all our people. I wish to take this opportunity to thank the former members
of Cabinet for their contribution to government and to the nation during
their term of office. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Speaker, agb President, die VF Plus verwelkom ...
[Hon Speaker, hon President, the FF Plus welcomes ...] I will change to
English just now, Mr President.

Die VF Plus verwelkom uit die aard van die saak enige verbetering in
dienslewering. Wat egter nie sin maak nie, is die afdanking van persone en
voormalige Ministers soos die agb Barbara Hogan en Geoff Doidge wat goeie
prestasie gelewer het. U het gesê wat nie werk nie moet weer reggemaak word
om te werk. Hulle het gewerk, want dit was twee moeilike portefeuljes.

Verder moet u u nie laat mislei deur te dink dat al u Ministers wat nou
hier sit, altyd in die Huis is as hulle moet werk nie. Hulle sit hier om u
te beïndruk, want gister met die Aansuiweringsbegrotingswetsontwerp was
daar 10 Ministers – eintlik net 9, want een het darem ’n amptelike
verskoning gehad – wat nie teenwoordig was nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The FF Plus naturally welcomes any improvement in service delivery.
However, what does not make sense is the dismissal of individuals and
former Ministers like hon Barbara Hogan and Geoff Doidge, who performed
well. You said that if something is not working the situation should be
rectified to make it work. They were working, because those were two
difficult portfolios.

Furthermore, do not allow yourself to be misled by thinking that all
Ministers who are present now are always in the House when work needs to be
done. They are sitting here to impress you, because yesterday when we dealt
with the Adjustments Appropriation Bill there were 10 Ministers who were
not present — actually only 9, because one of them at least had an official
apology.]

The FF Plus welcomes any improvement in service delivery. What we do not
understand is why former Ministers, Barbara Hogan and Geoff Doidge, were
replaced. They have done a good job and you said that if something does not
work, you have to replace it with something that works. They had two very
difficult portfolios which were in chaos and they have done a good job. My
first follow-up on that one is whether you would agree that it was not only
service delivery but also political situations that you had to consider.

Secondly, you must not be misled by the fact that when you are in this
House, all your Ministers are sitting here. Yesterday, with the
Appropriation Bill or the additional one, where the Ministers came to this
House and asked for more money, nine of them were absent. They could not
even answer the questions of the opposition. Would you agree that that is
disrespectful towards this House and that you should do something about
that? Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, the hon member has his own view of
what happens; it is normal for a person of the opposition. I don’t think
anybody will be surprised by that. I don’t think the hon member would want
the President to discuss the reasons why one person is replaced and not the
other. It has never been done. Rather join the party that is ruling.
[Applause.] Then you will benefit from the inside discussions.

I am sure that the hon member asks but he knows we cannot give an answer.
Certainly, it was informed by what the President said and not by what other
people think informed the decisions. I am sure that is very clear.

With regard to the Ministers who were not here during the time of the
discussions in Parliament about the Appropriation Bill, it is very
difficult to answer the question here because you said it happened
yesterday. I don’t know what the reasons are because some of them might
have been engaged in other kinds of commitments that they could not avoid.
I don’t know. If you want me to comment on that, it will be an unfair
comment. It is unfair to judge people if you don’t know the reasons. I
don’t do that, absolutely not. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Speaker. Hon President, with
respect, the first duty of Ministers is to account to this House. Other
arrangements which are made need to be put aside because this is where
their duties and responsibilities lie; this is where accountability lies.

Would you not agree that a change in Ministry or members of Cabinet is part
of the solution? Isn’t one of the real problems the whole question of
unskilled people who are not fit for purpose or cadre deployment in
officialdom because that is where real delivery will take place? Real
delivery will take place when officials are fit for purpose, skilled and
appropriate for the job that they have been designated to. It is then that
service delivery will take place. You are quite right in one respect. Your
Presidency will be defined by the extent to which delivery takes place.
Ministers are one thing, but officials need to be addressed as well.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon member, firstly,
I would like to respond to the first comment you have made that Ministers
are firstly responsible to this House. Part of the reason why I did not
want to venture to answer that question is because I don’t know whether
their commitment is as a result of the instructions from this House. How
would I know? [Interjections.] No, I am answering the question, not how you
feel. I really don’t know. If they are answerable to this House, this House
instructs the Ministers, as they do the oversight, to do x, y and z. If it
was as a result of that, why should I condemn them? That is why I am saying
that I can’t condemn people if I don’t know the facts. It doesn’t change my
answer that I gave.

Secondly, with regard to reasons, I can see that they are trying their
level best to search the reasons. They are not related to inefficiency or
lack of skills, not at all. It is totally not related to that. Remove that
out of your mind and just accept what has happened. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A MDA: Thank you, Speaker. President, I understand, and we all agree,
that you appoint Ministers because it is your prerogative and the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa empowers you to do so.
However, as you do that, would you want to use your prerogative to appoint
these Ministers just to keep them in your Cabinet when they are adding no
value to service delivery, which is the primary task of the government that
you are leading?

If service delivery is the primary task, you would not appoint them just to
keep them safe in their positions. Why would you keep a Minister under
whose leadership collapsing municipalities have become a daily norm? The
Ingquza Hill Local Municipality of the very same Minister, Minister
Shiceka, in the Eastern Cape has not been able to hold a council meeting
for two consecutive years. The council cannot do its business. It cannot
focus on service delivery, and it cannot serve the people of that area
because of the political infighting in that municipality. You are at the
helm of the Cabinet and have the prerogative. Why would you keep such
people? Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, of course, the hon member has
her own view of things and, naturally, as an opposition member, she will
have her own view. You have a very specific case that you mention, which is
a place you would know better. I don’t have the facts of the place you are
talking about but I take it that you talk about a place you know. This is a
place in Ingquza. It is one place.

This minute, I am dealing with the whole country. You are not asking me why
I keep a Minister when the whole country is collapsing. [Applause.] If it
was, you would have said so. I don’t think one can take serious decisions
based on one issue. It is your view, but as far as I’m concerned, that
Minister has been working and is very active. He has done a lot in terms of
that department, and that is why I have kept him. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Thank you, hon Speaker. President, the ID would like to
commend you for the courage that you have shown with the reshuffling of
your Cabinet. However, it is unclear whether the reshuffle was about
service delivery or internal ANC politics. We would like to know the
rationale behind your decision. Why would I first have to join the ANC to
know the reasons? They are public representatives and we have a right to
know the reasons. We would like you to take us into your confidence by
releasing these performance audit reports. Finally, when did the Ministers
sign the performance agreements, and will you ever release those reports?
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I stated my reasons why I have
made changes. I am not going to consider any suggestion that is made
different from that because there is no reason to do so. It is the
imagination of whomever that this is about internal things in the ANC. It
is imagination, absolutely. I stated the reasons and I am not going beyond
that.
The reason why I said the hon member should join the ANC is that you cannot
know the internal matters of the ANC from a distance. You will have to be
inside because we can’t discuss our internal things with you. It is
impossible. If you feel very eager to be part of changing government, win
the elections. That is a simple thing to do. Then you have the right to do
so. [Applause.]

Don’t worry; the matter is as clear as anything. The agreements were signed
and we have said it will be made public; it is not a secret. At the right
time, we will publish it. It is an agreement that we have signed with the
Ministers. We said so, and it is not the first time we are saying it. Thank
you.

  Policy to ensure co-ordinated execution of independent mandates by three
                            spheres of government

22.   Mr L P Khoarai (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      What policy has he  put  in  place  in  terms  of  the  Constitutional
      provision of co-operative government to ensure that the three  spheres
      of government execute their independent mandates in a co-ordinated and
      cohesive manner?                        NO3910E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, all spheres of government must
observe and adhere to the principles of co-operative government, as
depicted in Chapter 3 of the Constitution. It is an intergovernmental
obligation across national, provincial and local government.

Provinces and local government have to exercise their authority within a
framework and direction set and supervised by national government. As early
as 1998, the Presidential Review Commission had reported on the challenges
of co-ordination within and between the different spheres, which created
incapacity with regard to implementing programmes and services.

An extensive period of consultation was undertaken to inform the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act promulgated in 2005. Last year,
government began working on a White Paper on Co-operative Governance, which
is currently a draft Green Paper. It is due for submission for comments by
February 2011.

The purpose of this policy paper is to strengthen key elements of the
system. These include some reforms in the exercise of powers and functions
across government in order to clarify and simplify the executive
obligations of each sphere. Closely related to this is a process of
reviewing the intergovernmental planning system.

A third and critical element is the strengthening of the supervision and
intervention capacities of national and provincial government. This is in
order to provide for timely interventions when municipalities are in
distress. In this way, appropriate action may be taken before a situation
escalates and impacts negatively on communities.

Finally, our outcomes approach to governance is fundamentally co-operative
in its conception and practice across government. Each of the 12 delivery
agreements that have been signed depends on the co-operation of a range of
partners in the three spheres – Ministers, MECs and mayors.

I am honoured to join the NCOP, this Friday, when it meets at the Charles
Mopedi Stadium in Maluti-A-Phofung Local Municipality in the Free State
province. We will be celebrating co-operative governance in practice,
urging all spheres of government to work together to speed up the delivery
of services. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Thank you, Speaker. Good afternoon, Mr President. Mr
President, if you look at the municipal system - you said just now that we
should not look at one municipality only, but at the whole lot – you see
that it is, in fact, a bit of a mess. The reason for the mess is the
failure of the intergovernmental relations system. At least we will give
you credit for taking the initiative to hold an indaba last year and set
the ball rolling for a turnaround strategy.

The question that arises is: What are you going to do about the provinces?
The reason for such a question is due to the fact that I don’t think you
have grounds to be proud of what is happening in all the provinces. There
are problems of governance, maladministration, corruption, nepotism and
lack of service delivery all over the place. The Eastern Cape, North West
and Northern Cape are really badly run. As for Mpumalanga, I am not quite
sure if it is run by a party or by the mafia. [Interjections.] So, we have
real problems.

My question to you, Mr President, is - in fact, I have three questions.
Firstly, would you not consider holding a provincial indaba - as you did a
municipal indaba - including the legislatures to discuss improving the
governance of the provinces?

Secondly, are you satisfied that your Minister for Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs is devoting sufficient time to the provinces? What
I see is a department of local government, despite the name change. I am
glad that there is a Green Paper coming out, but in terms of actual
activity and engagement with the provinces, I don’t see a lot of it.

Thirdly, what does your performance agreement with the Minister have to say
about his responsibilities in terms of improving the performance of the
provinces? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. I am happy that the
hon member acknowledges that we have called an indaba to discuss this
issue. In the meantime, there is a Green Paper that is coming, which we
will all have time to comment on and help find solutions where we think
there are serious problems. Certainly, the proposal that we should have
even a bigger indaba, I don’t think is a problem, if we all agree there is
a need to do so in trying to deal with the issues that affect our provinces
and municipalities.

Certainly, we are together in that. I think your being here in Parliament
is for the oversight that you are talking about. You are asking questions
so that we can look into those matters if they are matters that need to be
given attention.

As you have correctly said, there are processes with regard to this, and we
must always bear in mind that we are talking about three spheres of
government. I hope you are not saying that the Minister must now run
provinces, because it is a co-operative governance issue. Provinces have
their space within which they must do their work. So, you can’t say the
Minister must now go to that level because, again, it will be contravening
the Constitution. So, we have got to do everything within the context of
the Constitution.

I think the Minister has done his work. He has gone there to research and
found all the difficulties and challenges. He has been talking about the
turnaround strategy precisely because he has discovered what the problems
are. I think the Green Paper will be addressing those issues, and ordinary
South Africans, MPs and everybody will have an opportunity to participate
to help improve the system. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M WENGER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon President, would you not agree
that the biggest barrier in delivering services to the poor is not the lack
of co-ordination but, rather, the fact that individual municipalities are
crippled by lack of skills, are inefficiently run, and are rife with
corruption? [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Well, these are some
of the factors that we have mentioned and that have to be taken into
consideration. We have said that, as the majority government, we are going
to take measures to deal with some of those issues.

Corruption is an issue that we are dealing with at every level. I think it
is important to make the point that it is not every municipality or council
that is corrupt. I think the majority are very good citizens who are
working for this country. It is the minority that is corrupt, which all of
us have to deal with.

We also have to deal with the question of skills. However, we have got to
identify where the gaps are, specifically, and then make our move. I think
it would be very useful, at some point, that when people raise issues they
are able to say that this particular council or this man is inefficient so
that we look at the issue. At times, the generalisation does not help.

If I move from here, where do I go if there is a claim that there is
inefficiency? I think it would be important, particularly for those who are
doing oversight, to be very meticulous in collecting information so that
they can say here is municipality A or B and there is problem X, Y and Z so
that we can focus on that one.

I will be very happy if issues are raised in that fashion so that we can
then address them. That is the point I want to make because, otherwise, we
could generalise and end up not knowing where to go. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T BOTHA: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon President, in October 2009, Mr
Yunus Carrim bemoaned the lack of co-ordination and cohesion in the
different spheres of government. The Human Sciences Research Council, in
its submission to the Budget Policy Statement, supported this position.
Back in 2004, the then Department of Provincial and Local Government’s
indaba also raised the same issue of lack of co-ordination amongst the
different spheres of government.

Recently, where there were problems of service delivery, the reports have
identified some of these problems. In spite of all of this, there is no
indication that this problem is subsiding. Is it lack of will on the part
of the institutions or government to solve this problem? Is it lack of
capacity, or is it because there is a problem in our institutional
arrangement in the different spheres of government?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon member, I think,
in the previous answers that I have just given, I said that there has been
research to find out these issues accompanied by the indaba that discussed
these issues, as you correctly say. The Minister has repeatedly said that
we now have a turnaround strategy, precisely to remedy these problems. We
have just said that the paper that is being prepared is about to be
released so that we — all of us, including you; not only government — have
an opportunity to comment on it. You will be able to say what it is that
you think needs to be done in order to correct what we believe are the
problems. We are going to have an opportunity to do that.

I have just said that that is a process which is ongoing. Nobody is saying
we have done everything. We are saying that, given the problems, we have
researched and identified them. There is now a strategy to address them.
However, before the strategy is implemented, there is a paper that allows
us to make healthy contributions to help the process and, therefore, help
the system. I am sure that you will have an opportunity, hon member, to
make a contribution, knowing you as I do. [Applause.]

   Particulars regarding South Africa’s use of its position on UN Security
         Council to advance human rights and free political activity

23.   Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the President of the Republic:

      (1)   Whether South Africa will use its position on the United Nations
           Security Council to advance  human  rights  and  free  political
           activity in countries such as Myanmar and Zimbabwe; if so,


      (2)   whether it will include supporting sanctions  against  countries
           that fail  to  respect  human  rights  and  do  not  allow  free
           political activity; if not, what is the position in this regard;
           if     so,     what     are      the      relevant      details?
                            NO3911E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. South Africa’s
foreign policy is informed by the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa and the country’s value system, especially our commitment to
democracy, human rights, justice and the wellbeing of all. Our primary
objective on the UN Security Council will be to contribute to the promotion
of these values. We also remain firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of human rights across the globe.

Membership of the UN enables us to contribute to promoting these goals as
well as the protection of multilateralism and the respect of international
law. South Africa, like the rest of the international community, is
concerned about the human rights situation in Myanmar. We are consistent in
our support for the consideration and discussion of human rights matters
with regard to the Myanmar issue in relevant UN bodies, including the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly. We have also supported the work of
the UN Secretary-General’s Special Envoy in Myanmar and the efforts of the
Association of the South East Asian Nations aimed at assisting Myanmar to
resolve its challenges.

The issue of Zimbabwe is currently not an agenda item in the UN Security
Council. Hon members would be aware that the Southern African Development
Community, SADC, and the African Union are attending to the Zimbabwean
matter, and South Africa is part of that process. Thank you, hon Speaker.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, what the President has said now is not
substantiated by what our country did when we voted for and in support of
countries that undermine human rights. The world was shocked when South
Africa cast its first vote as a nonpermanent member of the council to block
a resolution condemning Myanmar for flagrant human rights abuses.

Our country also voted against smart sanctions against Zimbabwe, in spite
of the political violence and human rights abuses perpetrated by the Mugabe
regime. As many hold the view - in spite of what the President has said -
that South Africa has betrayed its own Constitution that upholds human
rights, can the President assure this House that what he has just said
about concerns for human rights will be substantiated by the way we vote in
the UN Security Council? Can the President assure this House that, when
issues of human rights and issues of countries that are undermining the
rights of the citizens are raised - including Myanmar, Zimbabwe, North
Korea and the others - South Africa would not side and vote with countries
that are defending those that are undermining human rights? [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I’ve just stated South Africa’s
position, unless the hon member disagrees with what I said regarding the
position of South Africa. I said very clearly that our position is very
clear when it comes to human rights.

There are examples that the hon member cited; amongst them, Zimbabwe. I
think the issue of Zimbabwe has been discussed in this House many times,
and we have stated our position on that score all the time. You know the
position of the region and of the continent with regard to Zimbabwe.

We gave here, I think over the years, elaborate explanations about our
attitude towards Zimbabwe and what we are doing in Zimbabwe, which is
different from the attitude of those who were shouting and doing absolutely
nothing on the Zimbabwean issue. We have been working hard to help our
neighbours as a country and as part of the SADC region.

So, I think you can’t just post the issue of Zimbabwe in a huge basket
because we have been dealing with that issue. The fact that Zimbabwe is
where it is today is because of our contribution in solving problems.
Otherwise, there would have been more difficulties. That is accepted by
everybody else in the world. Thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr
President, Msholozi, I’m also addressing myself specifically to this issue
of Zimbabwe. I seem to see that, in my own assessment, there is a factor
which I believe is missing in the process that we also engaged in — a
factor which I also believe is vital to a future settlement in Zimbabwe. So
this may sound like a question, Mr Speaker, but it is also a matter of
saying: Mr President, look at that angle also.

My question is this: Is the President contemplating utilising his visit to
the United Kingdom as an opportunity to create, open or establish a direct
dialogue between London and Harare in order to revisit the Lancaster House
Agreement, particularly on the question of land? I believe this is
extremely critical for the future settlement, Mr President.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. Well, South Africa
has engaged with the British government over the period ever since the
Zimbabwean issue. As you know, Britain took a position of applying
sanctions, which includes not talking with the Zimbabwean authority. We
have been raising that issue as a country and as a region. Our view has
been: In order to resolve the Zimbabwean question, lift sanctions. We
should be open to the possibility we are talking about so that the British
and Zimbabweans could talk on this specific issue of land you referred to.
The land issue caused the deadlock during the Lancaster House time, but the
British have stuck to their views and position.

Those are matters we have been discussing with them, including the decision
of SADC in its last summit to send a delegation to the global institutions
and countries to deal with the question of lifting of sanctions. That is
the matter we’ve been engaged in all the time, but, of course, the British
have not moved. Thank you, hon Speaker.

Mr S MOKGALAPA:  Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Hon President, in light
of the recent release of Aung San Suu Kyi, who is recognised as a champion
of free political activity and human rights in Myanmar, and the recent
elections that were condemned by the international community as a sham,
does the South African government recognise the recently elected government
in Myanmar? What is the government’s position in this regard? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, thank you very much. Firstly, I
don’t think we give ourselves space to be judges of other people or to
judge situations. Certainly, the release has been welcomed because we
believe that there must be free political activities. The people of that
country must express their views freely and take decisions.

How the systems work in the end is the business of those countries. What we
would not like is for people to be arrested for their political views. That
is what we are against because that is part of the rights we believe people
should exercise. Therefore, regarding how they conduct their elections, if
we have the details of how the elections were conducted, and if those
details reflect that the elections were not free and fair, then, as you
know, the entire world will condemn them. However, if they conduct their
elections and people believe that they were free and fair in terms of their
system, I don’t think we would want to give ourselves space as judges to
judge other people. However, we are very happy that people have been
released. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Thank you, Speaker. Hon President, the Department of
International Relations and Co-operation promised that membership of the UN
Security Council would present an opportunity to promote the African agenda
and contribute to achieving peace and stability on the continent and in all
regions of the world.

Within the context of your answer with regard to the SADC region, Minister
Sisulu said on 17 November 2010:

    President Zuma is in touch with the coalition government in Zimbabwe and
    constantly on top of the situation.


She said —

    I believe we have moved them in the right direction.

Within that context, I would like to ask the President to take us into his
confidence with regard to the issue of the political relations between
President Mugabe and Prime Minister Tsvangirai, which are, at this point in
time, at an all-time low since the SADC region meeting in August.

What are the plans that the President and the government are implementing
to try and mitigate or intervene in the situation? That kind of
relationship is very important in resolving the situation in Zimbabwe, as
well as in ensuring that the implementation of the 24 Global Political
Agreement, GPA, issues is taken very seriously. Furthermore, that kind of
relationship is important for President Mugabe to ensure that he adheres to
the terms of the 2008 GPA. That is basically my question, Mr President.
Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, on the issue of Zimbabwe, the
Minister was correct. We are in dynamic contact with the situation in
Zimbabwe because, partly, South Africa has been put by SADC as the
facilitator and, therefore, we are always in contact.

The last SADC summit adopted a road map to implement the GPA, which was
accepted by all parties in Zimbabwe. This road map was mapped by the
facilitator. There are specific things that are expected to have happened
by now.

However, there were developments of a political nature that caused problems
in Zimbabwe. We immediately moved in to interact with the leadership in
Zimbabwe. In fact, a few days ago at the latest members of the facilitation
team were in Zimbabwe to address specifically those issues.

As part of a troika, we will be giving a report to SADC countries which are
meeting as from tomorrow evening in Botswana. We will be giving a report
and making some recommendations, from our point of view, of what needs to
be done. So the matter is indeed under constant attention. Thank you, hon
Speaker.
 Position regarding reconciliation of statement by President with 2010 State
                        of the Public Service Report

24.   The  Leader  of  the  Opposition  (DA)  asked  the  President  of  the
      Republic:

      How does he reconcile his statement in which he expressed satisfaction
      that the Government was tackling corruption with the 2010 State of the
      Public Service Report in which it is reported that the  Government  is
      unable to account for at least two thirds of the cases reported to its
      National                   Anti-Corruption                    Hotline?
      NO3988E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, there is no contradiction
because we have scored several achievements with regard to the
investigation of cases of alleged corruption reported to the national
anticorruption hotline. According to the reports provided to the Public
Service Commission since the establishment of the hotline and as a result
of the successful investigation of cases, 235 officials were found guilty
of misconduct.

Of these cases, 35 officials were suspended, 120 were given final written
warnings, and 80 officials were dismissed. In addition, a total of
R1 million was recovered from perpetrators. Against this backdrop, it is
clear that the hotline has had positive spin-offs; not only in terms of
monetary value, but also in terms of disciplinary action taken against
perpetrators.

The commission is currently following up with departments on all
outstanding cases that were reported to the hotline to ensure that
departments fulfil their obligations in investigating these cases.
We appreciate the fact that an independent body such as the Public Service
Commission draws our attention to such matters so that we can improve our
efforts.

Let me indicate as well that there are also a number of critical
initiatives that government has embarked upon to intensify the fight
against corruption. We have established the interministerial committee on
anti-corruption to ensure the alignment of corruption-fighting initiatives
within government. There are also many agencies that are focusing on
various aspects to attack corruption holistically. We have the Multi-Agency
Working Group established by the Minister of Finance to investigate high-
risk irregularities in the government procurement system. In addition, the
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development is working with other
Ministers in the criminal justice sector to strengthen the effectiveness of
the criminal justice system.

We have also instructed the Special Investigating Unit to probe alleged
maladministration and corruption in several government departments,
municipalities and agencies. These are the Department of Health in the
Gauteng province, the national Department of Human Settlements, the
Department of Arts and Culture, the Department of Education in the Eastern
Cape province, the national Department of Public Works, the SA Social
Security Agency and the SA Police Service. Last week we added the
Ekurhuleni and Tshwane municipalities and the SABC. While not prejudging
the investigations, the proclamations we issued are a clear indication of
the resolve of government to combat corruption, mismanagement and
maladministration at all levels of government and the Public Service.

Let me also take this opportunity to point out that we should avoid making
blanket statements about corruption, which only serve to stereotype people.
For example, an erroneous impression is created that all local government
leaders and officials are corrupt. The majority of mayors, councillors and
officials in local government work very diligently and in an honest manner.
[Applause.]

Corruption should, therefore, not be used as an instrument of fighting
certain ideological or sectarian battles; it should unite all of us to
ensure clean governance in the public and private sectors. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you hon Speaker. Hon President, my
question has nothing to do with internal machinations of the ANC, so,
hopefully, I won’t have to join the party to get a comprehensive response.

My question is: After publicly emphasising the need for leadership from the
government on this issue, why hasn’t the strategic report of the
anticorruption inter-ministerial committee, which was established a year
ago in November 2009, been made public? What recommendations does this
report make with regard to holding corrupt public representatives and
officials accountable? When will the full report be released? And when can
steps seem to be taken with regard to this task force?

The above questions are based on the questionable effectiveness of the
national anticorruption hotline and its inability to account for two thirds
of the reported cases, the apparent kid-glove treatment of the 235
officials you mentioned, and comments made by Cabinet spokesperson, Themba
Maseko, at the Cabinet briefing on 19 November 2009 when he stated that:

     Government’s view is that government does not provide leadership on the
     scourge of corruption. The chances are that it will continue and affect
     each and every aspect of life in South Africa.

Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon speaker. Well, sorry, if you
wanted to join ANC, there is no space at the moment. [Laughter.] I’m just
joking; don’t worry. [Laughter.]

I think I have just given a report of what is happening in terms of
fighting corruption — very specific facts, which will be part of the
interministerial committee’s report. I don’t think that, having got that
information, we should then create an impression that nothing has happened.
That, I think, must indicate that a lot is happening in fighting crime.

When will the committee report? I think that that is a matter of saying you
are interested in receiving the report. The report could be given any time.
Since you have said so, I’m sure government will work on the report and put
everything together. There is a lot of work that is being done and we are
achieving successes. Thank you.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Somlomo, mhlonishwa Mongameli, kuye kungabukeki
kukuhle noma ngabe batholakala benecala labo abasuke befake isandla
ebhodweni elingabafanele uma kuzothatha isikhathi eside ukuthi batholakale
benecala ngokwenza lokho. Lokhu ngikushiso ngukuthi kukhona abantu
abamiswayo emisebenzini kodwa babe behola, bahlale isikhathi eside bese
kuthi ngalesi sikhathi betholakala benecala abanye babo basule emisebenzini
bahambe. Lokho kuveza ukuthi abanye babo babaleka nezikhumba zezinkomo
asebezidlile Sikuvimba kanjani lokho? Lokhu ngikusho ngoba usanda kusho
manje ukuthi leli Komidi loNgqongqoshe abehlukene lizokwethula umbiko
maduze nje. Uma kuthiwa maduze nje uyazi ukuthi kungaze kuphele iminyaka
emihlanu? Kusemqoka kabi ukuthi sazi ukuthi umaduze nje unini ngempela.
Ngiyabonga.

UMONGAMELI WERIPHABHLIKI YASENINGIZIMU AFRIKA: Ngiyabonga Somlomo,
ngiyabonga Gatsheni,lungu elihloniphekile lesiShayamthetho. Ngiyethemba
ukuthi usuke wezwa ngikhuluma; senginesikhathi eside ngikhuluma ngikhala
ngokuthi isikhathi esichithekayo ngaphambi kokuthi kubhekanwe nalabo abenza
ubulelesi kuHulumeni side kakhulu. Ezinye zezinto okufanele ukuthi leli
komidi lizibheke yikho ukuthi kungenziwa kanjani ukuba kuphuthunywe.
Sengikhale kakhulu impela ngaba wuqanduqandu esidlangalaleni futhi hhayi
esithe, ngikhala ngakho ukuthi abanye bayantshontsha bese kuthiwa bamisiwe
emsebenzini kodwa babe behola behlezi emakhaya.

Kufuneka kushintshe lokho, yinto esiyidingidayo ukuthi sizokwenza kanjani
ukuthi sifinyeze isikhathi esiphakathi kokubanjwa komuntu owonile kanye
nokugwetshwa kwakhe; yinto esiphezu kwayo leyo. Uma ekhona amacebo athile-
njengoba phela kuyaziwa ukuthi amacebo aphuma kuzo izimpunga-, singajabula
ukuwezwa, sizwe ubuhlakani obudala bamava athi nakhu esicabanga ukuthi ake
nikwenze.

Phela sifuna ukwenza into esizovumelana sonke kuyona ukuze kulungiswe
umthetho ngoba zonke lezi zinto zenziwa phezu komthetho. Njengoba uzwile
nje uma ngithi abanye banikezwe isexwayiso; umthetho uthi akunikezwe
isexwayiso emva kwezikhathi ezithile- kuze kuthiwe sekuyisexwayiso
sokugcina-ke lesi, uyantshontsha njalo umuntu uyaqhubeka. Yimithetho le
okufanele ukuba sibhekane nayo ukuthi siyishintsha kanjani ukuze senze
izinto ngendlela ehlukile sikwazi ukubamba izigebengu. Ngiyajabula ukuthi
uwubuze lo mbuzo ngoba sonke kufanele ukuba siyicabange indlela yokuthola
amasu namaqhinga okuqeda le nkohlakalo ekhona emphakathini. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon President, it doesn’t look good
when it takes a long time to get a verdict for people who have been caught
committing crimes. I say this because there are people who were suspended
with full pay; they stay for a long time and some of them resign from their
jobs when found guilty. This shows that they leave with the evidence. How
can we prevent this? I say this because you have just mentioned that this
Ministerial Committee will submit a report very soon. Are you aware that if
one says very soon, it could even take five years? It is really important
for us to know the timeframe. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, Speaker, thank you, Gatsheni, hon
member of the National Assembly. I believe that you have heard me
complaining for a long time about the time that is wasted before those who
commit crimes in government are apprehended. Something this committee must
look at is how to fast-track these issues. I have publicly complained that
some people steal and are said to be suspended and then they get paid
whilst sitting at home.

That must change; we need to come up with a plan with regard to how we are
going to shorten the time between a culprit’s arrest and the court ruling —
that is what we are now embarking on. If there are any other plans — it is
known that some ideas come from experienced people — we would be pleased to
hear the wisdom of the experienced, saying this is what they think we
should do.

Indeed, we want to do something that we all agree upon in order to correct
the law because all these things are done based on the law. You heard me
when I said that some were given a warning; the law states that warnings
should be given after certain incidences have occurred before issuing the
final warning, whereas in the meantime the person continues to steal. These
are the laws that we must face, so that we manage to amend them in order to
do things differently so that we can catch the criminals. I’m happy that
you asked this question because we must all think about these plans and
strategies of curbing corruption in our community. Thank you.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Thank you, Speaker. Mr President, in the fight against
corruption that government is embarking upon — which all of us support — if
officials of state who are dealing with issues of resources are failing to
comply with Treasury regulations with regard to tender processes, and the
directors-general are failing to disclose their interest, would you agree
with the statement that the reasons as to why that is in fact taking place
remain suspect? At the moment, there is R3,9 billion that you have incurred
as the state; whether it’s a quote, and so on.

Again, have you taken the trouble to look at the details of this irregular
expenditure of R3,9 billion, which is as a result of the violations in the
Cabinet, to ensure that you actually fight corruption in earnest and
officials take precautionary measures?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, as the hon member knows, we have
said we are fighting corruption; we are doing everything. Among the
measures we detailed here are the steps that have been taken by our
Treasury to deal with those questions. We’ve taken a decision that we
cannot tolerate corruption. Therefore, anything that is done wrong, we want
to take a firm and quick decision on.

That is the reason why, as I was responding to hon Ndlovu, I said that the
time has come for us to look at the laws that at times do not make it
quicker for action to be taken. We should be together on those issues so
that we can act swiftly and firmly. We are in total agreement in terms of
fighting crime and we are not joking about it.

Therefore, whatever ideas you may have — and I know your previous
commitment as an MEC; you must have some ideas — bring them forth so that
we can work together to fight crime. We need that so that we can help this
country out of the problem of people who take decisions and take
government’s money, as well as the system that makes it difficult to deal
with them immediately.

So, we have agreed that we want to be firm and we are working on it. I’m
hoping that once we begin to be active, nobody is going to complain because
we need to be firm, not so? Agreed. Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, hon President, just yesterday, at
the meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
Administration, the members of this House were informed that 70% of the
directors-general in your government have not made their financial
disclosures. Is this the kind of example that you would approve of from the
most senior civil servants and officials of your government in fighting
corruption?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Certainly no, I will not accept that because
they ought to disclose. That is what the law says and that is my answer.
[Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

Debate concluded.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S J MASANGO: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House —


      1) debates the failure of the national Department of Education and
         the Mpumalanga provincial Department of Education to issue matric
         certificates to a number of 2008 matriculants and the consequences
         it has on the students concerned; and


      2) comes up with a solution.

[Interjections.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the re-launching of the “Proudly South African”
   campaign to make it more effective and widely spread.

Mr S B SIBANYONI: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the attacks on the judiciary - whether from
   political parties, academics or political commentators – which imperils
   confidence in the courts and, therefore, poses a risk to the independence
   of the judiciary.

Ms X C MAKASI: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the introduction of environmental studies and
   appreciation of nature in the school curriculum.

 ELECTIONS of Mr Cedric Frolick and Mrs Fatima Hajaig as HOUSE Chairpersons

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I hereby move without
notice:

   That the House, in terms of Rule 14, elects Mr C T Frolick and Mrs F
   Hajaig as House Chairpersons.

Agreed to.

                          TRIBUTE TO Bafana Bafana

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, I hereby move without
notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that Bafana Bafana yesterday lost their friendly international
        match against the United States of America (USA) 1-0 at the Cape
        Town Stadium;


     2) acknowledges that although they lost, the team did our country proud
        in displaying determination and skill in a spirited performance;


     3) further acknowledges that this sold-out game recreated the unique
        spirit of the 2010 World Cup, as fans passionately stood behind the
        national team;


     4) encourages all South Africans to continue to stand behind their
        national team;


     5) congratulates the USA on their victory; and


     6) further congratulates Bafana Bafana for their spirited performance;
        and wishes the team the best of luck for future games.

Agreed to.

                          Universal Children’s Day

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I hereby move without
notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that the General Assembly of the United Nations Organisation
        recommended in 1954,Resolution 836(IX), that all countries institute
        a Universal Children’s Day to be observed as a day of worldwide
        fraternity and understanding between children and of activity
        promoting the welfare of the world’s children;


     2) further notes that the recommendation was made that the day is
        observed on the date which each country considers appropriate; and
        that the date of 20 November marks the day on which the Assembly
        adopted the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, in 1959, and the
        Convention on the Rights of the Child, in 1989;


     3) recognises that the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
        Child and the creation of Universal Children’s Day reflects the
        growing recognition that children are important and valued members
        of society, now and in the future; and also that the Universal
        Children’s Day celebrates children just for being themselves; and


     4) supports the promotion of the rights of children everywhere around
        the world.

Agreed to.

         Proclamation of 20 November as Africa Industrialisation Day

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that within the framework of the Second Industrial Development
        Decade for Africa, the General Assembly of the United Nations
        Organisation proclaimed 20 November as Africa Industrialisation Day,
        Resolution 44/237 of 22 December 1989;


     2) further notes that the day is intended to mobilise the commitment of
        the international community to the industrialisation of Africa;


     3) recognises that it also serves as a reminder that more than 30 of
        the world’s 48 least developed countries are located in Africa; and


     4) supports this occasion to draw worldwide media attention to the
        problems and challenges of industrialisation in Africa.


Agreed to.

                BIRTHS AND DEATHS REGISTRATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.
                  SOUTH AFRICAN CITIZENSHIP AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)
Order disposed of without debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill be passed.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: The DA requests a division

Ms S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, I am waiting for you to put the question
first. The DA would like to make a declaration. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): There is an objection and
therefore we will have to put the question. I now put a question, those in
favour will say, “Aye!”

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Those against will say, “No!”

HON MEMBERS: No!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I think the Ayes have it.
Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: May we please now have a division.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think we have made it clear that we
did ask for a declaration as well. I should imagine that should happen
before the bells ring. Mrs Kalyan - hon Kalyan - indicated that we will be
asking for a declaration and the Whips on the ANC’s side do know it as
well. Thank you.

Declarations of vote:
Mrs A T LOVEMORE: Deputy Speaker, the DA has previously held that the
Minister of Home Affairs misled the House and the Republic with respect to
this Bill. The Minister has acknowledged her error and the wording of this
Bill has now been changed.

The amended Bill now contains the provision that states:


   Any person who obtained South African citizenship by naturalization in
   terms of this Act shall cease to be a South African citizen if he or she
   engages, under the flag of another country, in a war that the Republic
   does not support.

The Minister’s misunderstanding of the original wording has been addressed
and the section now applies only to naturalised citizens.
However, Deputy Speaker, there is no right of appeal against the loss of
citizenship. Allowing no right of appeal against being rendered stateless
is untenable. It is contrary to section 20 of the Constitution, which
provides that no citizen shall be deprived of citizenship. It is also
contrary to section 33 of the Constitution requiring just administrative
action.

Contradictory to the implication that the government supports some wars and
not the others, as this Bill implies; section 198(b) of the Constitution,
in fact, precludes any South African citizen from participating in armed
conflict nationally or internationally.

This is listed as one of the governing principles with respect to national
security. The Constitution does not make provision for the government to
declare a war as one that it supports. If it did, the government would be
in direct conflict with its constitutional principle.

The UN carries the burden of sanctioning wars. Will South Africa now have
its own list of sanctioned wars? This section is highly complex; it is
fraught with conflicting national and international legal implications. Our
legal opinion tells us that, as a result, this Bill cannot withstand
constitutional scrutiny. The DA cannot support the Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs M M MAUNYE: Deputy Speaker, the Minister has never misled anybody. We
have never misled anybody. The content of the clause that comes from the
NCOP is the same. The only thing is that it has been redrafted for anybody
to understand. It reads as the hon member has read:
    Any person who obtained South African citizenship by naturalization in
    terms of this Act shall cease to be a South African citizen if he or she
    engages, under the flag of another country, in a war that the Republic
    does not support.

The South African government supports peace; that is why troops are
deployed in countries where there is no stability. Missionaries cause
instability in most cases in Africa. We cannot continue harbouring such
heartless people who cause misery to other people for financial gain. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Question put.

Division demanded.

The House divided.

   AYES - 192: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Baloyi , M R; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bhengu ,
   N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane- Zulu, H I; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D
   F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M  A  ;  Chikunga,  L  S;
   Chohan, F I ; Coleman, E M; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B  N;  De  Lange,  J  H;
   Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dikobo, K J; Dlakude,  D  E;  Dubazana,  Z  S;
   Dube, M C; Dunjwa, M L;  Fihla,  N  B;  Fransman,  M  L;  Frolick,  C  T;
   Gasebonwe, T M A; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom,  J  P;  Gina,  N;
   Godongwana, E; Gololo , C L; Gona, M  F;  Goqwana,  M  B;  Gumede,  D  M;
   Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Huang, S-B; Jeffery, J H;  Joemat-Pettersson,  T
   M; Johnson, M; Kekane, C D; Kenye, T E; Kganyago,  N  M;  Khoarai,  L  P;
   Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof,  G  W;
   Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lishivha, T E; Lucas , E
   J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madlala, N  M;  Magagula,  V  V;
   Magau, K R; Magazi , M N; Magwanishe, G ; Makasi, X C; Makhubela-Mashele,
   L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malale, M I; Malgas, H H; Maluleke, J
   M; Manganye, J; Manuel  ,  T  A;  Mapisa-Nqakula,  N  N;  Mashigo,  R  J;
   Mashishi, A C; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N  F;
   Matlanyane, H F; Matshoba, J M;  Maunye,  M  M;  Mayende-Sibiya,  N  A  ;
   Maziya, M; Mdaka, M N; Mdakane, M R; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo,
   E M; Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A;  Mocumi,  P  A;  Mohale,  M  C;
   Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Moloto, K
   A; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S; Motlanthe, K P;  Motshekga,  M
   A; Motshekga, M S;  Mphahlele,  L  M;  Mpontshane,  A  M;  Msweli,  H  S;
   Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mushwana, F F; Nchabeleng, M E;
   Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndlanzi, A Z; Ndlovu, V B; Nel,  A  C;  Nelson,  W  J;
   Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N  J;  Ngwenya,
   W; Nhlengethwa , D G; Njikelana, S J; Nkoana-Mashabane, M E;  Nkwinti,  G
   E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z;  Ntuli,  B  M;  Ntuli,  Z  C;  N'wamitwa-
   Shilubana, T L P; Nxesi, T W; Nxumalo, M D ; Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M  F;
   Nyekemba, E; Oliphant , G G; Oliphant, M N; Oosthuizen, G C;  Padayachie,
   R L; Pampiri, S G; Peters, E D; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Pule, D D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramodibe,
   D M; Ramokgopa, G ; Schneemann, G D; Selau, G T; September, C C; Sexwale,
   T M G; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Singh, N; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, S C
   N; Skosana, J J; Skosana, M B; Smith, V G;  Snell,  G  T;  Sogoni,  E  M;
   Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Suka , L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza,  T
   B; Surty, M E; Thibedi, J D; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tobias, T V; Tsebe,  S
   R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; van Rooyen, D D;
   van Wyk, A; Williams, A J; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E.


   NOES - 74: Balindlela, Z B; Botha, T; Coetzee, T W;  Davidson,  I  O;  De
   Freitas, M S F; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Du  Toit,  N  D;  Duncan,  P  C;
   Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gcume, N P; George, D T; George, M E;  Greyling,
   L W; Harris, T; Hoosen, M H; Kalyan, S V; Kganare,  D  A;  Kilian,  J  D;
   Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Koornhof, N J J v R; Kopane,  S
   P; Kotsi , C M P; Krumbock, G R; Lee, T D; Lekota, M G P; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Max,
   L; Mazibuko, L D; McGluwa, J; Meshoe, K R J; Michael, N W A; Molao, S  P;
   More, E; Morgan, G R; Ngonyama, L S; Njobe, M A A; Ntshiqela, P;  Paulse,
   S; Pretorius, P J C; Rabotapi, M W; Ramatlakane , L ; Ross, D; Schafer, D
   A; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Smalle, J; Smiles, D C; Smuts, M; Steele, M H;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Stubbe, D; Swart , M; Swart,  S  N;  Swathe,  M  M;
   Tolo, L J; Trollip, RAP; Van Dalen, P; Van de Linde, J J; Van den Berg, N
   J; Van der Westhuizen, A P; Van Dyk , S M; Van Schalkwyk,  H  C;  Vukuza-
   Linda, N Y; Waters, M; Wenger, M.

Question agreed to.


Bill accordingly passed.

     CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF DRAFT NOTICE AND SCHEDULE
     DETERMINING RATE, WITH EFFECT FROM 1 APRIL 2010, AT WHICH SALARIES,
         ALLOWANCES AND BENEFITS ARE PAYABLE TO MAGISTRATES ANNUALLY

     CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF DRAFT NOTICE AND SCHEDULE
     DETERMINING RATE, WITH EFFECT FROM 1 APRIL 2010, AT WHICH SALARIES,
   ALLOWANCES AND BENEFITS ARE PAYABLE TO CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND
                               JUDGES ANNUALLY

There was no debate.

Draft notice and schedule determining the rate, with effect from 1 April
2010, at which salaries, allowances and benefits are payable to magistrates
annually approved.

Draft notice and schedule determining the rate, with effect from 1 April
2010, at which salaries, allowances and benefits are payable to
Constitutional Court judges and judges annually approved.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                            MAGISTRATE F R RAMBAU
        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                            MAGISTRATE L SKRENYA

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                          MAGISTRATE I W O M MORAKE

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON LIFTING OF THE PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM
                       OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE M K CHAUKE

There was no debate.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and provisional suspension of
Magistrate F R Rambau accordingly confirmed.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and provisional suspension of
Magistrate L Skrenya accordingly confirmed.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and provisional suspension of I W
O M Morake accordingly confirmed.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and provisional suspension of
Magistrate M K Chauke accordingly lifted.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
   CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE M N
                                   JASSIEM

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the National Assembly does not confirm the restoration to office of
   Magistrate M N Jassiem.

Motion agreed to.

Restoration to office of Magistrate M N Jassiem accordingly not confirmed.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON LIFTING OF THE PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM
                     OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE W J M PRINSLOO

There was no debate.

Recommendations of the committee adopted and provisional suspension of
Magistrate W J M Prinsloo accordingly lifted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON AMENDMENTS TO
  SCHEDULES 1 AND 2 OF FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE CENTRE ACT, ACT NO 38 OF 2001
   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES ON
   FUNDING SOLUTION FOR TRANSNET SECOND DEFINED BENEFIT FUND AND TRANSPORT
                                PENSION FUND

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Standing Committee on Finance on Amendments to Schedules 1 and 2
of Financial Intelligence Centre Act, Act No 38 of 2001 accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Funding Solution for
Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund and Transport Pension Fund accordingly
adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS ON 2009-10
                      FOURTH QUARTER EXPENDITURE REPORT

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
             AFFAIRS ON PROPOSED WATER TARIFF INCREASES FOR 2010

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Standing Committee on Appropriations on 2009-10 Fourth Quarter
Expenditure Report accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs on
Proposed Water Tariff Increases for 2010 accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF RECOMMENDATION FOR APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO BOARD OF
                   MEDIA DEVELOPMENT AND DIVERSITY AGENCY

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Deputy Speaker, hon members; the media in general, and
print media in particular, must be transformed and diversified in terms of
ownership and control. Transformation must be measured in terms of
language, diversity, gender mainstreaming, equity in respect of race and
class, and sensitivity to children and people living with disabilities.
According to section 4(1)(b) of the Media Development and Diversity Agency
Act of 2002, the board consists of nine members; six of whom are appointed
by the President based upon the recommendation of the National Assembly.
Section 4(1)(c) makes provision for three members to be appointed by the
President after consultation with the industry players in terms of the
commercial media and commercial broadcasting. The term of office for Mr
Siviwe Minyi, Ms Nomonde Gongxeka and Prof Guy Berger will be expiring at
the end of December 2010. As the committee, we are grateful for their
participation through the Media Development and Diversity Agency, MDDA, in
serving the nation.

The committee called for nominations and received 22 CVs. From those CVs,
ten candidates were shortlisted. On 16 November 2010, the committee
interviewed all the candidates, except for Dr Simangaliso Malinga, who
could not attend due to bereavement in his family. The committee
deliberated and unanimously recommended that the House recommends to the
President the appointment of the following candidates to serve on the MDDA
board: Ms Louise Carol Vale, Ms Nadia Bulbulia and Ms Phelisa Nkomo. I am
sure hon members will note that the committee recommended three female
candidates. We hope that they will be able to execute their duties as
expected, I thank you.

Question put: That the recommendation for the appointment of Ms Louise
Carol Vale, Ms Nadia Bulbulia and Ms Phelisa Nkomo on the Media Development
and Diversity Agency Board be approved.
Question agreed to.

Ms Louise Carole Vale, Ms Nadia Bulbulia and Ms Phelisa Nkomo accordingly
recommended for appointment on the Media Development and Diversity Agency
Board.

        RETIREMENT OF SERJEANT-AT-ARMS, MR GODFREY EDWARD CLEINWERCK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move that the
motion as it appears on the Order Paper be adopted, as follows:

   That the House —

     1) notes that Mr Godfrey Edward Cleinwerck, the Serjeant-at-Arms, is
        due to retire with effect from 1 February 2011 on attaining the
        compulsory retirement age of 65 years;


     2) recognises that Mr Cleinwerck has served this democratic Parliament
        with distinction and his total service to Parliament spans more
        than 26 years;


     3) further recognises that he has served in the public sector for a
        total of 48 years;
     4) congratulates Mr Cleinwerck on his dedicated service to this
        democratic dispensation; and


     5) wishes him well on his retirement.


Agreed to.

      FAREWELL TRIBUTES TO OUTGOING SERJEANT-AT-ARMS, MR GODFREY EDWARD
                                 CLEINWERCK

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you very much indeed. It was
quite something today, watching the Serjeant-at-Arms, Mr Cleinwerck,
arriving and announcing the arrival of the Speaker — first of all placing
the Mace and then standing back to wait for the prayers or silent prayers
or meditation, because I think all of us are aware of the fact that that
was, in fact, the very last time that he would do that; he has been doing
it for many years. [Applause.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, it was early in May 1987 when I arrived in Parliament
as a very new Member of Parliament – hence I am allowed to wear this hat
today, I might add. I had never been to Parliament before and was - to put
it mildly - somewhat overawed by the experience. I was told by my
colleagues that the very first thing I had to do was to go and get my
parliamentary pass.

I was ushered by a colleague into a room in which sat a man who, I was
told, was the Serjeant-at-Arms for the then House of Representatives. I
have to be honest, I did not know who or what a Serjeant-at-Arms was, but I
did learn there and then that this particular Serjeant-at-Arms went by the
name of Godfrey Cleinwerck - a man who had been in that position for some
three years. He sat me down; took my photograph; printed my pass; and I
left. I left not really knowing that over the many years to come Godfrey
Cleinwerck and I would become pretty good friends.

He has had a very distinguished career in Parliament. In 1994, he became
the Serjeant-at-Arms for the new democratic National Assembly — a post, I
would say without any fear of being wrong, he has filled with enormous
dignity. [Applause.] [Interjections.] He did throw me out, hon Trevor
Manuel. He did throw me out once, and I will come to that just now.
[Laughter.].

It is difficult to imagine an opening of Parliament in the future without
Serjeant-at-Arms Cleinwerck; immaculately dressed as always, shouldering
the Mace and announcing the arrival of the President. Be it P W Botha, F W
de Klerk, Nelson Mandela, Thabo Mbeki, Kgalema Motlanthe or Jacob Zuma - he
has done them all. He has also served four Speakers in that time, and a
host of Secretaries to Parliament.

I do need to add that one does not always know what a Serjeant-at-Arms
does. I think they are quite secretive in a way. They even have a
Commonwealth Association of Serjeants-at-Arms, of which he was chairperson
for two years. I have often wondered what they really do in their quiet
moments and where they stay, because nobody quite knows where Mr
Cleinwerck’s office is. [Laughter.]

Then suddenly, one day, miraculously, out of nowhere, when you have been
thrown out of the House, the Serjeant-at-Arms appears. He comes up to you
very quietly and tells you that you must leave the parliamentary precincts
immediately and not return until the next day. [Laughter.] Let me assure
you, when that happens, you do not argue. However, when it comes to Mr
Cleinwerck, he is at all times the epitome of a gentleman, and even at
times like this you just do as he says.

He likes to refer to himself as “the Speaker’s bouncer”. He has had the
pleasure of bouncing 20 Members of Parliament since 1994. [Laughter.] As I
said earlier to the hon Trevor Manuel, I am privileged, sir, to have been
one of those that he has bounced, together with my colleagues from the DA,
the hon Mike Waters and the hon David Maynier. I do want to say - and I am
sorry that he is not here - that the serial offender in this regard is one
hon Pieter Groenewald from the FF Plus, who has had the pleasure of being
thrown out four times by the Speaker’s bouncer. [Laughter.]

Mr Cleinwerck has done an outstanding job and has had a long and
distinguished career. [Applause.] He has met many heads of state and has
attended many conferences around the world to do his work. He is highly
respected. As he goes now to retirement, I hope he writes a book. It will
be a history of our Parliament from a very different perspective and will
make, I am sure, a very positive contribution to what our understanding of
the first 16 or 17 years of this democratic Parliament has been all about.

From the DA, we wish him well. Thank you, Godfrey, for your dedication to
the cause of running this Parliament. We appreciate, certainly, all that
you have done and congratulate you on a job well done. We wish you and your
family all the best in your retirement years. Your family, your church and
your societies that you serve so well will now benefit from your time in
the same way that Parliament has for so long. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M A A NJOBE: Madam Deputy Speaker, as you are aware, I am 80 years old,
but I am still in service. So, I wonder why such a young man should be
retiring so soon. [Laughter.]

When Mr Cleinwerck retired from the civil service in 1985, he joined the
parliamentary staff. On a lighter note, I wonder whether it could be that
he is now looking for a vacancy in the executive or maybe wants to play a
role as an ambassador. After all, he knows and has ushered into this
Parliament so many kings, queens and Presidents, that perhaps he could be
considered for such a post! [Laughter.]
On a more serious note, I first got to know Mr Cleinwerck when I came to
Parliament in 1994. Although I remember him recently chucking hon Mluleki
George out of the House, he has always been a gentle giant. I always found
him to be courteous, affable and efficient, and always performing his tasks
with diligence from day to day. When he leaves us, he will carry a lot of
institutional memory with him. He served at a time of fundamental change to
Parliament, and I wish he would produce a book to record his knowledge and
experience.

Mr Cleinwerck has been Serjeant—at—Arms of the National Assembly since
1994. I can understand how proud he must have felt when he announced Madiba
into the National Assembly Chamber in 1994, and also when announcing the
last procession out of the Chamber when Madiba retired as President in
1999. When Madiba was about to come in, I can hear him saying: “Madiba,
ladies and gentlemen!” and we all stood up. Madiba touched so many lives,
and for each person he touched in that way, the occasion is indelibly
etched in that person’s memory.

Cope wishes Mr Cleinwerck well in his retirement. Spending more time with
his granddaughter will be one of the great joys of retirement. May the Lord
bless him with good health and many more years so that he can do all he
wants to do for himself, his family, his church and finally, for society.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Madam Deputy Speaker, hon
Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon members, it is a great honour and
privilege for me to stand here on behalf of my party and its president,
Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, at this important moment and occasion in the
life of our retiring Serjeant—at—Arms, Mr Godfrey Cleinwerck.

Since I was elected House Chair for Internal Arrangements by Parliament
three years ago and Chair of the Quarterly Consultative Forum, I have
worked very closely with Mr Cleinwerck on matters of fundamental interests
that must enhance the performance of all the Members of Parliament. I must
say that he has been extremely helpful to our office in many ways. I am
quite sure that the capable team that he has so ably led in the renewal of
the workings of the tools of trade in Parliament ...

Let me pause there just for a while. We are now saying “tools of trade”. I
think I’ve heard that hon Ellis will be changing this in different ways
because we have always heard members saying, “My thing does not work,” or
jumping up and saying, “My thing is not working,” when in fact, Mr
Cleinwerck, they meant that the microphones and the voting gadgets were
defective.

But hon Ellis knows this, as we worked together with him and hon Frolick on
the task team where these things were called the tools of trade. I am not
sure whether members will be happy now to say, “My tool doesn’t work!”
[Laughter.] That would be shocking!
So the tools of trade include the installation of new chairs; one for the
Speaker — I think people who knew the old one did not realise that this is
a new chair – and several other chairs for the judges and departmental
officials, including microphones, etc. I am confident the team will ensure
that Mr Cleinwerck’s good work continues and that he is remembered by all
of us and generations of MPs to come.

I believe I also share the sentiments of the speakership, Members of the
National Assembly and officials within the precincts of Parliament,
including security, when I say to you, sir, that your big personality, your
lovable humour and godly humility will surely be missed. May you enjoy your
retirement years with your beloved family, and may the Almighty continue to
bless you. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the UDM joins the
rest of the House in bidding farewell to the outgoing Serjeant—at—Arms, Mr
Godfrey Cleinwerck. We salute him and his contribution to the functioning
of the National Assembly. He fulfilled an important role in our democracy.

In his capacity as Serjeant—at—Arms he acted as a guardian, a role that is
both ceremonial and practical. However, in both instances, it is a duty
that is deeply symbolic of the importance we attach to the orderly and
unfettered conduct of the business of this House.

We wish him well in his future endeavours and thank him for his service to
this House. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the FF Plus, it is an
honour and a privilege for me to wish the Serjeant—at—Arms everything of
the best in his retirement.

Dit is waar dat mnr Cleinwerck baie jare gewerk en ’n baie lang loopbaan
gehad het. Hy het begin werk as ’n jong man van 17 en ’n lang werksloopbaan
van 47 jaar gehad. Ses-en-twintig jaar van daardie tydperk het hy op
hierdie terrein by die Parlement deurgebring – voor die nuwe bedeling en
daarna – tot waar hy vandag by sy aftrede kom.

Ek, en baie van u ook, het hom altyd ervaar as ’n baie vriendelike man. Hy
was ’n persoon wat altyd baie netjies op sy persoon was, wat altyd
professioneel opgetree het, en wat altyd ’n voorbeeld was. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is a fact that Mr Cleinwerck has worked for many years and has had a
very long career. He started working as a young man at the age of 17, and
his long working career spans over 47 years. Twenty-six of those years he
has spent within the precincts of Parliament — before the new dispensation
and thereafter — until he reached retirement today.

I, and many of you as well, always found him to be a very friendly person.
He was always very neat, always acted in a professional manner, and set an
example at all times.]

After every election, one of the more sensitive issues is the question of
seating in the House. Mr Cleinwerck always played his role in trying to
solve that kind of problem with regard to exactly where parties should be
seated ...

... met die hulp van ander lede van die Parlement. [... with the assistance
of other Members of Parliament.]

Sometimes, while members were in the House before the official commencement
of a sitting of Parliament, one or two members would try to emulate the
Serjeant—at—Arms and try to call the House to order. They never succeeded
in the way that he officially did it until the last opening of Parliament.

Ek wil graag vir hom alles van die beste toewens en hoop dat hy ’n baie
rustige en vredevolle aftrede sal hê saam met sy vrou, sy kinders en sy
kleinkind, en dat dit met hom goed sal gaan.(Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[I would like to wish him all of the best and trust that he will have a
very tranquil and peaceful retirement together with his wife, his children
and his grandchild, and that things will go well with him.]

I think we can all learn one thing from Mr Cleinwerck and his work after so
many years: “I leave with no regrets.” Baie dankie. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP shares in the sentiments wishing
Mr Godfrey Edward Cleinwerck Godspeed in his retirement, after a lifetime
of public service. He has served in Parliament through the terms of six
successive Presidents, under four Speakers and six successive Secretaries
to Parliament. This is no mean feat.

He has met various heads of state and dignitaries and led their ceremonial
processions into Parliament. We will indeed miss his booming voice that
announces the arrival of such dignitaries and the Speaker.

Mr Cleinwerck is an inspiration to us all in always being prepared to go
the extra mile. He has always spoilt visitors to Parliament with
parliamentary publications. On one occasion he made such a fuss of American
visitors that they acknowledged his kindness to the American President,
Barack Obama.

The ACDP will miss your kindness, sir, and your willingness to help at all
times. We wish you God’s richest blessings on retirement. We pray that the
Lord will bless all your endeavours, particularly as you have resolved to
give more time to serving Him in your church. Thank you and God bless you.

Mr K J DIKOBO:  Madam Deputy Speaker, it is difficult to give a fitting
tribute to a man with such an illustrious career in just one minute.

I joined Parliament in May of this year, and one of the first persons I
spoke to was Mr Cleinwerck. He told me then that he would be retiring at
the end of the year. He related his experiences as a Serjeant-at-Arms,
including the Presidents under whom he had served.

From our discussions, I drew two conclusions. Firstly, that he was proud of
the service that he has rendered to his country and, secondly, that, in
spite of it all, he remained a humble and down-to-earth person.

What he did not know at that time was that I was a bundle of nerves, as I
was about to take the Oath of Allegiance in the office of the Speaker, and
that our discussion helped to calm me down.

We thank God for the service that you have rendered, sir, and wish you well
in your retirement. Of course, we will hold you to the promise that you
will write a book!

On behalf of Azapo, I bid you farewell and may God bless you and your
family. Thank you.

Mr A MLANGENI: Madam Deputy Speaker, first of all, I must apologise for the
state of my voice; it was caused by smoking. [Laughter.] A friend of mine,
Mr Ndlovu – I don’t see him here – has for many years been saying, “Come on
man, give up smoking.” But I have not been successful after several
attempts. [Laughter.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, in recognition of the outstanding service of the
outgoing Serjeant-at-Arms, Mr Godfrey Cleinwerck, to the National Assembly,
this, on behalf of the ANC, is my farewell tribute to him.

The Speaker and members, Deputy Ministers and Ministers arise to
commemorate Godfrey Edward Cleinwerck for his 48 years of dedicated service
to the Republic of South Africa ... [Applause.] ... but more specifically
for his 16 years as Serjeant-at-Arms of the National Assembly.

Mr Cleinwerck was, in his own words — sorry for the repetition; many people
have said this — born, bred, educated and worked his entire career under
the slopes of our beautiful Table Mountain. His working career started at
the age of 17 at the then Coloured Affairs Department, which later came to
be known as the Administration of the House of Representatives. He was
appointed as Serjeant-at-Arms of the then House of Representatives in
September 1984 and held the position until 1994.

Godfrey — as he is fondly known by most of us — began his career as
Serjeant-at-Arms of the National Assembly after the first democratic
elections in 1994. Now, to the backbenchers of the House, who may or may
not know the origin of this position, the Serjeant-at-Arms has been a part
of British history since 1279, when King Edward I formed a bodyguard of 20
Serjeants-at-Arms. The gentlemen under that title carried a decorated
battle mace as a weapon and as a badge of that particular office. In 1415,
one of their number was appointed to attend upon with the Speaker in
Parliament as Serjeant-at-Arms for the British House of Commons.

The Serjeant-at-Arms is the custodian of the Mace which, in turn,
symbolises the authority of the Speaker in the House. This tradition was
inherited by most of the modern-day democratic parliaments in the world.
Many of the contemporary roles of the Serjeant-at-Arms stem from the
historical and traditional aspect of the office: the ceremonial, security
and housekeeping roles. However, the responsibilities have evolved over
time and at present include a wide and varied range of responsibilities in
keeping with the needs of the National Assembly as a modern organisation.

While there has been an evolution of the role, the focus remains very much
on the provision of advice and services to the Speaker and the provision of
advice and services to members. Under the Speaker, he enforces the
Speaker’s directives relating to order and decorum on the floor of the
National Assembly and in the public galleries.

In this regard, Godfrey jocularly refers himself as the chief bouncer of
the National Assembly. This is due to the fact that, during the period 1996
to 2010, he was called to action 20 times to escort members from the
precincts after they were ordered to withdraw from the Chamber after having
disregarded the authority of the Chair. His has, certainly, been a career
of highlights that few people will be able to equal, and will most
certainly become an interesting part of his memoirs. I hope he is going to
write his memoirs.

He led the first postapartheid procession and — as a member on my left has
said — announced Madiba into the National Assembly in 1994, and announced
Madiba’s procession out of the Chamber upon his retirement as President in
1999. He served in Parliament through the terms of six successive
Presidents, namely P W Botha, F W de Klerk, Nelson Mandela, Thabo Mbeki,
Kgalema Motlanthe and, currently, President Jacob Zuma. Furthermore, since
our fair democratic elections in 1994, he has served under four Speakers,
namely Frene Ginwala, Baleka Mbete, Gwen Mahlangu-Nkabinde, and, currently,
Max Sisulu.

Godfrey has had the privilege of leading the ceremonial processions into
the Chamber for the Joint Sitting of both Houses, as well as of meeting the
following heads of state and dignitaries: Queen Elizabeth II of Britain — I
think it was in 1995 — President François Mitterrand of France, President
Sam Nujoma of Namibia, President Chissano of Mozambique, President Robert
Mugabe of Zimbabwe, President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, President Bill
Clinton of the USA, President Fidel Castro of Cuba, President Yasser Arafat
of Palestine, General Abubakar of Nigeria and Mr Kofi Annan, who was then
the Secretary-General of the UN.

He was the founder member of the SA Serjeant-at-Arms Association. Being a
founder member of the Commonwealth Association of Serjeants-at-Arms for
Africa in 2000, he was elected chairperson for the period 2005 to 2007. For
most of us who started our careers as Members of Parliament in 1994, 1995,
1999, 2004 and 2009, he has always been a very friendly face and a trusted
source of information about what is happening on the House floor.

In January next year, when we return to Parliament after the recess,
Godfrey will retire from the service of Parliament following 48 years of
outstanding public service, during 16 years of which he was the Serjeant-at-
Arms of this House. That is an achievement. [Applause.] For 16 years, Mr
Cleinwerck served our country within the walls of Parliament with dignity
and decorum.

Today, I ask my colleagues in the House to join me in congratulating
Godfrey on his retirement after a remarkable career. We truly appreciate
his hard work and dedication to our country. I’m sure I speak on behalf of
all of us in the House when I say that it will be with a sense of nostalgia
that we will look back on the life and service of such an outstanding
public servant and close friend whose contributions were immeasurable.

He will be missed, but his work ethic will continue through his co-workers
who, over the years, have admired admired him and have looked to him for
guidance and up to him for the qualities he embodies, namely dedication,
commitment, loyalty, enthusiasm, and reliability - all gems that we will
cherish.

Needless to say, it takes a special individual to contend diplomatically
with the wide range of personalities who make up the National Assembly. He
has nevertheless truly earned the respect, admiration and affection of all
of us, including members like myself who had the privilege to work with
him.

We, on the ANC’s side of the House, wish him the best. He has certainly
earned the opportunity to kick up his heels and enjoy some time with his
wife, Linda, his son and daughter, and his only grandchild, Alexia Rose. He
will have all the time in the world to dedicate to his pet duties as
secretary of the Owl Haven Night Shelter for homeless persons in Lansdowne,
as life member of the Maitland Cottage Home Society in Newlands, as altar
server at the All Saints Anglican Church in Plumstead, and for his
favourite pastime, namely singing in that beautiful baritone voice.

Speaker, Deputy Speaker, in closing I wish to quote an Irish blessing to
accompany Godfrey on his retirement:

    May you always have work for your hands to do,
    May your pockets hold always a coin or two,
    May the sun shine bright on your windowpane,
    May the rainbow be certain to follow each rain,
    May the hand of a friend always be near you,
    May God fill your heart with gladness to cheer you.

Lastly, please continue to play golf ... [Laughter.] ... and enjoy it. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members of
this House, our ongoing message to all South Africans that working together
we can do more as a nation is not a meaningless mantra, but a genuine
recognition that in history our people have been able to attain the
impossible when united behind a common goal.

When he concluded his state of the nation address to the Joint Sitting of
both Houses of Parliament at the beginning of this term, President Jacob
Zuma implored all of us to work together to make this year of action a
successful one for our country. A few days later, during his response to
our debate on the President’s annual address, President Zuma again reminded
us to work together for a common prosperous future.

The system of working together, at the core of which is continuous
interaction with a wide spectrum of our society to defeat the challenges
that confront the nation, is a long-standing tradition of the ANC. This
inclusive approach has also been the hallmark of President Zuma’s
leadership of the country. As leaders of various political parties in this
institution, we have enjoyed fraternal relations with the President.
Throughout this year, we have seen the continuation of meetings between
leaders of opposition and the President. These important meetings have
served as fora through which matters of national interest could be
discussed with the opposition.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank the President for this inclusive
approach. The leaders of opposition parties in this House must also be
commended for coming to the party, partnering us in the interest of a
common future, as the President appealed in his state of the nation
address.

As the ANC, our inclusive approach is informed by the recognition that,
while we are the ruling party, we claim no monopoly over wisdom. It is for
this reason that we have embraced the President’s leadership style and
fostered dialogue with the opposition. Apart from giving some of our
speaking time to smaller parties during the state of the nation address, we
have enjoyed robust debates in multiparty fora in this institution. This
has ensured that we learn from each other and that participatory democracy
is strengthened.

Participatory democracy places at its core the participation of the people
in the operation of their country’s political systems. Members of this
House must, therefore, be commended for overwhelmingly endorsing the
President’s request to address Parliament in the evening for the first
time. This indeed afforded the greater majority of South Africans an
opportunity to be part of the occasion, whether through their presence in
Parliament or following it live on television or radio in the comfort of
their homes. Indeed, it is acts such as these that enhance this
institution’s reputation as a tribunal of the people.

Comrade Deputy Speaker, mutual co-operation, even in an ocean of
confrontational or aggressive politics, is necessary in steering our
people’s ship to prosperity and development. The sense of unity
demonstrated by this Parliament, which mirrored that of the entire nation
behind the hosting of the World Cup, is indeed indicative of what we can
achieve when we work together. As a nation, we must be proud of our
individual and collective effort that brought about such a huge
achievement.

Our character as a people can perhaps be best described by the observation
made by our icon, Nelson Mandela, when he paid tribute to South Africans on
the occasion of his retirement in 1999. Madiba referred to us as “a nation
that has won the world’s admiration, not by prowess in war, but by the
dedication of its people of every background to celebrate their humanity”.

Indeed, the World Cup has gained us the admiration of the world and
reminded us of our true character as a nation. As members of this House, we
must be proud for having put aside our differences and suspended petty
politics in the interest of putting our country first.

Hon members, as we rise today, let us remind ourselves that this
institution defined itself as an activist Parliament. This declaration
coincided with the enactment of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
Related Matters Act of 2009, which, indeed, deepened Parliament’s oversight
authority as enshrined in the Constitution. This necessitates that, as an
activist Parliament, we must build our capacity to realise this progressive
concept of Parliament, which is necessary to enhance service delivery that
will improve the material conditions of the lives of our people.

As I said during Parliament’s budget debates earlier this year, we need to
continue to strive for a fully capacitated institution in the interest of
fully equipped members of Parliament who are equal to the critical task
placed on their shoulders by our people. The recent decision by this House
to establish a committee on nation-building and heritage development will
make this Parliament a responsive and activist people’s Parliament. The new
committee, which draws members from various political parties, will serve
as a consultative mechanism to drive the objectives of this activist
Parliament and enhance nation-building efforts and social cohesion.

The aftermath of the World Cup has inspired South Africans to once again
appreciate that there is much more that unites us as a nation than what
divides us. Through this multiparty committee, Parliament will take the
lead in preserving the national unity that was prevalent during the World
Cup.

This has been an exciting and interesting year. The House once again served
as a theatre of robust, lively and open engagement. We listened to each
other rather than howl, but we also howled, rather than listen to one
another. On some issues we lost our minds, while on some we gained our
sanity. We yelled and shouted on some occasions, while on some we smiled
and laughed. We spoke past each other at times, but we also spoke with each
other most of the time. We were divided at times, but united some of the
time. All of this, consequently, deposited one or two grey hairs on the
heads of our presiding officers under the able and orderly leadership of
hon Speaker Max Sisulu.

That the presiding officers have been able to withstand all this is a true
testament of their tenacity and resoluteness. Indeed, the trait of a good
presiding officer is not measured by the number of orders he makes, but how
he or she manages the business of the House through a fair and impartial
application and interpretation of Rules, conventions, practices and
precedents. I stand here to congratulate you, Madam Deputy Speaker, the
Speaker and your team for performing that with sheer unadulterated
excellence. I believe hon members will agree that the Speaker and Deputy
Speaker deserve a round of applause. [Applause.]

As I conclude, let me say that I also wish to take my hat off to all the
staff members of Parliament, under the able leadership of the Secretary to
Parliament, Mr Zingile Dingani, including our ever helpful Table staff and
service officers, for easing up our work in this institution. Well done!

Hon members, as we rise this day, I wish to use this opportunity to pay
tribute to our beloved colleagues and members of this House, whom death
snatched from our benches during this year. May the spirits of Comrade
Molefi Sefularo, who served as the Deputy Minister of Health and Comrade
Alina Rantsolase, our caucus chairperson and Whip rest in peace. I also
wish to pay tribute to the former Members of Parliament who left us during
this year. They are Frederik van Zyl Slabbert, Cheryl Gillwald, and Mittah
Seperepere; may they rest in peace.

In conclusion, Speaker, this year Parliament marked the 20-year anniversary
of the release of our icon, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, and other political
prisoners. I wish to remind you of what the first President of the
democratic South Africa wished when he gave his farewell speech at the UN
in 1998. He said:

   I will continue to hope that Africa’s Renaissance will strike deep roots
   and blossom forever, without regard to the changing seasons. Were all
   these hopes to translate into a realisable dream and not a nightmare to
   torment the soul of the aged, then will I, indeed, have peace and
   tranquillity. Then would history and the billions throughout the world
   proclaim that it was right that we dreamt and that we toiled to give life
   to a workable dream.

As we rise and formally conclude the business of this House, we should take
this opportunity and ask ourselves whether our performance in this
institution during this particular term has contributed in making that
African dream, which Madiba spoke of, realisable, or have we contributed in
turning it into “a nightmare to torment the soul of the aged”.

I am hopeful that Madiba will look at our work this year with an approving
smile. I am also hopeful that we were able to heed the call made by the
President at the beginning of this year for us to work together in the
interest of building our future. Bon voyage. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, at the outset, I would like
to thank the Chief Whip of the Majority Party for the co-operation that
exists in the Chief Whips’ Forum. I think we both have a common aim of
ensuring that there is smooth working of this House and, more importantly,
the deepening of democracy as represented by this House.

I would also like to convey my party’s congratulations to Mr Frolick and Ms
Hajaig for their escalation to the high office. I hope we can give you our
best co-operation, although I don’t always guarantee it.

Most of us at this stage feel like school children waiting for that bell to
ring so that we can go out and, perhaps, play in the fields and on the
beaches out there. Unfortunately, for most of us with elections around the
corner that bit of peace and quiet is going to be short-lived as we will
all again be put back into the trenches to start working for the municipal
elections next year. However, I hope that those of us who do get a chance
to have a break enjoy that break and come back refreshed.

Before I get into the real thanks, I just want to reflect for a moment on
the year that is passing. I want to pick up one particular event which I
think was an epoch-making event. It was an event that I think really
encapsulated the spirit of what this nation wants to be, and how others
want to see us. That was the 2010 World Cup. That spirit was a wonderful
spirit which was exhibited here in the House. There was unity in this House
that I think I and most of us have never experienced before. The World Cup
brought together South Africans with South Africans. It brought together
South Africans with foreigners.

We paraded a country that spruced itself up, readied its infrastructure,
and delivered a world-class event on time. It was a time when, as the
President said, even the criminals went on holiday. There were no no-go
areas. We saw a confident nation proud of its team, itself and what we had
achieved. It was a nation that was beginning to bond and be at peace with
itself.

The question that I want to ask before we go into recess is this: Are we
still in that space? A few events took place just after that, which, I
think, took us from those heights back to a painful reality. We had the
Defence Force — as somebody quoted yesterday — essentially going on mutiny
and rampage.

We had South Africa paralysed by a public service strike over an ostensible
wage dispute. We had a debate about nationalisation emerging in certain
quarters. This essentially frightened off a good deal of job-creating
investment, which could have alleviated poverty.

We saw a drop in rankings of South Africa as far as the Human Development
Index, the Global Competitive Index and the Freedom House’s Freedom of the
Press Index are concerned. Finally, we saw crime and no-go areas coming
back. A painful reminder of this was — there are many reminders — the
recent one of Anni Dewani in Gugulethu. What was so awful about Dewani’s
event was that it splashed South Africa back into the headlines throughout
the world about a subject which, quite frankly, put us back to where we
were prior to that wonderful event in July.

So, as we go into recess, I want to ask the members to reflect on how we
can regain that status; how we can regain that period of peace and
goodwill; and how we can regain those Houses’ spirit. How do we recapture
that spirit of goodwill that we once had, and how do we recapture becoming
what we want to become and what others want to see us become?
Yesterday’s event in Cape Town was a wonderful exhibition of that event,
that spirit reoccurring when people took to the streets of Cape Town on
that walk. You saw that wonderful togetherness that existed. It is there,
it is heightened and people want it. We, as leaders, must provide it.

Finally, let me say thanks and good wishes. I take this opportunity do so
to, first of all, the DA staff in Parliament, research staff, media staff,
staff in Whippery, my own assistant and my personal assistants. A
particular thanks to my deputy, Mike Ellis, and all other Whips who helped
me. Indeed, I thank all Whips of all parties who co-operated so well in the
interest of Parliament.

Let me also thank the Speaker and the presiding officers, and all the staff
of Parliament, from the most senior to the most junior, for doing their
best to treat us with courtesy and consideration and for giving us their
best. Finally, may I take this opportunity to wish you, Mr Speaker, the
Deputy Speaker, presiding officers, all hon members and staff a happy and
blessed Christmas and a wonderful New Year. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Hon Speaker, if we look back over the past year we actually
can think back to many very interesting debates and discussions, although
some of the media people would say most of them were very boring. But, at
least, we knew what we were discussing in this House.
We had highs and lows here. Sometimes things worked, and sometimes they did
not. Members will recall what a very distressed member of the DA said when
his microphone did not come on and he wanted to attract the attention of
the Speaker. Some parties had less infighting than others, but those who
pretend to live in eternal bliss and harmony with each other could be
accused of misleading Parliament. It’s only those one-member parties that
can truthfully say that they have no differences in their caucuses.

When we came here some 18 months ago, many of us did not know each other.
However, we soon found common ground, and I believe we developed respect
across party-political lines, mostly because we share a common love of our
country and the people of our country. Previous speakers have referred to
the World Cup spirit that prevailed and that we should really rekindle it
again when we go forward as South Africans.

Despite having had differences on some fundamentals here in the House, as
well as in committees, and although tempers often flared up, we have not as
yet seen a rematch of the famous bout of fisticuffs of some years ago. I
think hon De Lange has calmed down somewhat. I don’t know if his
relationship and marriage to hon Chohan had anything to do with that. He’s
really calmed down a lot.

The past year also saw a new precedent, with an hon member being accused of
coming to the House in his pyjamas. Fancy dressing appears to be the surest
way to be seen and not to be heard. Maybe some of us should also do that in
future.

Cope saw the first member in the history of our party and Parliament to be
escorted out of the House by the Serjeant-at-Arms. He will also go down in
history as the only one who was escorted by Mr Cleinwerck. We saw with
pride our party leader, president Lekota, coming into Parliament, and we
are very thankful to have him in our ranks. [Applause.]

From all of us in Cope we want to thank you, the Speaker, Deputy Speaker,
the presiding officers, the Serjeant-at-Arms, the NA Table staff, the
Secretary and everybody who worked tirelessly during the course of the past
year to support us as Members of Parliament.

To our colleagues in the majority party, please bear with us. It is our
role as nongoverning parties to keep the executive accountable, to keep the
ruling party on their toes, and to make sure that those Ministers who go
overseas return soon to the House to answer questions, as we saw yesterday.

To all hon members, on behalf of Cope, may we express our best wishes to
enjoy the festive season with your families and friends before the hard
work for the 2011 local government elections commences. We wish you all the
best. Enjoy your rest period, and may we soon meet each other again to
continue to work for the nation that expects all of us to deliver on our
promises. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Hon Speaker, if I were speaking as the House Chairperson, I
would have been given more than three minutes, I think. I am sure the
Speaker will also agree with me that today I am earning my 5% increment.
[Laughter.]

Hon Speaker, hon Ministers who are here, hon Deputy Ministers and hon
members, centuries ago, when the wise ones — that is, the philosophers —
looked at the soul of the state, and after a long period of study, they
concluded that Parliament was the heart of the state and the executive was
the brain. They strongly contended that when the brain ceases to function,
the body politic will still continue to struggle. However, when the heart
stops beating, the body politic becomes lifeless and dies. What follows is
the end of democracy and the beginning of autocracy and, eventually,
anarchy.

The hon members of this House have often and on many occasions referred to
Parliament as the voice of the people. Now that this House is about to
rise, the question remains: Have we been that strong heart? Have we been
that powerful voice of the people? Have we been that intelligent brain that
is needed by the sovereign authority, the people of the Republic —
particularly the poor and the marginalised majority in our land?

I hasten to admit that, looking back at the numerous sessions of this
Assembly, hon members have tried to the best of their abilities to embrace
the vision and mission of this Parliament. Perhaps we have not tried hard
enough to bring about the common good for all as postulated in our
Constitution. It is therefore virtuous to admit our political deficits as
individual members and as a collective of political parties in this House
and, at the same time, appreciate what Parliament has achieved this year.

We thank the leaders of all the political parties who are here, the
speakership and all the Whips of all the parties, the National Assembly
Table, and parliamentary services at all levels, including catering and
security.

In conclusion, the IFP in this House, led by Prince Buthelezi, wishes all
the members of this respectable House, including the President, Ministers,
Deputy Ministers, Deputy President and their families, a memorable, safe
and restful festive season. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Hon Speaker, I was unceremoniously thrust into the position
of the leader of the ID in Parliament in September when Patricia de Lille
decided to continue her fight for the poor as Western Cape MEC for Social
Development. [Laughter.] This has been an interesting journey for me as I
have tried to fully acquaint myself with all the strange workings of
Parliament.
I have learnt that the wheels of change grind very slowly in this
institution and that it is unparliamentary to blow a vuvuzela in the House.
Contrary to that, I have learnt — hon Ellis — that it is indeed
parliamentary to wear a hat in the House. To put you at rest, hon Speaker,
I have decided to finally conform to the rules of Parliament and I do not
have a concealed vuvuzela in my pocket.

I hope by now that you have forgiven me for getting caught up in the
emotion of the World Cup because this was truly a great year for this
nation. I was immensely proud of the way in which Parliament joined the
whole country in celebrating this momentous moment in our country’s
history, and it was a joy to watch the sea of yellow jerseys in the House.

As a nation, we can certainly be proud of putting on a spectacular show for
the world. We have proven that, when we feel the pressure, we can deliver.
However, the ID believes that we now need to make the Ministers feel this
pressure when it comes to delivering services to all our people. We have to
live up to the vision as an activist Parliament where parliamentarians can
truly hold the executive to account.

We cannot do this, though, when Ministers shamelessly boycott the question
time over their own requests for extra money. Yesterday’s debacle was a
slap in the face of our democracy and showed utter contempt for Parliament
and the voters who have placed their faith in us. My hope is that next year
we will see a different attitude being displayed to Parliament so that we
can build this institution into the true cornerstone of our democracy.

Lastly, Speaker, to all of us present, I would like to wish you a merry
Christmas and a happy holiday. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Mr Speaker, hon members, we have once more reached the end
of the year. It has been a particularly busy year with this Parliament
getting down to business for its first complete year of work. The year has
been particularly busy with new departments and new Ministers commencing
their work in earnest. The recent Cabinet reshuffle and consequent
parliamentary changes have added a further level of complexity to
parliamentary work under way.

Nevertheless, the House has managed to deal with a great deal of business
and addressed numerous important matters. We wish our colleagues in other
political parties farewell for the year and hope that they will find joy
and contentment over the festive season in the company of friends and loved
ones.

The UDM would like to wish our Muslim compatriots a prosperous Eid Mubarak
for yesterday. Similarly, we hope that those who have recently celebrated
Diwali will have a joyous New Year. In a month’s time, our Christian
compatriots will be celebrating Christmas. It is a reminder of our rich
diversity as a nation and also that we share common values that cherish
life, family and prosperity. May we return refreshed and inspired to
proceed with our work in the New Year.

At this time, the UDM would like to once again appeal to everyone that we
should travel safely, especially on our roads. Together, let us spread the
message of responsible and safe road usage. The vast majority of our
shockingly high number of road fatalities are caused by avoidable reckless
or negligent road use.

In conclusion, allow me to express gratitude to the many staff members
within the administration of the institution and the political parties who
enable us to do our job; we appreciate their efforts. May everybody have a
merry Christmas and a happy New Year. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Speaker, we have come to the end of another long year in
Parliament, where all played their own roles in their own respective ways.
It’s a time to say thank you and goodbye to all members from all parties at
the end of this session.

Our colleague, the hon Chief Whip of the Opposition, used the opportunity
for one second to bring in a specific political point, which is very
important to him and I understand that. He made a point that he remembers
how united we all were when we were preparing for the World Cup earlier in
the year. He then expressed his concern by asking what happened to that
spirit in the period after that. And I can understand that very well.

If we look back to our own history and our own past, a couple of years ago,
this country successfully hosted the Rugby World Cup and the Cricket World
Cup. The point I would like to make is that - as I said in the past in this
House, and I want to repeat it – sport is very important in terms of nation-
building and in terms of social cohesion. However, we will not succeed in
addressing the issue of being united in our diversity by just going from
one sporting event to the next. We need more than that.

We need to address the real issues of our country and our nation in terms
of poverty and joblessness. We need to find a constitutional dispensation
where we can be truly united, but also respecting our diversity. I
understand what hon Davidson has said, but we need to take those issues
further in our debates.

Ek wil, ten slotte, baie dankie sê vir die parlementêre personeel vir die
rol wat elkeen van hulle die afgelope jaar gespeel het. Van die
veiligheidspersoneel wat ons veilig hou; tot die spyseniering; tot die
biblioteek — noem maar op, almal wat daar is — elkeen het sy rol gespeel om
van hierdie jaar ’n sukses te maak.

Dankie ook aan die media, waarsonder die Parlement irrelevant sou word in
die oë van die kiesers daar buite, want, as die media nie rapporteer wat in
hierdie Parlement en by die uitvoerende gesag gebeur nie, gaan die volk en
die mense daar buite aan asof ons nie bestaan nie. Ons moet dit weet en
besef watter rol die media daarin speel.

Ek sê baie dankie aan u almal. Geniet die rustyd wat vir u voorlê. Ons gaan
’n Kersseisoen betree, en, van die VF Plus se kant af, wens ek dat Kersfees
vir u elkeen werklik ’n Christusfees in u hart sal wees wat rustigheid en
vrede vir ons almal sal bring. Baie dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, I would like to thank the parliamentary staff very much for
the role that each of them has played over the past year. From the security
personnel who keep us safe; to the catering; to the library — you name it,
all of them — each one has contributed to making this year a success.

Thank you also to the media, without whom Parliament would become
irrelevant in the eyes of the voters out there, because, should the media
not report what transpires in this Parliament and in the Executive, the
nation and the people out there would continue as if we did not exist. We
should know this and realise the important role the media has to play in
this regard.

I thank you all very much. Enjoy the period of rest that lies ahead. We are
entering a festive season, and, from the side of the FF Plus, I wish that
Christmas would truly represent to each of you a festival of Christ in your
hearts that would bring tranquility and peace to us all. Thank you very
much.]

Mr S N SWART: Speaker, we have come to the end of a busy parliamentary
session that was full of surprises, failures, successes and disappointments
in a year that seemed to have gone by very fast. The highlight was clearly
the successful Soccer World Cup. The challenge is clearly to build on the
success to improve service delivery to our citizens.

On behalf of the ACDP, I wish all hon members a refreshing time of rest
with their families so that they can be encouraged and come back refreshed
and ready to face the new year’s challenges, hard work and elections. I
would like to thank the Secretary to Parliament and all parliamentary
staff, security and police officials that have made our work possible. I
would also like to thank the media for covering parliamentary activities
and making Parliament accessible to the public.

A particular word of thanks also goes to the main opposition party for the
words of encouragement before we speak; it always means a lot to me. As I
have said before, Parliament is like a very big family. Whilst we may
differ robustly on issues, there is a huge amount of co-operation,
camaraderie and genuine caring for one another amongst us. It is
regrettable that the members of the public do not see this other side of
Parliament, rather than the often inflammatory speeches and debates that we
have in the House. I am sure that had they seen more of this, it would be a
great encouragement to the nation as we seek to further the common good.

The parliamentary prayer group has been a great blessing to me,
particularly when I was busy with my exams earlier this year. I will miss
each one of you. I have passed, and thank you for your successful prayers.
May I encourage all members to consider joining this group next year. I
understand that it has a significant impact on results of the elections as
well. I would ask the prayer group to continue praying for me, in
particular, as I embark on the parliamentary study tour later in a week’s
time with the hon Marius “Pik” Swart. Can you imagine two Swarts in
Germany? Talk about the Swart gevaar! [Laughter.]

I would like to conclude with a priestly blessing to all members. May the
Lord bless you and keep you. May the Lord make His face shine upon you and
be gracious to you. May the Lord lift up His countenance upon you and give
you peace. Have a very blessed Christmas and happy New Year. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnr L M MPHAHLELE: Agb Speaker, agb lede en gaste, vandag is die dag dat
ons mekaar groet. Die Pan Africanist Congress van Azania wens u almal ’n
veilige reis terug huis toe. Ons gaan almal huis toe vir die feestelike
seisoen. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Hon Speaker, hon members and guests, today is the day
that we greet each other. The Pan Africanist Congress of Azania wishes you
all a safe journey home. We are all going home for the festive season.]

Somlomo, Mgcina, NoKwindla, ndiyathemba ukuba xa ufika ekhaya eQuthubeni,
iigusha zamafama azisayi kuba ziziduli zethafa. [Hon Speaker, Mgcina,
noKwindla, I hope that when you arrive home in Quthubeni, members of your
constituency will not be without a shepherd.] [Laughter.]

Hon Speaker, as we disperse to our different homes and constituencies, let
us each behave responsibly during the recess. Through our behaviour, the
people will judge the quality of Parliament that South Africa has.
Leadership is action, not position.

Mohlomphegi Sepikara, gotša mollo o tšhume Palamente ye e swe lore.
[Lesego.] Mphato o swele gore ditsela di wele kgwahlana. Phala tša mona
marula di a tloga! Ke a leboga. [Legofsi.]

SEPIKARA: Re a leboga, Ntate Mphahlele. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs
follows.)
[Hon Speaker, our work is done. [Laughter.] Let me stop here. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Mphahlele.]

I was going to give you an extra minute, but you are gone now. So, it’s
okay. [Laughter.]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Mr Speaker, hon members and guests, we have come to the end
of a very eventful year for the National Assembly. This House has
experienced robust discussions and debates. The Speaker, Deputy Speaker and
House Chairpersons have had their hands full trying to keep, and I quote:
“Order, hon members!” [Laughter.]

As members go back to their constituencies and later on leave to enjoy the
festive season with their families, Azapo would like to take this
opportunity to wish all of them a peaceful one. Parliament would not
function without the staff members who perform different functions. Azapo
also wishes them a happy festive season, a merry Christmas and a prosperous
New Year.

We are extending the same wishes to the rest of South Africa. Azapo is
urging South Africans, particularly road users, to be careful on the road,
to drive carefully, and to respect others on the road. We also urge our
people, particularly the youth, to enjoy the festive season responsibly and
to stay away from alcohol and drugs. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to remind you that this is the first time
in more than 30 years that the hon Koos van der Merwe is not here. He is
recovering from an operation and we would like the hon Chairperson,
Skosana, to convey our wishes to him for a speedy recovery. I know he is
here with us in spirit. Please pass our greetings and best wishes to him.
[Applause.]

Hon members, I also wish to join in, in thanking the hon Godfrey Cleinwerck
for his contribution to this Parliament. His contribution has been
outstanding. It is difficult to think of Parliament without Mr Cleinwerck.
He has become part of the institution. We are certainly going to miss him a
great deal.

I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome the appointments of
hon Frolick and hon Hajaig as House Chairs. I would like to tell them that,
as presiding officers, they are expected to preside at night during the
night shifts. This is the last time I am presiding in the evening.
[Laughter.]

Although this is the last plenary session of the National Assembly,
committee work is still going to continue next week. Members will then have
an opportunity to reconnect with their constituencies before breaking for
the annual leave on 15 December. Drive safely and take time to relax and to
enjoy with your families. I wish you all the very best. Thank you very much
for your co-operation. It has been a long, hard year, but it has been worth
it. Again, I would like to thank you for your co-operation and all the hard
work that you have put in.

The House adjourned at 17:43.
                                 __________

                     ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

     1) Bills passed by National Assembly on 18 November 2010:


          a) South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17D – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18D – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Rport and Financial Statements of the Road  Traffic  Management
        Corporation for 2009-2010, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 255-2010].


    (b)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  International  Air
        Services Council (IASC) for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Service Licensing
        Council (IASC) for 2009-2010.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Assessment
        of the Effectiveness  of  Thusong  Service  Centres  in  Integrated
        Service Delivery [RP 60-2010].


    (b)     Public Protector Report No 30 of 2010-11 on an investigation
        into a complaint of improper conduct by the governing body of the
        Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and the
        prejudice caused by its decision not to accredit a panel list of
        bargaining councils.


    (c)     Letter from the Minister of Transport dated 17 November 2010,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in the
        submission of the Annual Reports:  The Road Traffic Management
        Corporation (RTMC), the Air Service Licensing Council (IASC) and
        the International Air Services Council (IASC) for 2009-2010.


        WRITTEN EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING OF THE
        ANNUAL REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH
        2010 OF THE ROAD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT CORPORATION (RTMC), THE AIR
        SERVICE LICENSING COUNCIL (ASLC) AND THE INTERNATIONAL AIR SERVICE
        COUNCIL (IASC), AND THE TABLINGOF THESE ANNUAL REPORTS


        I write to inform Parliament that in terms of subsection 65(1)(a)
        of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), as
        amended (PFMA), I was unfortunately not able to table the Annual
        Reports and audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 arch
        2010 of the Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC), the Air
        Service Licensing Council (ASLC) and the International Air Service
        Council (IASC) before the deadline of 30 September 2010.


        Section 65(2)(a) of the PFMA stipulates that if an Executive
        Authority fails to table, in accordance with subsection 65(1)(a),
        the Annual Report and Annual Financial Statements of the Department
        of the Public Entity, and the Audit Report on those Statements, in
        Parliament within six months after the end of the financial year to
        which those  Statements relate, i. e. 30 September 2010, the
        Executive Authority must table a written  explanation in Parliament
        setting out the reasons why such an Annual Report was not tabled.
        The purpose of this communication is therefore to furnish
        Parliament with the following reasons for the late tabling of the
        following Annual Reports:-


        The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC)


        The reason for the late tabling of the Annual Report of the Road
        Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) was that a forensic
        investigation was undertaken on various allegations against the
        RTMC, which had to be finalised first.  The report of the
        investigation was required by the Auditors in order to finalise the
        financial statements of RTMC for the year ended 31 March 2010,
        hence the delay.


        Air Service Lincensing Council (ASLC) and the International Air
        Services Council (IASC)


        The reason for the late tabling was the fact that there are several
        alterations on the reports that had to be rectified and agreed to,
        which needed incorporation in the final versions. It was imperative
        that the commentary and assent of the members of the Councils be
        solicited prior to submission of the reports. The delay was further
        compounded by printing challenges of the finalised copies of the
        reports.


        The delay in submitting the above-mentioned Annual Reports is
        sincerely regretted and every effort will be made to ensure that in
        future all Annual Reports are submitted to Parliament before the
        deadline.


        I therefore wish to submit, in accordance with Section 65(1)(a) of
        the Public Financial Management Act, the above Annual Reports for
        tabling in Parliament.


        I trust that this will be in order.


        Kind regards


        (signed)
        MR J S NDEBELE , MP
        MINISTER OF TRANSPORT
        DATE:  2010-11-17

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Higher  Education  and  Training  on
   the Further Education and Training (FET) Summit dated 17 November 2010

   The Portfolio Committee on Higher  Education  and  Training  having  been
   invited and participated at the FET Summit held at  Birchwood  Conference
   Centre, Boksburg reports as follows:




1. Background to the Summit

Over 400 stakeholders in the Further Education and  Training  (FET)  College
sector gathered at the Birchwood Conference Centre  on  3  and  4  September
2010 for decisive discussions on the future of  this  crucial  component  of
the post-school education and training landscape. The FET college  subsystem
is poised, in its new location in the  post-school  education  and  training
system, to be a significant locus of delivery of vocational  and  continuing
education and training, with strong links to the industry in order  to  meet
the critical skills shortage.


The FET Summit was attended by  among  others  college  principals,  college
councils, labour, business, teacher unions, Sector  Education  and  Training
Authorities  (SETAs),  development  agencies,  Members  of   the   Portfolio
Committee on Higher Education and provincial  departments.  The  Summit  was
aimed at repositioning the FET sector and building  the  confidence  of  the
industry and of the public in the capacity of FET colleges.



 In April, a FET Roundtable  brought  together  all  key  role  players  and
stakeholders in the  college  subsystem  to  engage  in  a  rigorous  debate
informed by an analysis of the challenges facing the colleges. A  high-level
steering committee, established at the  roundtable  and  chaired  by  Higher
Education  and  Training  Director  General  Professor  Mary  Metcalfe,  was
appointed at the Roundtable and presented its recommendations to the  summit
for discussion. These recommendations were developed by  intensive  work  of
task teams and aimed at stabilizing the FET college sub-system and  building
a platform for its long-term development.



DELEGATION: The delegation of the committee consisted of Ms M Kubayi  (ANC),
Ms N Gina (ANC), Ms N Magazi (ANC), Ms F Mushwana  (ANC)  and  Mr  K  Dikobo
(AZAPO). Support staff included: Mr A Kabingesi (Committee Secretary).



2. Address by Ms N Nxesi: Chief Executive Officer,  Education  and  Training
Development Practices SETA (ETDPSETA)

The CEO welcomed all the distinguished guests and  various  stakeholders  to
the FET Summit hosted by ETDPSETA in  conjunction  with  the  Department  of
Higher  Education  and  Training.  In  her  address,  she  highlighted   the
following key issues:

    • The FET colleges and the schooling system form part of the  agenda  of
      SETAs in strengthening of skills development  and  building  a  strong
      relationship between business and the FET sector.

    • The FET Summit culminated as a result of the Roundtable  in  April  to
      ensure synergy in  the  higher  education  and  training  sector.  The
      Roundtable identified critical issues of the FET sector which would be
      seriously debated in the FET Summit.

    • Recommendations of the Summit would be forwarded to the  Minister  and
      the department for consideration.



3. Address by Dr B Nzimande: Minister of Higher Education and Training

The Minister welcomed  all  distinguished  guests  to  the  FET  Summit.  He
expressed his sincere appreciation to the FET Steering Committee led by  the
DG for the excellent work they have  done  over  the  past  four  months  in
preparing for the FET  Summit.  He  highlighted  that  the  Summit  has  the
challenge to critically examine the issues and recommendations presented  by
the Steering Committee which would lead to the stabilisation of the  college
sector in the short term and the  creation  of  a  sound  platform  for  the
development of the colleges as pillars  of  skills  development  across  the
nation.
The Minister indicated that the  key  focus  areas  of  this  government  in
respect of colleges include but are not limited to:
    • The shift  of  the  function  of  managing  the  college  system  from
      provincial to national government.
    • Quality improvements including increased success and throughput.
    • Increased enrolment of youth and adults.
    • Closer  alignment  with  skills  development  strategies  and  funding
      including training partnerships and work placement.
    • Increasing apprenticeship and learnerships.
    • The production of quality artisans as one of the key goals of the  FET
      college sector.
The Minister went on to state that the President’s 2010 State of the  Nation
Address reiterated these themes with particular emphasis  on  the  expansion
of access in the context of the  need  to  develop  a  skilled  and  capable
workforce to support growth and job creation. A key  challenge  is  for  the
sector to grow as rapidly as possible to be accessible to both young  people
and adults, but  to  drive  that  growth  on  a  firm  basis  together  with
increasing quality in provision. Of the 2.8 million South  Africans  between
the ages of 18 and 24 who were (in 2007) not  in  employment,  education  or
training, two million (71%) had not achieved Grade 12. Of these  0.5m  (18%)
had not progressed beyond primary school. Dr  Nzimande  further  added  that
the college community therefore, must expand its horizons and see the  world
beyond individual institutions and campuses, whilst at  the  same  time  not
losing sight of building each institution as  a  centre  of  excellence.  He
indicated that the Summit should focus  on  strengthening  the  relationship
between FET colleges and employers, both in the public and private  sectors.
The question  of  facilitating  work  placement  for  college  students  and
graduates  must  be  at  the  heart  of  the  sector’s  skills   development
strategies.
Dr  Nzimande  referred  to  the  difficulties  that  the  FET   sector   has
experienced over the past few years, which include but are not limited to:
    • Loss of lecturers from colleges, low morale and a high vacancy rate.
    • Poor learner performances, with  low  pass  rates  and  high  drop-out
      rates.
    • Increasing reliance on private sector  for  skills  training,  coupled
      with a growing loss of confidence in public sector provision.
    • Institutional instability and labour instability.
    • Severe financial difficulties.
Dr Nzimande was of the view that these challenges and complexities must  not
lead to further lamentations; instead they should make the sector  to  focus
on practical and concrete solutions to these problems.  The  principal  task
is that of growing a  quality  FET  college  sector;  and  this  is  a  non-
negotiable.
Key activities over the next five years to improve responsiveness to the
needs of the economy will therefore include the following:
    • Significant expansion of the FET college sector.
    • Programme offerings will be expanded, not only strengthening the NCV
      programmes, but also expanding the N type programmes, especially to
      absorb matriculants without university endorsement.
    • Training partnerships with industry will be funded through SETAs.
    • Partnerships with employers will be established.
    • A work placement programme for graduates of FET colleges will be
      established.
The Minister stated that the post-summit processes  will  be  critical.  The
Department will inform all colleges of the recommendations  of  the  Summit,
and of the Ministers subsequent decisions, and will  work  intensively  with
provinces and prioritised colleges and programmes  to  provide  support  for
their operational planning for  2011  and  for  the  implementation  in  the
longer term of the  summit  outcomes.  The  outcomes  of  this  summit  will
ultimately inform a Green Paper which will survey the post-school  education
and training landscape and  set  out  the  policy  and  legislative  changes
needed to support our strategic objectives.
4. Higher Education South Africa’s (HESA) Perspective  on  the  Post  School
Education (PSE) System
Prof D  Malaza:  CEO,  HESA  led  the  presentation  which  highlighted  the
following key issues:
    • The challenges in the new post school education  system  includes  the
      development of a PSE system  to  deliver  on  a  skilled  and  capable
      workforce to support  an  inclusive  growth  path  and  to  coordinate
      subsystems  in  HE,  FET  and  SETAs  and  to  deliver   on   credible
      institutional  mechanisms  for   skills   planning   and   access   to
      intermediate and high level learning.
    • HESA’s  strategic  commitments  includes,  achieving  high  levels  of
      responsiveness and relevance,  promoting  a  dynamic  evolution  of  a
      differentiated HE system and advocating for funding arrangements  that
      facilitate institutional differentiation.
    • The HESA Task Team on the PSE system is expected to develop  a  sector
      position  paper  on  a  PSE  system  appropriate  for   the   national
      development agenda, which will outline the  nature  of  the  interface
      between HE and the FET sector.
    •  Priority  issues  identified  by  the  HESA  Task  Team  for  further
      engagements include, curriculum for the FET  college  sector  (how  it
      links to HE), funding of post school education  and  training  systems
      and strategies for increasing post school educational opportunities.
    • HESA will form a Task Team on the PSE workshop on 8 October 2010.
    •  A capacity development project is  in  place  through  a  partnership
      between the United States of America and South Africa targeting 12 FET
      colleges.

5. Steering Committee Presentation to the FET Summit
Prof M  Metcalfe:  Director-General,  Department  of  Higher  Education  and
Training and Chairperson of the  Steering  Committee  led  the  presentation
which highlighted the following key issues:
    • The FET College  Roundtable  was  convened  to  identify  and  address
      challenges faced by the FET sector. A Steering Committee consisting of
      various stakeholders was established to report to the  FET  Summit  on
      recommendations of the Roundtable.
    • The key recommendations of the Roundtable included a new policy vision
      and legislative framework for the  colleges  that  should  locate  the
      public FET colleges sector within a single policy and legal  framework
      for compulsory education and  training.  The  policy  should  map  the
      relationship between colleges, SETAs and HEIs, and FET  colleges  will
      have a dual mission meaning that they should provide large numbers  of
      school leavers and out of school youth  with  access  to  occupational
      programmes that can enhance employability or lead to job creation.
    • In terms of the governance and legal context the transfer of  colleges
      is the priority of the Department. The legislation is not likely to be
      introduced before the end of 2011, therefore the Further Education and
      Training Act remains in place.
    • In terms of the way forward, the Steering Committee  will  consolidate
      the FET Summit Report that will be distributed to all stakeholders and
      presented to the Minister by 7th October 2010.  The  Task  Teams  will
      visit all colleges and brief staff regarding the outcomes of  the  FET
      Summit.

6. Consolidated Feedback from Working Groups
a) Feedback: Policy

Most of the delegates did not have sufficient  opportunity  to  engage  with
the Task Team reports on the policy issue. However, it was argued  that  the
role of the provinces must be properly articulated if colleges are to  be  a
national function.

b) Feedback: Students

It was  recommended  that  there  is  need  to  strengthen  student  support
services and Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) should be prioritized.  The
student fee portion for programmes needs to  be  lowered  as  poor  students
cannot afford the current 20% required.



c) Feedback: Management of the Employer-Employee Relationship

There was a general consensus that there should be one  employer  (DHET)  in
the FET sector and an appropriate bargaining  council.  The  review  of  the
National Certificate Vocational (NCV) should  take  note  of  the  lecturing
staff workload. A short-term recommendation is the finalization of  phase  2
of  the  new  salary  dispensation  and  permanent  appointments  of  acting
positions in FET colleges.

d) Feedback Programmes

It was felt that there is a need for a more detailed analysis of the  future
of  the  N  programmes  and  the  NCV  must  be  reviewed.   A   long   term
recommendation is that colleges need to be capacitated to offer  their  full
programme  quality  management  (funding,   infrastructure   and   staff   /
management capacity).

e) Feedback: Quality

It was recommended that there is a need  to  consider  how  to  introduce  a
total  quality  management  system  to  ensure  quality  delivery   of   all
programmes and short courses. A short-term recommendation  is  the  need  to
improve teaching and learning. Finalisation of the  lecturer  qualifications
policy was identified as very critical for lecturer development.

f) Feedback Funding

There was a concern  about  the  availability  of  budget  for  colleges  to
perform in terms of the required mandate. The shortage of  funding  has  led
to the crisis in the sector. There is a need to operationalise the SETA  and
NSF funding mechanism in a way that ensures that colleges have the  capacity
to deliver against their obligations. There is a need to review the  costing
model which  takes  into  account  inequities  across  colleges  and  budget
shortfalls. Colleges must be capacitated to engage  with  SETAs  and  access
funds and college financial management capacity must be improved.

g) Feedback: Implementation

A long term recommendation in this  regard  is  the  management  information
system  and  the  need  to  undertake  a  functional  analysis  of   college
organograms in order to promote equity across the system. It was noted  that
there were very good recommendations from  all  Task  Teams.  However,  they
lacked the “how” part.  More clarity  was  required  in  terms  of  how  the
articulation will take place with the Department of Higher Education.



7. Summit Discussions

 It was noted that  change  management  is  a  good  idea  that  has  to  be
seriously considered in FET colleges. However, the challenge is  that  there
is no clear articulation on performance indicators for FET college staff.

It emerged that  Recognition  of  Prior  Learning  (RPL)  was  not  properly
articulated during the  discussion  sessions  and  it  was  urged  that  the
department should set clear time frames for the implementation of RPL  as  a
priority programme to accredit people with workplace experience.

It was highlighted that the  issue  of  one  employer  in  FET  colleges  is
fundamental. However, with the FET Act as the current  legislation  for  FET
colleges, the  proposed  legislation  should  be  prioritized  to  curb  the
current tensions that exist in FET colleges.

It was emphasized that the current funding norms for  FET  colleges  do  not
set the balance between growth and quality, and as a  result,  FET  colleges
do not meet their targets.

It was noted with concern that the FET Act has no articulate definition  for
college campuses and as a result, satellite campuses  are  less  prioritized
and resourced.

In terms of implementation of the Summit outcomes, the department  indicated
that it might receive the constitutional amendment from  the  Department  of
Justice in a period of six  months  which  will  assist  the  department  to
progress swiftly with the transfer of colleges from provinces  to  national.
College Councils remain the employer of FET college staff as  stipulated  in
the legislation until such amendment has been made.

College Councils  are  not  bargaining  forums  for  FET  colleges  and  the
Education and Labour Relations Council (ELRC) is a  bargaining  council  for
the FET sector and all tensions in colleges are referred to the Council  for
consideration. It is against the law that Council members present  political
interests in Council forums rather than capacity building to the college.

There was a general consensus that inadequate student support services  have
affected the throughput rate of  FET  colleges.  Work  placement  tools  for
graduates’ remain a challenge for most FET colleges.

The  lack  of  a  clear  plan  on  teacher  development  for  FET  lecturers
contributes to the poor pass rate in colleges and the  fact  that  there  is
less representivity of college lecturers in the Summit is a concern.

It was noted that there will be a national career guidance call centre  that
will be aimed at reaching learners from  remote  rural  areas  and  it  will
offer career advice for needy learners.

The N courses are critical for an occupational pathway  and  the  department
will update them with a view to provide different purposes.

Teaching  and  learning  should  work  together  and  there  is  a  need  to
understand that lecturers come from different backgrounds  hence  they  have
various weaknesses. There is a need to understand student’s  background  and
complexities before making any comparisons.

There was proposal to move away from  school  type  exams  to  lecture  form
exams with a view to professionalise college lecturers.

In terms of lecturer  development  colleges,  28%  of  lecturers  have  real
workplace experience and 72% don’t have any. In  a  recent  survey,  45%  of
college lecturers indicated that they do not require workplace training.

FET colleges should enroll learners according to the  resources  they  have.
The  main  challenge  is  that  most  colleges   enroll   learners   without
considering the financial capacity and resources to meet their demands.

SETAs should not be viewed as money making schemes and they serve as a  very
important link between the employer  and  new  entrants  in  the  workplace.
There was a proposal that SETAs should form part of the Task Team that  will
be visiting all colleges to present the outcomes of the Summit.



8. Minister’s Closing Remarks

In his closing remarks Dr B  Nzimande:  Minister  of  Higher  Education  and
Training highlighted the following key issues:

    • There is a need to convene an urgent meeting of the  College  Councils
      to come up with  clear  proposals  of  differentiation  with  a  clear
      timeframe and a framework for RPL.

    • Articulation of the post school education challenges is very important
      to determine the future of this sector. By doing  so,  the  department
      will not be lowering standards; rather it will increase to Post School
      Education.

    • Artisan training should be priority  training  in  all  FET  colleges.
      There is a need to consider provincial summits to bring all  employers
      and industry players into one forum.

    • Universities have a very important role in training and development of
      lecturers’  even  industries.  There  should  be  innovative   methods
      formulated for lecturer development.

    • The expectations of the FET sector and the review of the N courses are
      at the centre of the agenda of  the  department  as  it  expands.  The
      National Skills Fund (NSF) and SETAs will play a very  important  role
      in the expansion of FET colleges progress.

    • There is a need for a very strong partnership between  private  sector
      and the FET sector.

    • College principals should  implement  the  Summit  outcomes  at  their
      colleges.

    • Fight against corruption at FET colleges should be prioritized as  the
      sector expands to meet its mandate and objectives.



9. Conclusion

The Summit featured some of the  most  distinguished  and  respectable  role
players of the FET, HE  and  business  sector  who  each  provided  valuable
insight into the  discussions  during  the  break  away  groups  and  Summit
proceedings.  The  most  recurring  and  strongest   theme   was   that   of
differentiation in FET colleges. Below are some of the critical  key  points
that surfaced during the Summit proceedings:

    • The role of provinces must be unpacked further if colleges are to be a
      national competence.

    • The issue of RPL needs to be seriously addressed and clear  timeframes
      for its implementation should be articulated.

    • The student fee proportion for programmes needs to be lowered as  poor
      students cannot afford the current 20% required.

    • There was general consensus that there should be one employer  in  the
      FET sector.

    • There is a need for a more detailed analysis of the future  of  the  N
      programmes and the NCV must be reviewed.

    • Lecturer development needs to be directly addressed and  the  lecturer
      qualifications policy needs to be finalized.

    • Concern was raised about the availability of budget  for  colleges  to
      perform in terms of the required mandate. The  NSF  and  SETAs  should
      assist colleges to access funds.

    • Concern was also raised regarding the delay  in  proposed  legislation
      aimed to curb current tensions in colleges.

Report to be considered.



2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Higher  Education  and  Training  on
   the Public Hearings on Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill [B24 – 2010],
   Skills  Development  Levies  Amendment  Bill  [B25  –  2010]  and  Higher
   Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B26 - 2010] dated 17 November
   2010

The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training,  having  conducted
public hearings on the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill  [B24  –  2010],
Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill [B25 – 2010] and  Higher  Education
and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B26 – 2010] reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and  Training  conducted  public
hearings on the afore-mentioned  three  pieces  of  legislation  on  the  31
August 2010. The  purpose  of  the  hearings  was  mainly  to  consider  the
submissions received from the members of  the  public  regarding  the  three
pieces of legislation.

1.1 The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education & Training

Mr M Fransman Chairperson (ANC), Ms N Gina (ANC),  Ms M Kubayi (ANC),  Ms  N
Magazi, Ms W Nelson (ANC), Mr S Radebe (ANC), Dr W James (DA), Ms  N  Vukuza
(COPE) and Mr K Dikobo (AZAPO).

Apologies: Mr G Lekgetho (ANC) and Ms F Mushwana (ANC).

1.2   The Department of Higher Education and Training
Adv E Boshoff: Chief Director, Ms M Erasmus: Senior Legal Admin Officer,  Mr
Z Hlongwane: Director and Ms N Nqaba: Parliamentary Liaison Officer.

1.3   Other Guests
Prof  V  Mazwi-Tanga:  Vice-Chancellor,   Cape   Peninsula   University   of
Technology, Dr H Amoore: Registrar, University of Cape Town, Dr S  Mabizela:
Chairperson, Umalusi, Dr M Rakometsi, Chief Executive Officer,  Umalusi,  Mr
M Kerruish: Director, Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages, Dr  F
Coughlan:  Director,  Independent  Institute  of  Learning,  Mr  H  Bennett:
Consultant, Advetch, Mr T Fletcher: Attorney, Cliffe Dekker  Hofmeyr,  Ms  S
Hammond: Consulting Editor, Skills Portal, Mr A Small:  State  Law  Adviser,
Department of Justice and  Constitutional  Development,  Mr  Archie  Mokone:
Chairperson, Adult Learning Network, Mr  S  Mbara:  Student,  University  of
Cape Town, Ms T Mdala: Administrative Secretary, National Youth  Development
Agency.

2.    Summary of submissions

2.1   Council for Quality Assurance in General  and  Further  Education  and
Training (Umalusi)

Dr S Mabizela: Chairperson gave introductory remarks while Dr  M  Rakometsi:
Chief Executive  Officer  led  the  entire  presentation.  The  presentation
highlighted the following key issues:
    • Umalusi representatives were concerned about the  definition  of  the
      term “further education and training” which does not reflect the  new
      and emerging understanding of the FET sector.  They proposed that the
      definitions be linked to the purpose of basic education schooling and
      adult vocational education  and  training  in  respect  of  the  post
      compulsory schooling stream.
    • Umalusi welcomed  the  provision  made  in  both  Acts  for  national
      policies and the clarification of the responsibilities of the Council
      of Education Ministers  (CEM)  and  Heads  of  Education  Departments
      Committee (HEDCOM) in respect  of  adult  learning  centres  and  FET
      colleges. However, it  advised  that  policies  which  are  currently
      envisaged as discrete and separate should be conceived on  the  basis
      of an integrated single AVET system  for  post  compulsory  schooling
      candidates and provincial competencies could be spelled out in such a
      policy.
    • Umalusi commented on the amendments to the FET Colleges Act No 16  of
      2006 section 41 C  (f),  which  refers  to  achieving  an  integrated
      approach  to  “adult”  education  and  training  within  a   national
      qualifications  framework.  It  was  proposed  that  it  should  read
      “further” education and training.
    • Umalusi would like the same provision to be made to the sub-framework
      of qualifications for general and further education and training  (as
      has been for the Quality Council for Trades and Occupation).
    • The amended act  does  not  define  the  term  programme  and  it  is
      therefore not clear what the Minister will set  norms  and  standards
      for given Umalusi’s mandate. Secondly there is no  sub-framework  for
      FET on the NQF.
    • Umalusi welcomed the  effort  at  creating  coherence  in  the  adult
      education and FET systems through  linking  of  adult  education  and
      vocational education in the amended Adult Basic Education Act  52  of
      2000.
    • Umalusi further proposed for the establishment  of  a  committee  for
      monitoring of academic standards and quality promotion.

2.2   Adult Learning Network (ALN)

Mr Archie Mokone: Chairperson led the  presentation  which  highlighted  the
following:
    • The presenter indicated that the definition  of  Adult  Education  and
      Training is incorrect. It is therefore suggested that an amendment  be
      effected to the definition of AET and it should read, ‘adult education
      and training means all learning programmes for adults on level 1  –  4
      registered on the NQF as contemplated in the NQF Act No 67 of 2009’.
    • ALN requested more clarity and certainty to be provided  in  the  Bill
      around centres and that the Bill must reflect an appropriate term. ALN
      supported the rest of the amendments reflected in the HETLA Bill.

2.3   University of Cape Town (UCT)

Mr S Mbara: Student in Public Policy  Administration  led  the  presentation
which highlighted the following key issues:
    • The presenter made specific comments on Section 1 of the  Adult  Basic
      Education and Training Act 52  of  2000.  The  presenter  opposed  the
      substitution of ABET for AET and indicated that it  allowed  room  for
      ambiguity in terms of education levels, function-ability and  efficacy
      of the use  of  the  term.  He  mentioned  that  it  was  unnecessary,
      irrelevant and confusing to change the definition.
    • On Chapter 4A – Section 25G, the presenter  was  concerned  that  this
      section did not provide any powers to political heads of education  to
      monitor, develop, employ and fire employees. The main thrust  of  this
      submission was based on the fact that  political  heads  of  education
      should participate in employment or selection of educators.

2.4   Independent Institute of Education (IIE)

Mr  H  Bennett:  Consultant  led  the  presentation  which  highlighted  the
following key issues:
    • This submission was mainly concerned with Section 2 and 3 of the  HELA
      Bill and the consequences of the  proposed  amendments  for  education
      generally  and  for  private  higher   education   service   providers
      specifically.
    • The submission was also concerned with the term “offered” which  needs
      to be defined since the Act did not provide significant definition  to
      the term and this might add additional uncertainty.
    • It further alluded that the amendments to the Act may have the  effect
      of isolating the country’s higher education from the rest of the world
      and this might discourage the presence of some high quality  providers
      that could assist in meeting the national agenda.
    • The Bill cannot be promoted in  its  current  form  if  there  is  any
      likelihood that its effect would be either to  deprive  or  discourage
      students from  access  to  a  range  of  education  opportunities  and
      relationships just on the grounds of their being international.
    • The proposed section 65 (d) to the Higher Education Act introduced  by
      Section 3 of the Bill repeats  the  provision  of  section  51(2)  but
      extends the prohibition on offering unregistered qualifications to all
      persons. The reality is that part of qualifications  cannot  currently
      be  registered  on  the  NQF  so  even  if  reasonable,  this  is  not
      enforceable.
    • The further statement that no certificate or diploma (or  degree)  can
      be offered by a private higher  education  institution  unless  it  is
      registered on the HE sub framework of the NQF could be  read  to  mean
      that ALL certificates or diplomas are higher education  qualifications
      and this is currently not the law.

3.    Discussions and Responses

It emerged that Umalusi would like a special  dedicated  Matric  for  adults
that would be distinct to the currently Matric for learners.  This  kind  of
Matric would be flexible and it will be  based  on  the  model  of  distance
learning where adults would not be  required  to  attend  classes  and  will
write exams at suitable times. The committee  was  interested  in  this  new
idea and wanted an explanation as to where would this kind of Matric fit  in
the current further education and training system.
Umalusi indicated that the Matric for adults  would  fit  well  in  the  FET
college system and this  would  assist  in  the  improvement  of  the  adult
education system.
The committee was of the opinion that education is meant  for  a  particular
function and adults should go through a special discipline  such  that  they
should attend classes and sit for exams.
The committee was informed that the  needs  of  fundamental  adult  learners
varied  differently  from  an  ordinary  learner   and   therefore   it   is
fundamentally important to look at adult learners differently.  Adults  have
vast responsibilities and hence  Umalusi  is  proposing  this  new  form  of
Matric for adults that will assist them in balancing their priorities.
Umalusi further proposed the creation of a seamless adult education that  is
not tied to different levels of the NQF.
It emerged that the ALN supported most of the amendments in the HETLA  Bill.
However, the main concern with this Bill was with the term  ‘adult  centres’
as it did not give recognition to the youth who  also  form  part  of  adult
education as well as the definition of an educator.  It  was  proposed  that
community education learning centres  should  be  the  new  name  for  adult
education and training centres to accommodate young people that are part  of
the system.
The committee commended the good work that is  done  by  ALN  in  the  adult
education field. It was noted that the ALN should not  be  too  prescriptive
with  the  definition  of  an  educator  since  this   would   have   severe
implications on the employability of educators.
The committee was deeply concerned  that  there  were  no  clear  norms  and
standards for adult education educators and that their basic  conditions  of
employment were still poor.
It was noted that an educator is a specialized professional  person  and  in
the past there were universities which offered special  training  for  adult
education educators, and these  programmes  can  be  redeveloped  for  those
interested in the field.
The committee commended the presentation by the student  from  UCT.  It  was
explained  that  political  heads  cannot  be  part  of  administration   of
educators and there is a clear  distinction  between  the  roles  played  by
Ministers and administrators.
The IIE was of the opinion  that  foreign  providers  should  be  accredited
swiftly in the NQF without prolonging the process  due  to  their  standards
and recognition.
The committee highlighted the  fact  that  the  Bill  aims  to  ensure  that
foreign providers register in the NQF as  stipulated  in  the  NQF  Act  and
perhaps the accreditation period should be reviewed. The other aim  of  this
Bill is to protect the public from unscrupulous  providers  who  are  making
wealth at the expense of ordinary citizens.
The IIE proposed that there should be discussion with the private  education
providers sector in addressing the challenge of unscrupulous  providers  and
at the moment there is  no  such  conversation.  The  department  should  in
future consult  the  sector  when  initiating  policy  changes  unlike  what
happened with this Bill.
The IIE proposed that that accreditation process for  foreign  providers  in
the NQF be sped up as the current process was insufficient and could have  a
pessimistic factor on the contribution of foreign providers to the  national
agenda.
It was noted that private providers contribute positively to  the  education
and training sector since the public sector is overwhelmed with  demand  for
learning.
The representatives from HESA concerned with the  proposed  speeding  up  of
the accreditation process as proposed by the  IIE  and  indicated  that  all
institutions are subject to the NQF Act and should follow the same routine.

4.    Conclusion
The public participation process allowed the  committee  an  opportunity  to
engage with various stakeholders  in  the  education  and  training  sector.
Although the amendments to the three pieces of  legislation  were  perceived
to be technical,  it  was  clear  through  the  engagements  with  different
stakeholders that there were critical underlying  policy  issues  that  were
brought by these amendments to  the  original  Acts.  There  was  a  general
consensus from different stakeholders that the  definition  of  an  educator
was  vague.  Another  critical  issue  which  emerged   strongly   was   the
complicated  registration  requirements  in  the  NQF.  The  rest   of   the
submissions welcomed the amendments brought  forward  by  these  amendments.
The committee acknowledged the inputs from all stakeholders and promised  to
engage thoroughly during the next deliberation phases.

CREDA INSERT - T101118e-insert3 – PAGES 4091 - 4101

CREDA INSERT - T101118e-insert4 – PAGES 4102 - 4113


