---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 15 April 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-04-15
---

THURSDAY, 15 APRIL 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson (Mr T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr O DE BEER: Madam Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council-

   (1)      notes that Cope is appalled to hear of the school rampage that
        occurred at Naphakade Secondary School in Malmesbury this past
        Tuesday, where scores of learners protested because of overcrowding
        at the institution;


    (2)     recognises that this violence is a long overdue consequence of
        the department’s failure to honour a promise of a new school
        several years ago;


    (3)     further notes that the sharing of the same premises by the
        primary and secondary schools is simply unacceptable;


    (4)     acknowledges that the children of South Africa have the right to
        a safe educational environment; and


    (5)     believes that the MEC should take full responsibility for this
        occurrence and should deal with it swiftly and appropriately.

                   BEHAVIOUR OF STRIKING MUNICIPAL WORKERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R LEES: Madam Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

    (1)     notes with concern the unacceptable and illegal behaviour of
        striking municipal workers over the past 3 days;


    (2)     further notes the negative impact such irresponsible action has
        and will have, on the image of South Africa as a place to visit for
        the 2010 Fifa World Cup and the resultant impact upon opportunities
        for South Africans of all communities to benefit from this once-in-
        a-lifetime opportunity;

    (3)     therefore calls upon the organisers of the strike to take action
        to ensure that striking municipal employees immediately cease the
        destructive trashing of towns and cities throughout South Africa
        and terminate the strike; and


    (4)     urges the police to increase their presence at meetings and
        marches of striking municipal employees and take immediate action
        against any persons who break the law, particularly those who trash
        the streets with garbage which millions of responsible citizens
        have collected, ready for removal and disposal in an
        environmentally friendly manner.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Do you have an
objection? I have just called your name, hon Tau. Are you objecting?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I thought the Chair would note the
objection.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, I am noting it.
In light of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will now become a notice of motion.

     CONGRATULATIONS TO DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS FOR ORGANISING BIRTH
                     CERTIFICATE FOR FIANCÉ OF DR MASUKU

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chair, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council congratulates the Department of Home Affairs after the
   hon Deputy Minister, Mr M Gigaba, was contacted when the fiancé of Dr
   Masuku at Itshelejuba Hospital in KwaZulu-Natal could not get a birth
   certificate after five applications, when the matter was brought to his
   attention during the last oral question day in the House and today Dr
   Masuku’s fiancé has a birth certificate and has already also applied for
   an identity document.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   AMENDMENT OF COUNCIL DECISION TO ADOPT REPORT IN RESPECT OF REGULATIONS
  MADE IN TERMS OF SECTION 97 (1) OF CHILD JUSTICE ACT, OF 2008 TO INCLUDE
                                 DIRECTIVES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S S MAZOSIWE (on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Council): Deputy Chair,
on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Council, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1) notes that on 25 March 2010, the Council adopted a report of the
         Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development in
         respect of regulations made in terms of section 97(1) of the Child
         Justice Act of 2008; and


    (2)     therefore, resolves that the decision of the Council be amended
         to include the directives made in terms of section 97(4) of the
         Child Justice Act, (Act 75 of 2008, as reported by the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Development.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Before we proceed with
the Orders of the Day, I would like to remind members that there is only
one speakers’ list for the two Orders, as agreed by parties in the
programming committee meeting.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs:

Vote No 15 – Health:

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon Chairperson, my colleague, the Minister of Home
Affairs, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma; Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, Mr
Malusi Gigaba; MECs for health from various provinces - I can see they are
all here, except Limpopo and Western Cape, who have representatives - hon
members; distinguished guests, and ladies and gentlemen, I am honoured to
present to this esteemed House the national Department of Health’s policy
priorities and budget for 2010-11 for your consideration.

Throughout this week, Parliament has been paying tribute to a gallant son
of the soil, who was also a member of the National Assembly, hon Dr Molefi
Sefularo, the Deputy Minister of Health, who passed away on 5 April 2010.
I had personally known him for over 30 years, as a comrade in the struggle
for the emancipation of the people of South Africa as well as a colleague,
friend and a fellow student and, subsequently, a medical practitioner.

He was a highly talented, gifted and astute person, who was always humble
and easy to work with. It is fitting that so many ceremonies were held in
his honour including the one by the ANC on Tuesday and the NA yesterday.
May his soul rest in peace!

This year marks the second year of the implementation of our 10-point
programme for transforming the health sector into a well-functioning health
system capable of producing improved health outcomes.

I just want to refresh your memories by mentioning what our 10-point
programme for consists of: First, we must provide strategic leadership and
create a social compact for better health outcomes and we think we have
successfully been doing so over the past year; second, we must also
implement the National Health Insurance; third, improve the quality of
health services; fourth, overhaul the health care system and improve its
management; fifth, improve planning, development and management of human
resources; sixth, revitalise the infrastructure; seventh, accelerate the
implementation of the HIV and Aids strategic plan 2007-11 including the
focus on TB - I will come to this point later in detail; eighth, we need
mass mobilisation for better health for the population; ninth, we need to
review the drug policy; and tenth, we need to strengthen research and
development.

Since our last budget speech, which we delivered in this very House on 30
June 2009, a solid foundation has been laid for the attainment of these
goals.

Our 10-point programme has been endorsed by a wide range of stakeholders in
the health sector, including trade unions, medical associations, nursing
organisations, most of the private health sector and indeed even the NGOs
and civil society. Our 10-point programme received a boost when it got
support from the Public Service Summit, which was held between 10 and 12
March 2010.

Having successfully popularised our 10-point programme, I wish to draw this
Council’s attention to the outcome-based approach for improving service
delivery, which was announced by the President in his state of the nation
address earlier this year.

I wish to inform this Council that the health situation in the country that
requires our collective and sustained attention is as follows: Firstly, the
life expectancy in South Africa has declined; secondly, we have an
unreasonably high maternal and infant mortality rate; thirdly, we are
carrying a very big load of HIV/Aids and TB infections and, fourthly, South
Africa has a predominantly curative health care system that places less
emphasis on disease prevention and health promotion.

Since our first democratic elections in 1994, the Department of Health
adopted primary health care as the foundation of our health care delivery
system. Unfortunately, over the past 10 years, we inadvertently have been
shifting emphasis from primary health care to a largely curative health
care system.

A prominent health expert, who has contributed significantly to the
strengthening of the National Health Service in the United Kingdom,
recently remarked to me that it is ironic that South Africa has a larger
private health care sector than the UK, which is much richer than theirs,
where they are using the public health system more than we are doing. One
of the things that we are going to be doing is to make sure that we refocus
on primary health care as we had agreed in 1994.

The Cabinet agreed in January 2010 on a set of concrete outcomes that must
emerge from our interventions to transform the health sector over the next
four years. These can be classified into four broad categories: Firstly, we
need to increase the life expectancy of our people; secondly, we need to
combat HIV and Aids; thirdly, we have to decrease the burden of diseases
from tuberculosis; and fourthly, improve the health system’s effectiveness,
by strengthening primary health care and reducing the costs of health care,
which are ever escalating in our country.

Based on these four broad categories, the health sector needs to, during
the period 2010 to 2014, produce the following outcomes: increase life
expectancy, as I’ve already mentioned; reduce child mortality; decrease
maternal mortality; deal with HIV and Aids; expand the prevention of mother-
to-child transmission; improve the TB case load; improve TB outcomes; make
sure that people who are TB and HIV coinfected are treated as a priority;
revitalise primary health care; improve physical infrastructure; improve
patient care; have accredited health facilities; improve operational
management; improve health care financing by establishing the National
Health Insurance, and expand home-based care and community health workers.
These are the 20 outcomes which, together with our 10-point programme, we
need to be implementing over the next years.

The key priorities for the health sector for 2010-11 and 2012-13 will
strengthen our ability to meet the health-related Millennium Development
Goals.

Our maternal mortality ratio must decrease from an estimated 400 to 625 per
100 000 births to about 100 or less. We also need to make sure that our
infant mortality rate is reduced from 69 per 1000 live births to about 30
to 45 deaths per 1000 live births.

The health sector will continue to ensure that children younger than one
year of age are fully vaccinated against pneumococcal infection and
rotavirus.

International evidence has shown this to be an effective intervention in
ensuring child survival, together with other key strategies, which we are
going to adopt. We shall accelerate child survival strategies at the
primary health care level, including the fight against HIV and Aids among
children and also by introducing school health programmes.

We need to prepare to deal with the H1N1 influenza virus as we are entering
the winter season because it gave us a lot of problems last year. Unlike
last year, I’m happy to announce that this year we do have a vaccine.

Following the advice from the World Health Organisation and our own experts
within the country, starting from 5 April and ending on 30 April 2010, we
will be vaccinating the following priority groups: firstly, 80 000 children
under the age of 15 years, who are HIV positive. We have already started
and vaccinated 5 000 on the very first day we started; secondly, 10 000
officials at our ports of entry; thirdly, 700 000 pregnant women; fourthly,
1 million adults with HIV and Aids who are on antiretrovirals at our
clinics and, lastly, 900 000 people with chronic heart and lung diseases.
These are the people that are going to be vaccinated. [Applause.]
I officially launched the national Measles and Polio Vaccination Campaign
at Benoni West Primary School three days ago, on Monday, 12 April 2010.
This campaign will end on 28 May 2010. Our target is to vaccinate 15
million children between the ages of 6 months and 15 years against measles,
and 5 million children under the age 5 years against polio. By the end of
the first day, we had already vaccinated 290 461 children against measles
and 161 598 children against polio.

Hon members are requested to assist the Department of Health by speaking to
our constituencies about the importance of immunisation against these
diseases. We have to eliminate measles and polio - this means having a
fully immunised community now and in the future.

In keeping with the targets in our outcomes-based approach, we must
increase the TB cure rate from 64% to 85% by the 2014-15 financial year. We
are implementing our key strategy to strengthen TB control with the Desmond
Tutu TB Centre as our development partner and we have launched the “Kick
TB” campaign, which is based on the 2010 Fifa World Cup, to focus on
children. We are targeting 250 000 schoolchildren in that regard, 10 000 of
whom have already been provided with soccer balls engraved with TB
messages.

As announced by President Zuma on World Aids Day in December 2009, we
started 15 days ago, on 1 April 2010, to provide antiretroviral treatment
to pregnant women when their CD4 count is 350 or less, rather than the
initial 200. We are also doing so with TB and HIV coinfected people. We
have also started treatment to stop mother-to-child transmission when
pregnant women are 15 weeks pregnant instead of the initial 28 weeks. We
are also treating our children who are under one year of age as long as
they are positive, regardless of their CD4 count.

By the end of March 2010, only 496 public health facilities were accredited
and providing antiretrovirals. I am happy to announce that we had added 519
more centres by 1 April, meaning that we now have 1000 health facilities
that are able and initiating treatment. By March next year, we must have
reached all 4 300 health facilities.

Even with this success, we are not pretending that we are not going through
teething problems in the implementation of these strategies, such as our
low human resource base and the problems of logistical supply in some of
the health centres. However, we wish to emphasise that these problems are
not insurmountable.

As I mentioned earlier, South Africa is paying for very expensive ARVs,
unlike other countries. We have made a decision that, with the next tender,
we are going to buy the cheapest ARVs. Whether we buy in or outside the
country, we are going to have to do that; we have no option as a country.
Carrying these loads of diseases and being the biggest consumer in the
world means that we must get the lowest possible price.

After the President’s speech on World Aids Day, many people, especially the
media, put a lot of emphasis on only one aspect of his speech - the issue
of treatment. The most important things which he also mentioned, issues of
treatment and prevention, were not picked up. I want to tell this Council
that, while we are treating people who are infected and helping those who
are affected, the mainstay of this battle is still prevention, prevention,
prevention.

The Cabinet agreed on 10 March that we needed to launch the biggest ever
HIV counselling and testing campaign. The Cabinet agreed that we must
launch the campaign on 15 April 2010, which is today. But we postponed it
because the President and the Deputy President are out of the country, and
they insisted that we can only launch this campaign in their presence and
they are going to lead it. So, we will inform you in due course about the
date, which has been set.

This ambitious campaign seeks to mobilise South Africans to fight against
HIV and Aids and we believe that by June next year, we would have tested no
fewer than 15 million South Africans.

When we call on people to get tested for HIV and get counselling, we are
also mindful of the report we received from prestigious medical journal. It
commissioned researchers in our own country who came up with the finding
that the country is going through a quadruple burden of diseases, meaning
that we are facing four pandemics, the most well-known ones being HIV/Aids
and TB. But we are also going through a pandemic of a high maternal and
child mortality rate and of noncommunicable diseases like high blood
pressure, diabetes, cardiac disease and, finally injury and violence.

Because of this, we have taken a decision that when people arrive at the
testing stations, we will not only test for HIV/Aids. We will also test for
their blood pressure to see if they’ve got hypertension; blood sugar to see
if they’ve got diabetes; and haemoglobin to see if they’ve got anaemia.
They will also go for oral screening for TB, because 1% of South Africa’s
population is suffering from TB. These are the tests that you’ll receive
when arriving at the testing station.

We are calling upon leaders in all sectors to lead this campaign. The
President and the Deputy President have agreed to lead nationally. Premiers
have agreed to lead together with Ministers who’ll be present in respective
provinces. Principals of our universities will be the first ones to test
when their universities start conducting the campaign. Chief executive
officers of our hospitals have agreed that in their respective hospitals
they’ll be the first to get tested. Ministers of religion have agreed that
in their churches they’ll be the first to get tested.

In the villages, we believe traditional leaders must be the first to be
tested when the time comes. We are calling upon members of this Council,
the NCOP, the hon Chairperson and leaders of various political parties to,
as will happen in the NA, also be the first to be tested. We believe ward
councillors will be the first to be tested in their wards. Every South
African must take leadership.

We are also launching a number of interventions, including the massive
distribution of condoms, both male and female, much more than we have ever
done before. We are happy to announce that His Majesty, King Zwelithini,
has launched a massive campaign for circumcision on Saturday whereby the
Department of Health in KwaZulu-Natal, together with the King, is targeting
2,5 million circumcisions in the next five years. Our next target is
Mpumalanga province where we want a similar thing to happen. By next year,
all the other provinces should be doing a similar thing. The MEC for
Mpumalanga will know why I’m targeting Mpumalanga, especially the Gert
Sibande region, where we would like to do a massive campaign for
circumcision.

One of the huge outcomes that must be achieved in the health sector
delivery is the issue of revitalising infrastructure, improving quality of
care, overhauling the health care system and reducing the ever escalating
cost of health care.

To this end you are aware that the Minister of Finance has already
announced the building of five mega hospitals from scratch: the Nelson
Mandela Academic Hospital in the Eastern Cape; Dr George Mukhari in Ga-
Rankuwa, North West; Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital in Gauteng; King
Edward VIII Hospital in KwaZulu-Natal and Polokwane Academic Hospital in
Limpopo.

In terms of the quality of care, we will make sure that the safety of our
patients, infection control, availability of medicine, cleanliness of our
health facilities, waiting times and positive and caring attitudes are
implemented.

Globally, people are searching to reduce the cost of health care delivery
while improving access and quality. The establishment of a National Health
Insurance, NHI, system will go a long way in ensuring this.

With the NHI, we will ensure universal access to good quality and
affordable health services for all South Africans. Our major objective of
pursuing an NHI is to put in place the necessary funding and health service
delivery mechanisms. This will enable the creation of an efficient,
equitable and sustainable health system for all South Africans. With the
ever-widening gap between the rich and the poor in South Africa, a gap
regarded as being one of the biggest in the world, we believe South Africa
needs such a system.

With regard to allocations to provincial departments of health for the 2010-
11 financial year, I wish to report that the overall budget for the
provinces has increased by R10 billion, from R86,6 billion in 2009-10 to
R98,6 billion.

I am concluding this by thanking everybody who has worked with us,
including our provincial MECs and the hon Chairperson of the Select
Committee on Social Services, Comrade Nomonde Rasmeni. I’m requesting this
House to approve the budget of the Department of Health for 2010-11 and
2012-13. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, my hon brother, Minister Aaron
Motsoaledi, MECs, hon members of the NCOP, Chairperson of the Select
Committee on Social Services, distinguished guests, I take this opportunity
to thank the Chairperson of the Select Committee, hon R N Rasmeni and the
hon members of the select committee for their support and oversight. I
would also like to extend my appreciation to the hon Deputy Minister,
Malusi Gigaba, as well as the director-general and his team of hardworking
senior officials – especially those who are honest – for their dedication
and commitment.

We would also like to join the rest of the country in expressing our
heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of our late Deputy Minister
of Health, Dr Molefi Sefularo. He has joined the rest of our heroes,
heroines and forebears who liberated this country - heroes like Chris Hani,
Oliver Tambo, Solomon Mahlangu and many others who made sure that we are
here today, after liberating us from the oppression that started in this
very month in 1652, and ended in this very month in 1994.

Everyone will recall that, last year, standing on this podium, we announced
that we would embark on a birth registration and identity document, ID,
campaign. I’m happy to report that, led by His Excellency President Jacob
Zuma, we indeed launched the campaign in Libode in the O R Tambo District
Municipality in the Eastern Cape, on 23 March. The launch of this massive
national campaign was preceded by two pilot projects in the Sisonke
District Municipality in KwaZulu-Natal and the O R Tambo District
Municipality in the Eastern Cape.

The reason for the pilot was to make sure that, when we started the
campaign, all the building blocks were there and we would have learned some
lessons. Some of these building blocks are the launching of a number of
stakeholder forums at local level and in all provinces. To date, we have
established 10 district municipality stakeholder forums and 67 local
municipality stakeholder forums, and we will be completing the
establishment of these forums in the rest of the country during the course
of the year.

The reason for establishing these forums is to make sure that people in all
the provinces participate directly in the processes of service delivery at
Home Affairs, in a manner that will empower them to monitor performance,
combat corruption and provide support to the department, as well as assist
members of their communities who may be experiencing problems in accessing
the services.

The campaign’s key objective is to secure and protect the National
Population Register, NPR, and make sure that it is accurate. The outcomes
of this campaign should be the birth registration of every child within 30
days of delivery; the issuing of identity documents to every South African
16 years and above; and the eradication of late registration of birth by
December 2010. Late registration of birth refers to everyone who is over 30
days old, but, more importantly, those who are over 15 years of age, trying
to get an ID, but not having birth certificates. They have to start with
the process of late registration.

I’m happy to say that, in order to clear the backlog of late registration
of birth, we have established 176 screening committees countrywide, and
these committees have processed 354 840 people since the campaign started.
I would like to say that the trends show that the provinces that have a
bigger backlog on late registration are KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape and
Mpumalanga. The majority of those are people between the ages of 15 and 30,
and women. These provinces should take note and make sure that they join us
in this campaign to eradicate this problem.

The difficulty is that if women are not registered and they have children,
they can’t register those children. This means that those children are not
able to access the grants or any of the social services that the country
provides. As a result, we can’t take them out of poverty. Therefore, this
campaign is also trying to assist in the eradication of poverty.

I’m also happy to say that we registered 1 147 000 children last year, and
that, since the launch of this campaign, we have also issued IDs to 834 453
first-time applicants. This is 200 000 more people than the previous year.
The department is also implementing an urgent review of legislation
impacting on registration, births, deaths and marriages.

I would also like to say to the members here, particularly because they are
from the provinces, that Home Affairs considers the ID important for life
in general and not only for elections. I am asking them to join us in the
campaign now, because there’ll be no special campaign during election time
from now on, not even for the 2011 local government elections. This means
that the ID campaign is now and not then. So, please join us.

As everyone is aware, we, as a country, are about to host the most
spectacular world event, the 2010 Fifa World Cup. As Home Affairs we are
ready to welcome the world to our beautiful shores in the spirit of ubuntu
and love. We are proud to report that, in preparation for this event, and
in line with the Fifa guarantees, we are introducing, for the first time
ever, an events visa. This means that anyone who has a ticket for the World
Cup will get a visa free of charge at our missions abroad.

We’re also introducing what we call an Advanced Passenger Processing
system. We have trained airline liaison officers who will be based abroad,
who will process the passengers at the points of departure, before they
even board the planes, so that we try and eliminate those who may be
hooligans, or other people who are involved in any offences, who would not
be welcome. We are going to deploy these airline liaison officers in May
this year.

At our airports, particularly the major international airports, there will
be dedicated lanes to speed up the processing of Fifa World Cup visitors.

At the land ports of entry - Lebombo, Ficksburg, Maseru Bridge, Oshoek,
Beitbridge and Kopfontein - there will be one-stop border posts for the
purposes of the 2010 World Cup, so a person won’t have to go through two
border posts; we’ll all be colocated with the neighbouring countries and a
person will go through one stop only. These are some of the preparations
that are in place. We have established a 24-hour operation centre which
will look at all the incidents and collate information.

I’m happy to say that, in partnership with the SA Revenue Service and other
relevant departments, we are going to roll out a movement control system
that will enable us to both secure and facilitate movement of people at our
ports of entry. That system is already in place at O R Tambo International
Airport and will be rolled out at the other 33 ports which we have
designated as priority points before the 2010 World Cup, and the rest after
the World Cup.

Concerning the department and its challenges, one of the challenges that we
are facing is, of course, corruption. As a department we have started to
build on what is there and we are enhancing our anticorruption unit. From
now on that unit will be headed by a deputy director-general, DDG, and
we’ll be appointing specialists in this area. In addition to the unit we
are also improving our systems to make sure that it’s not easy to engage in
illegal activities.

We have introduced what we call biometric access control. Instead of just
using one’s user number, one must also use one’s fingerprint so that we
know exactly who dealt with what, in order to be able to follow the trail
if we find some signs of corruption.

We’re also happy that, having taken these measures during this campaign and
also having conscientised the people in the provinces about corruption, we
have, in the O R Tambo District in the Eastern Cape, already arrested two
women and a nurse who colluded in the production of fraudulent clinic
cards. Women were paying R150 for every fraudulent clinic card, and they
were bringing the cards to us for us to produce birth certificates. The
nurse and the two other women have been arrested. So, we are beginning to
see the results of our campaign, but we would like everyone to assist us to
make sure that this campaign is successful.

Last year I stood here apologising for problems we were experiencing with
the backlog of passports, but today I’m happy to say that we have cleared
that backlog. We don’t have problems. [Applause.]

I’m also happy to announce that we have extended our track-and-trace system
to the other documents. So now, whether a person is applying for a
passport, a late registration or a marriage certificate, we are able to
track and trace the document, link it to the person, and, via SMS, inform
them about the stage at which everything is.
We had said that we were going to open 13 new offices to expand access and
our footprint. I would like to report that we indeed met and even exceeded
our target. We opened 21 new offices: one in Gauteng; one in the Northern
Cape; three in the Western Cape; three in KwaZulu-Natal; 11 in Mpumalanga;
and two in the Eastern Cape. We have also upgraded others.

We also opened one refugee centre in Musina. We have relocated the refugee
centre at Nyanga – it was creating a lot of problems for all of us and for
the refugees – to Maitland, which has a bigger and more efficient office.
The Deputy Minister will expand on some of those areas.

We are piloting an electronic queue management system in Khayelitsha. We
hope that this system will assist us to manage queues better and also to
determine how much time people spend standing in the queues, so that we can
try and improve all the time. In Khayelitsha, just by using the electronic
queue management system, we have already seen an improvement from 45
minutes to between 25 and 30 minutes.

Last year we said that to assist women to register their babies, we were
going to connect hospitals to Home Affairs, so that women are able to
register their babies whilst in hospital. We are happy to say that we now
have 142 hospitals connected. We are hoping to connect 120 more this year.
[Applause.]

I would like to give you a breakdown of this figure. Of the connected
hospitals, 24 are in the Eastern Cape, 17 in Free State, 20 in Gauteng, 29
in KZN, 19 in Limpopo, 12 in Mpumalanga, eight in the North West, five in
the Northern Cape and eight in the Western Cape. Those are the ones we have
connected and, as I have said, we will be connecting more.

I would like to thank KwaZulu-Natal in particular, because they have agreed
that they will accommodate Home Affairs offices in their one-stop
development centres that they are building across the province. We are very
happy about that, and we hope other provinces will do the same. [Applause.]


Of course, we had also committed ourselves to reviewing the immigration
policy, and I’m happy to report that we have started with consultations.
Some of you may have heard that we started consultations with Cosatu, and
we are going to be continuing with other stakeholders. Once we have
finished the consultations, we will come here for legislation.

Last year we had many vacancies for deputy directors-general, chief
directors and directors. The vast majority of these posts have been filled
and we’ll continue to finalise the others.

I would like to introduce to you our new director-general, Mr Mkuseli
Apleni, who replaces our former director-general, Mr Mavuso Msimang, and we
hope that he will receive your support. We wish the former director-
general, Mr Mavuso Msimang, all the best in his future endeavours.

I think I will leave the remaining minutes and have them added to my
response time. I request that you support our Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs R N RASMENI: Chairperson, hon Minister, Dr Dlamini-Zuma, hon Minister
Motsoaledi, Deputy Minister Gigaba, members of the NCOP, and distinguished
guests, let me first express the select committee’s condolences on the
department’s loss of Deputy Minister Sefularo.

Kusapho lwakwaSefularo, sithi akuhlanga lungehlanga. [We convey our
condolences to the Sefularo family; as we are saying, may they find solace
and comfort in these trying times.]

I am honoured, today, to focus on the broad policy perspective of the ANC
on health and home affairs, respectively.

From the Freedom Charter to the Reconstruction and Development Programme
until the present juncture, our movement has regarded health as a priority.
It remains a basic need of our people and, therefore, has enshrined it in
our Constitution. What is critical is that we ensure that the majority of
our people have access to quality health care and that should in the future
be free at point of entry. We have never regarded health as a commodity and
it should not be treated as such. Section 27(1) of the Constitution states
that:

   Everyone has the right to have access to –


     a) health care services’ including reproductive health care;
     b) sufficient food and water;
     c) and social security.

The ANC seeks to ensure the necessary funding and delivery of health
services for an efficient, equitable and sustainable health system. This is
premised on the principle of the right to health, social solidarity and
universal coverage.

The ANC is guided by the Freedom Charter’s clarion call that, “there shall
be access to health for all”. The Freedom Charter commits us all to promote
a preventive health scheme under the state, free medical care and
hospitalisation with special care for mothers and young children. As a
consequence there have been many achievements in improving access to health
since 1994.

Our historic policy documents speak to the nature and form of the national
health system that we envisaged. As this is a policy debate it is only
correct that I reflect on the evolution of our health policy since 1994. An
overview and assessment of this policy reflect the following:

   That the provision of equitable health care should be guided by the
   aspiration of our people as enshrined in the Freedom Charter and by
   principles which reflect the Primary Health Care Approach adopted by the
   World Health Organisation, and the United Nations Children’s Fund at Alma
   Ata in 1978. The primary health care approach is essentially that of
   community development. It aims to reduce inequalities in access to health
   services, promotes equitable distribution based on appropriate technology
   and integrates the many sectors of modern life such as education and
   housing. Further, it is based on full community participation.


   Access to health care is a basic human right. This right is incorporated
   in the Constitution and the Bill of Rights and will be enforced by law.

Chairperson, let me state up front that the current policy priority of the
ANC government of the introduction of the National Health Insurance system
should not be conflated with or confused with a national health system. The
first is a system of operational functioning in totality. The other is a
funding model to unlock resources into the national health system and make
health access free at the point of entry for all citizens of South Africa.

Getting back to policy evolution, and the creation of a comprehensive,
equitable and integrated health service, there will be a single
governmental structure dealing with health for the whole country. It will
co-ordinate all aspects of both public and private health care delivery. It
will be accountable to the people of South Africa through democratic
structures.

The oversight visit of the Select Committee on Social Services gave us a
first-hand impression of how health services are provided to our people.
While doing oversight work in Hlabisa Hospital in KwaNongoma, KwaZulu-
Natal, the outpatient department, OPD, was full to capacity of patients
waiting to be examined by a doctor. During our interaction with the
patients, we discovered that they slept at the OPD waiting to be examined
by a doctor, but no doctor came to see them up until 16h30 on the day we
were there. After talking to the chief executive officer, CEO, of the
hospital, I was informed that the hospital on that day had about nine
doctors on duty, but surprisingly there was no doctor allocated to the OPD
to attend to the patients. This experience directly shows a certain degree
of poor management and a dereliction of duty.

As the Select Committee on Social Services, we are convinced that the plans
to overhaul the health system and the hands-on approach of Minister
Motsoaledi will bring a huge change to these unacceptable practices.

The health service actively promotes community participation in the
planning, provision, control and monitoring of services. Fundamental to
this approach will be accountability to local communities and
decentralisation of decision-making. The responsibility of health care will
be co-ordinated between national, regional and district authorities. These
will, as far as possible, coincide with regional and local government
boundaries. Authority over, responsibility for and control over funds will
be as decentralised as is compatible with rational planning and the
maintenance of good quality care. Clinics and health care centres will be
the points of first referral for medical ailments.

Rural health services will be given priority and made accessible with
particular attention given to improving transport. The health service will
give priority to children, mothers, the elderly, the mentally ill, workers,
the unemployed, and the disabled. Appropriate services to adolescents and
to young adults will also be provided. In addition, there will be a focus
on the eradication and control of major diseases, especially Aids,
tuberculosis, measles, and others. Attention will also be given to sex
education, family planning, oral health, substance abuse, and environmental
and occupational health.

Within the health service, health workers must respect the right of their
patients to be treated as equals in all respects. Furthermore, individuals,
interest groups, and the whole communities will be able to participate in
the process of formulating and implementing a health policy.

Appropriate and efficient data collection will be an essential part of the
health system; it will allow for rational management and planning and also
relevant research to address the most important problems facing the
community. The private sector will also be required to collect and submit
both financial and clinical data in order to facilitate planning at local,
regional and national levels.

The health service will be planned and regulated to ensure that resources
are used in the best way possible to make essential health care available
to all South Africans, giving priority to the most vulnerable groups.
Health workers at all levels will promote general health and encourage
healthy lifestyles. The health service seeks to establish appropriate
mechanisms that will lead to the integration of traditional and other
complementary healers into the health service.

At all levels of government the health sector should promote intersectoral
co-operation to promote the health of communities. The health service will
play a role in co-ordination of government authorities responsible for
sanitation, water supply, fuel supply, food and agriculture, housing, and
other social services. In the event that a threat to public health is
identified, the health services will ensure that the necessary steps are
taken to remove such a threat.

In the longer term, most health care should be provided by the public
health service. The public services will be strengthened and made
accountable to the communities they serve. At the same time, we envisage
active co-operation between the two sectors, namely private and public,
with the common goal of improving the health of the nation.

The statutory bodies governing the registration of health workers and the
maintenance of standards are being restructured to protect the interests of
all South Africans. Training of all health workers should be appropriate
and community oriented. Training programmes are being implemented to
continually upgrade the skills of existing health workers. In the light of
this, the present health worker training institutions, particularly medical
schools, are being transformed.

The health service provides sensitive and supportive care to victims of
sexual violence and other forms of abuse against women. Special counselling
and support for victims of rape and incest will be provided. Women have the
right to control their own bodies. Contraceptive services will be based on
informed choice, will be free and accessible, and will protect fertility.
They are gender-sensitive and engage both men and women.

Women and female children are being provided with information to enable
them to make free and informed choices about all matters relating to their
fertility with the objective of quality health care and making services
available to all to ensure better health outcomes. This has included one of
the most comprehensive programmes in the world in the fight against HIV and
Aids, TB and other diseases. In this regard, work to accelerate the
mobilisation of available resources in both private and public health
sectors is to ensure improved health outcomes for all South Africans.

To achieve this, the ANC has focused on public-sector-led development. It
is the public-sector-led health system that can ensure access to health for
all. The majority of our people are poor and need access to quality health
in their millions. In this regard, the resources of the public health
system need to be strengthened in the areas of personnel so as to deal
effectively with disease control associated with HIV and Aids,
tuberculosis, high infant mortality, and low life expectancy.

Towards the end of 2008, the ANC concluded a draft 10-point strategy for
the revitalisation of health services. I have to go to Home Affairs
quickly, Madam.

Hon members, in a constitutional democracy, the state becomes an important
institution. The ANC supports both the Home Affairs and Health Budget
Votes. Thank you very much. [Applause.] [Time expired.]

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members and friends,
it is an honour and pleasure to take part in this debate, especially on
Vote 15 - Health.
U sien, agb Voorsitter, dat gesondheid ’n sleutelprioriteit van ’n regering
is. Dis geensins ’n guns of ’n buitengewone stap ten opsigte van die
kiesers of die land nie. Allermins is dit die regering se plig of
verantwoordelikheid om te sorg dat die gesondheidstelsel van die land in
goeie kwaliteit en effektiewe werkende omstandighede verkeer. Anders word
die nasie bedreig met uitwissing deur siektes wat erger is as oorlog.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[You see, hon Chairperson, that health is a key priority of a government.
It is by no means a favour or an extraordinary step in respect of the
voters or that country. At the very least it is the government’s duty or
responsibility to see to it that the health system of the country is of a
good quality and in an effectively working condition. Otherwise the nation
will be under threat of eradication by diseases that are worse than war.]

I fully agree that value for money is a must, and it is the ultimate goal
for Health.

The Minister said in his presentation to the select committee that we have
a problem with managing our health institutions; that is rightfully so. One
of the reasons for this is the incompetent appointees as managers and,
directly, the appointment of cadres. This is a huge mistake and disgrace to
the people of our country. It is the poor who suffer when poor service
delivery is rendered. Poor delivery also degrades and does enormous harm to
the innocent and most of the people who are already suffering under
unemployment, poverty, shortage of food and others. This must be stopped
now and forever.

Chairperson, poor management in Health can clearly be seen in the line item
of consultants used by the department, because they must fill in where
incompetent officials fail in their responsibilities. Let us look at the
statistics. Under administration for consultants, the allocation for 2009-
10 is R7,6 million; for 2010-11 it is R7,9 million; for 2011-12 it is
R9,013 million; and for 2012-13 it is R9,3 million. Under the same
programme, there is another item for consultants. This allocation comprises
R7,06 million for 2009-10, R3,1 million for 2010-11, R3,5 million for 2011-
12, and R3,6 million for 2012-13.

For strategic health programmes the allocation for consultants is as
follows: R97,77 million for 2009-10, R105,59 million for 2010-2011, R110,73
million for 2011-12, and R110,73 million for 2012-13. For health planning
and monitoring, the allocation is as follows: R10,56 million for 2009-10,
R12,58 million for 2010-11, R12,35 million for 2011-12, and R9,023 million
for 2012-13.

Chairperson, this department spends R133,85 million on consultants for the
2009-10 financial year and R129,28 million for the 2010-11 financial year.
Like this, you can add the amounts for the 2011-12 and 2012-13 financial
years too. This is clearly a statement that Health is being run and managed
by consultancies. This can’t be true and if it is then it must be stopped.

Voorsitter, ons mense verkies om eerder dienste by hospitale te gaan soek
en vermy die kliniekdienste. Dit is ook die woorde van die Minister tydens
die voorlegging aan die komitee. Primêre gesondheidsorg misluk dus.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, our people prefer to look for services at hospitals and to
avoid the services at the clinics. These were also the Minister’s words at
the submission to the committee. Primary health care is therefore a
failure.]

The problem lies squarely in poor service delivery by staff in clinics.
This puts unnecessary pressure on the staff of hospitals. Our people don’t
receive quality and workable medicine delivery for their illnesses at
clinics. I can actually say that these phenomena only happen in other
provinces, and not in the Western Cape. The Western Cape’s programmes and
monitoring systems work and are in place.

Here is just one example. During our oversight visit in KwaZulu-Natal, a
very sick old lady was lying in the passage on a bed waiting for the papers
and administration to be completed to admit her to a ward to receive the
necessary support. What is this, Chairperson and hon Minister? Is it total
abuse and inhumane service delivery? This is unacceptable behaviour, and
someone must account for this.

All of us agree that the HIV/Aids and TB pandemic must be stopped and
controlled. We cannot do it by distributing millions and millions of
condoms and by circumcisions. The wrong signals are being sent out. More
and more advocacy must be done to better the morals and standards of our
people. We must get the buy-in of people, as the government wants them to
make use of the programmes and plans of government. Good money is wasted,
which could be spent on other service delivery items.

The reimplementing of nursing colleges is a must. Not only will this help
our youth to get earlier access to the job market, but it will also address
the shortage of nurses and provide a better quality service in hospitals
where needed.

Chairperson, hospitals cannot be supplied with medical machines and
equipment that they cannot use or do not know how to use. Again in Limpopo,
a hospital is furnished with this equipment, and it is a white elephant
there. This equipment is expensive and must be used in hospitals where
doctors and officials are trained and know how to use it.

Our state hospitals have the responsibility to render an effective and
quality service to our people. Our government must guarantee this. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr P MASUALLE (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister, Ministers present,
hon Deputy Minister, colleagues, MECs, hon members of this august House, I
am also privileged and honoured to participate in the debate on behalf of
the province and, from the outset, we should join the President and the
Minister in equally expressing our condolences to the family of none other
than Dr Sefularo, the Deputy Minister of Health. We, in the province, have
benefited from his wealth of wisdom and his leadership, though we would
have loved to have had more. We believe that the most important monument we
could have to mark his memory is to work tirelessly for a radically
transformed public health care system that contributes to the overall
health care of the country to benefit the poor of our country for whom he
worked so hard.

Chairperson, from the outset we would like to state our appreciation and
our unequivocal support for the Budget Vote, as presented by the Minister.
In spite of the challenges we are confronted with as a province, we have
joined the Minister and answered the clarion call that we should go back to
basics, which is building a strong, sustainable primary health care
foundation, a system that will ensure that we build towards the
implementation of a National Health Insurance for the whole country.
In that respect, we have undertaken to mobilise our communities and various
stakeholders to ensure a social compact that will ensure that our platform
for the provision of health care is advanced. We have taken into account
that it will not only take the Department of Health but also other critical
stakeholders who have a contribution to make, as there other social
determinants that impact on the health of our nation. The issue of water is
one that comes to mind. Therefore, the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs is central to this cause. There is also the issue of
sanitation, as well as decent housing for our people.

To the hon member who spoke just before me, particularly when we make
comparisons, it really hits a nerve. It tends to remind us that at some
time in the history of our country, we were governed from a place that was
called the Cape of Good Hope, even though for the majority of our people
there was nothing to hope for. [Interjections.] Of course, it could have
been that the good was then left here, because we do know that all the
areas here were adequately served, compared to where the majority were left
with unattended infrastructure, with water problems that today impact on
health. It is really not advisable, when we have for years neglected some
of these areas, to come here and make unfortunate comparisons.

An HON MEMBER: Are you going to burn us?

Mr P MASUALLE (Eastern Cape): We have also, in welcoming the Minister’s
address here, taken cognisance of the question of strengthening our
hospital-based services that will not substitute but support our primary
health care programme. In this respect, we welcome the announcement about
the priority hospitals that will receive attention in the revitalisation
programme, for example the Nelson Mandela Academic Hospital in our
province. This will go a long way in supporting our primary health care
initiative. We have also undertaken other initiatives to mitigate the
situation in which we find ourselves and have looked at where we could
improve the ability and the performance of our hospitals. There are income-
generating projects that we’ve undertaken to look at supporting resource
mobilisation for a very needy public health care system.

We will also be focusing on the patient-centred quality improvement
programme, again in response to the clarion call made by the Minister who
called for cleanliness in our hospitals, patient safety, infection-control
programmes, caring amongst the employees and those who serve our
communities, and reducing the waiting times as well as ensuring continuous
availability of drugs and medicines in our facilities. We support the
Minister wholeheartedly, even as we respect and acknowledge the
contribution made by some of the reputable pharmaceutical companies that
have served the country by providing jobs and providing us with much-needed
drugs, but we cannot do so at all costs. We support the Minister’s call
that if we cannot get them to lower the prices of drugs, we should get
drugs elsewhere when we can, to be able to serve our people. So the
Minister has our full support in that regard.

As part of the drive responding to the call made by the President and the
Minister, we will also be targeting, during the period of the focused
campaign on testing, two million people in the province to be tested. In
this respect we have assured readiness across all spheres and increased the
number of testing sites in order to be able to respond to the call. With
our home-based care programme, we will be targeting more than 60 000
patients in the coming financial year. This is thanks to the support we
received from the budget.

As I conclude, Chair, let me say that we have also enhanced our readiness
for the purposes of 2010. The portfolio committee visited a number of
facilities as recently as last Friday. They were visiting our province to
look at the state of readiness in terms of the Fifa 2010 Soccer World Cup.
We are assured of success, in spite of the challenges that we have, and we
all welcome the leadership and the guidance that the Minister is giving. We
will, without hesitation, call for support of this Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms B V MNCUBE: Deputy Chairperson, and all protocol observed, as the ANC,
the Freedom Charter commits us to a preventative health scheme run by the
state; free medical health and hospitalisation provided for all, with
special care for mothers and young children. The social impact for
continued health transformation should be strengthened and consolidated
through ensuring that the people participate in decision-making and
community mobilisation for a healthy and long-living society.

The commitment to improve health standards for both public and private
sectors, upgrade and improve public hospitals, reduce the rate of HIV-
related infections by 50%, and achieve the Millennium Development Goals,
MDGs, should be actualised in order to improve the quality of health care
services.

There has been a notable deterioration in health care, despite a
quantitative improvement in access to health services. Equally, it is
pivotal that efforts to improve the quality of health services escalate
concurrently with the equality of quality access by all, regardless of
gender, race, or class. Progressive legislation and the continued
improvement of the health infrastructure are insufficient to resolve the
contradictions between the private health care system and public health
care system. This duality has caused access to quality health care to be
unequal based on differences in the economic abilities of patients, such
that those who are more economically favoured would access better health
care and, as a consequence, live a longer and better life than their
opposites.

Our Constitution is very clear regarding the fact that everyone has a right
to have access to health care services and, thus, the ANC government has
put in place a 10-point plan to improve access to health care and to reduce
inequality in the health system. This position is compatible with the ANC
national executive committee’s January 8 Statement and the 2009 election
manifesto. It is, therefore, necessary that the quantity and capacity of
teaching hospitals be increased; human resources be strengthened; health
financing and information systems be strengthened; and health services be
integrated. The fact is that the current command of health resources by the
private health sector, which services a minority section of the population,
has been to the detriment of the public sector on which the vast majority
of the people depend.

It must be emphasised that the National Health Insurance, NHI, will address
both capacity and access in relation to health care. It will be publicly
funded and administered and ensure respect for the right of all to access
quality health care, which will be free at the point of service. People
will be able to choose a service provider of preference within a district
without being fettered by financial considerations. The ANC is committed to
introducing the NHI in the next financial year, and it should not be
delayed any further.

HIV and Aids remain a considerable threat in our country and a lot of
ground has been lost in the last few years to the extent that a delayed
response has a potency to occasion a situation where fatality will be
significantly lower than mortality. It is in this light that the ANC
commits to working hard towards the target of cutting new HIV and Aids
infections by half by 2011 and ensuring that 80% of those infected have
access to ARVs. I have no doubt that this commitment requires our budget to
be utilised appropriately in order to ensure that we do not fail our
people. We commend the stance taken by the Minister and his department to
campaign vigorously on testing, knowing your status and for leaders to lead
by example - by doing it.

The ANC shall mobilise our people to practice safe sex in partnership with
faith-based organisations, FBOs. It shall embark on a moral regeneration
campaign to encourage our people to assist in strengthening the moral fibre
of society. Working together with other social formations, the ANC shall
encourage HIV counselling and treatment, and the destigmatisation of the
disease, thus championing efforts to support those who are already attacked
by opportunistic infections. Support shall be rendered to hospices and
traditional healers who offer support to those who are ill.

We also commend His Majesty King Goodwill Zwelithini for the bold step he
has taken in partnership with the KwaZulu-Natal government and the
Department of Health to circumcise men and boys to promote prevention. We
also commend the Minister for rendering his services free of charge to
circumcise those who have not yet been circumcised. We hope that the hon
members will also make themselves available to the Minister. [Laughter.]

The African National Congress commends the Department of Health for its
approval of the new HIV treatment guidelines which bring South Africa in
line with international best practice. It is noticeable that the
introduction of the new treatment guidelines ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order, hon members!

Ms B V MNCUBE: ... is a direct response to President Zuma’s instruction for
the revision of the treatment guidelines by 1 April 2010.

The current system of funding health care in South Africa appears to be a
two-tier system which grossly discriminates against the working class and
the poor in favour of the rich and propertied classes.

In the words of Comrade Minister Aaron Motsoaledi in the recent debate on
the state of the nation address, one of the most glaring and obvious
reasons why the public sector is not doing well is what the people who have
started engaging are trying their best to hide. This subsidy contributes to
inequalities in the system. It does not make sense to subsidise the wealthy
who largely benefit more from this subsidy. The high income earners tend to
benefit more since they are in higher income tax brackets than lower and
modest-income workers.

Interestingly, the private sector insists that government must not
interfere with the private health care system. The rising costs of
contributions to private medical aid schemes make it unaffordable for many
people to continue their membership of private medical aid schemes or to
use private health care services, let alone the 42 million who cannot
afford to subscribe to such schemes. The efficiency of the private sector
hospitals seems questionable and cannot be ascertained as there is little
or no transparency about their costs; yet they stringently demand
transparency on the part of the state.

So, it is the poorest 25% that should receive 36% of the benefits and not
the richest, as happens now. But the private sector still insists that
government must not interfere with the private medical aid and health care
systems.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, your time
is up.

Ms B V MNCUBE: The ANC supports Budget Vote 15 - Health. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms A MARAIS (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, whilst
the national health budget deserves praise for the objectives and
priorities, the speech outlines almost no details on the budget allocated
to various projects.

In a broad context, and together with a wide range of key stakeholders, we
support the 10-point programme, with the exception of the National Health
Insurance, because we believe alternative ways and means should be
researched to strengthen the delivery of health services throughout the
country.

However, the budget speech is severely lacking in details and, more
specifically, the tactics that must be implemented to address the estimated
shortfall of almost R6 billion, which is more than double that of the
previous financial year. In fact, with the gross underestimation of the
occupation-specific dispensation, the real health deficit is a guessing
game.

Die oorspandering van die ander agt provinsies tot ’n bedrag van ongeveer
R7 miljard - met Gauteng op R1,75 miljard; KwaZulu-Natal op R2,3 miljard,
en die Oos-Kaap op R1,6 miljard - bewys dat dit ’n standaardprosedure
geword het vir die provinsies om nie hul aanwas te betaal nie en dat hulle
by hulle krediteure agterstallig is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[The overspending by the other eight provinces to the amount of about R7
billion - with Gauteng at R1,75 billion, KwaZulu-Natal at R2,3 billion and
the Eastern Cape at R1,6 billion – proves that it has become standard
practice for the provinces not to pay their accretion and that they are in
arrears with their creditors.]

The goals and objectives set out in this week’s budget speech remain only
concepts if specific amounts, tight financial control and strict fiscal
discipline to manage and pay back these shortfalls are not built into the
implementation.

Die verbetering in die kwaliteit van dienslewering as ’n prioriteit word
verwelkom.

Die effektiwiteit van dienslewering word onder geweldige druk geplaas deur,
onder meer, migrasie en immigrasie. Volgens Demographics Online, word die
vloei van mense in Gauteng op 446 900, in KwaZulu-Natal op 12 100 en in die
Wes-Kaap op 137 000 bereken.

Die Departement van Binnelandse Sake se sake is so deurmekaar en
oneffektief dat die werklike getal immigrante nie geregistreer word nie.
Sodoende kan die provinsie nie behoorlik beplan en begroot vir die
dienslewering van gesondheidsorg nie.

Verdere probleme kom voor waar migrante van byvoorbeeld die Oos-Kaap meer
gebruik maak van dienslewering in die Wes-Kaap. Die Oos-Kaap het 83
staatshospitale teenoor die 55 van die Wes-Kaap. Dié in die Oos-Kaap staan
leeg of het geen toerusting, personeel of medikasie nie en daarom is daar
’n toestroming na die hospitale in die Wes-Kaap.

Hierdie soort van situasie behoort en moet dringend aangepak te word, hetsy
deurdat ’n pro rata-toewysing van meer fondse aan die Wes-Kaap of ‘n
verbetering in dienste en omstandighede in die Oos-Kaap.

Op 9 Maart verskyn ’n berig in die Cape Argus waarin die Minister van
Binnelandse Sake haar kommer uitspreek oor die groot getal kinders onder 15
jaar wat geen amptelike status in Suid-Afrika het nie en nie in ’n
inskrywingsboek of die bevolkingsregister voorkom nie. Hulle het ook geen
geboortesertifikate nie. Die feit is dat babas nie meer op ’n gereelde
basis by hospitale geregistreer word nie. Binnelandse Sake se kantore is
nie toeganklik vir mense van verafgeleë gebiede nie. En, indien wel
toeganklik, is die dienslewering so stadig en ondoeltreffend dat ouers net
nie daarvoor kans sien nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The improvement in the quality of service delivery as a priority is also
welcomed.

The effectiveness of service delivery is placed under tremendous pressure
by, among others, migration and immigration. According to Demographics
Online, the estimated flow of people in Gauteng is at 446 900, in KwaZulu-
Natal at 12 100 and in the Western Cape at 137 000.

The affairs of the Department of Home Affairs are so mixed up and
ineffective that the true number of immigrants cannot be registered. As
such, the province cannot properly plan and budget for health service
delivery.

Further problems arise where migrants from for instance, the Eastern Cape
are making more use of service delivery in the Western Cape. The Eastern
Cape has 83 state hospitals as opposed to 55 in the Western Cape. Those in
the Eastern Cape are standing empty or have no equipment, personnel or
medication, and therefore there is a convergence on the hospitals in the
Western Cape.

This type of situation ought to and must be addressed urgently, either by
allocating more funds pro rata to the Western Cape or by improving services
and conditions in the Eastern Cape.

On 9 March a report appeared in the Cape Argus in which the Minister of
Home Affairs expressed her concern regarding the large number of children
under the age of 15 who do not have official status in South Africa and who
do not appear in a registration index or in the population register. They
also have no birth certificates. It is a fact that babies are no longer
being registered hospitals on a regular basis by hospitals. The offices of
Home Affairs are not accessible for people from remote areas. And when they
are accessible, the service delivery is so slow and ineffective that
parents are just not up to it.]

However, I want to congratulate Minister Dlamini-Zuma for all her efforts
and what she has achieved so far.

Ontoeganklikheid ten opsigte van primêre gesondheidsorg kan bydra tot die
swangerskap- en kindersterftesyfers. Die feit dat al drie bogenoemdes
prioriteite in die Begroting is, word waardeer, maar daar is geen
spesifieke planne om die toepassing daarvan te verseker nie, soos
byvoorbeeld deur middle van befondsing, vervoer, die aantal
gesondheidswerkers en die toerusting wat benodig word.

Weereens dra Binnelandse Sake se werksetiek by tot die bykans onmoontlike
registrasie van opgeleide, vaardige immigrante. Die Cape Argus van November
2009 berig, en ek haal aan:

   To aggravate matters, the Department of Home Affairs officials make it
   virtually impossible for the genuinely skilled among these African
   migrants to get permits for legal employment; consequently, Nigerian
   theatre nurses are selling mangoes at the side of the road.


In die Wes-Kaap word kinders uit noodsaaklikheid van geboorte tot vyf jaar
teen polio, en van ses maande tot 15 jaar teen masels ingeënt. Die
gesondheidswerkers het vrywillige hulp van ouers en die gemeenskap gekry en
oor die afgelope twee dae is 20 000 kinders in Khayelitsha alleen ingeënt.

’n AGB LID: Baie mooi!

Me A MARAIS (Wes-Kaap): Soos Minister Motsoaledi genoem het, moet 190 000
kinders nog ingeënt word en 700 000 swanger vroue teen, onder meer , die
N1H1 griepvirus gevaksineer word. Dit is voorwaar ’n grootse taak.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)


[A lack of accessibility in respect of primary health care can contribute
to the pregnancy and child mortality rates. The fact that all three of the
above-mentioned are priorities in the budget is appreciated, but there are
no specific plans to ensure implementation, such as for instance by way of
funding, transportation, the number of health care workers and the
equipment required.

Once again the work ethic of Home Affairs is contributing to the virtually
impossible registration of trained, skilled immigrants. The Cape Argus of
November 2009 reports, and I quote:]

   To aggravate matters, the Department of Home Affairs officials make it
   virtually impossible for the genuinely skilled among these African
   migrants to get permits for legal employment; consequently, Nigerian
   theatre nurses are selling mangoes at the side of the road.

In the Western Cape children are perforce inoculated against polio from
birth to five years, and against measles from 6 months to 15 years. The
health workers have received voluntary help from parents and the community
and in the past two days 20 000 children were inoculated in Khayelitsha
alone.

An HON MEMBER: Very good!

Ms A MARAIS (Western Cape): As Minister Motsoaledi has mentioned, 190 000
children must still be inoculated and 700 000 pregnant women must be
vaccinated against, among others, the N1H1 flu virus. This is indeed an
ambitious task.]

I want to thank the national Minister for the strong leadership that he has
shown in the past year with regard to the stricter management of health
facilities throughout the country. I believe we will see the fruits of
these actions in the year to come. It is heart-warming that the Minister
recognises the ineffectiveness of the health system and that the quality of
health services is poor.

Private health care is the only way possible towards meeting the health
care needs in this country. [Interjections.] We are not the only country
facing this challenge. It is a global challenge. There is no way that the
needs of South Africa’s health sector can be met if we continue separating
public health care and private health care. As long as these services
operate in silos, health services will continue to see-saw between the two.


The challenge for both the public and private health facilities is to
approach the challenges as a common challenge and together find ways and
means to address these challenges. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Cope appreciates the efforts
the Minister has made to improve services and curb corruption in the
Department of Home Affairs. However, we wish to raise a few debatable
questions.

The Home Affairs National Identification System, Hanis, was meant to
implement two fingerprint systems, namely a civil system for citizens and a
separate criminal system for lawbreakers. What is the progress in this
regard?

A tender for the implementation was awarded to a MarPless Consortium in
1999. Where is the project at this stage and what percentage of the project
can now be regarded as completed? Also, to what extent is the technology
being upgraded to prevent the system from becoming obsolete?

One month ago the SA Banking Risk Information Centre and the department
signed an agreement that will allow banks in South Africa to conduct online
fingerprint verification of bank clients by having access to Hanis. When
will this be implemented?

In 2008-09 the department implemented the Who Am I Online project. This is
a R2,2 billion project. What percentage of the work has now been completed
and when will implementation occur? Will the Minister please elaborate a
little on the use of the advanced passenger profiling programme at our
ports of entry and explain what benefits and results have come from its
implementation?

I now turn my attention to Health. In this regard, Cope welcomes the
programme to vaccinate children.

The revitalisation of health facilities through conditional grants is very
important. Cope has acknowledged and noted that the revitalisation of
hospitals, the procurement of health technology and keeping hospitals in a
good condition, will need more than conditional grants. The department must
examine additional models that will allow hospitals to be well maintained
and to have the necessary technology to support good health care.

The Minister has come out strongly on the question of overpricing of
antiretroviral medicines in South Africa. Will he engage with
pharmaceutical companies in the country to find a solution?
[Interjections.]

Finally, I wish to raise the question of procurement policy. The Minister
of Finance has been asking for full value for every rand spent by
government. How is the department progressing in this regard? Is the
country getting full value? Also, are the items and medicines that are
being procured at the top of the list and in accordance with this demand?
[Interjections.]

Recently, in the Free State, a substantial quantity of medicines had to be
thrown away because they had reached their expiry dates. Is there any
system that will ensure that wastages that occur during the transfer of
surplus medicines from one hospital to another don’t ever happen? Will the
department consider setting up a database to monitor the medicine situation
in hospitals?

Cope recognises that there is a new determination to achieve a turnaround
in Health. This is welcomed. Thank you.

Ms R KASIENYANE (North West): Chairperson, I dedicate my speech in memory
of Dr Molefi Sefularo. The work and the footprint of the late Deputy
Minister of Health speak volumes. What it proved once and for all to us is
that once in a while a leader is born who is complete and comes with all
the attributes of a good leader. Very few leaders are what Dr Sefularo was.
We thank Mrs Sefularo and the family for allowing him to serve the nation.

Chairperson, hon Ministers, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and Dr Motsoaledi,
the Deputy Minister, Ntate Malusi Gigaba, my colleagues, MECs, hon members,
in supporting Budget Vote No 15, the department, management committee and
executive of the North West have developed comprehensive plans to address
the Minister of Health’s directives. These provincial plans guide the
planning and implementation at facility level.

Every management meeting of the department and of each facility has these
key elements on the agenda. A detailed operational plan containing inputs,
activities, outputs, outcomes and impact is in place.

The following elements are addressed in detail in this plan. I will outline
some elements of the detailed plan to illustrate that the North West
department of health and social development is determined to turn the
performance and perceptions of health services around.

The first of these elements is clean hospitals. A clean health care
facility environment will be maintained through daily supervisory
inspections and hourly inspections of high-use areas, such as public
toilets in outpatient departments. Adequate budget allocations will be
necessary to ensure that a sufficient number of staff is on the premises,
and to cover cleaning as well as gardening contracts. Clean facilities will
result in an improved image of the hospital, improved patient satisfaction,
outcomes and a reduction in patient costs through reduced average length of
stay and cost per patient day equivalent.

Secondly, improved patient file management will shorten patient waiting
time, and improve booking and fast queue systems through development of
kaizen projects, at all areas with patients waiting. There will be
provision of consistent quality packages of service at each level of care,
and clear referral mechanisms to ensure that cost-effective health care
services with health care are delivered at the right level, at the right
time and at the right amount.

We will promote active community involvement in the process by setting
monitoring, displaying standards at all reception areas, and signing of new
service delivery agreements with communities. Facilities will market their
complaints mechanism and display monthly complaints with management
responses in reception areas.

Thirdly, safe health care facilities for patients must be given. This will
be achieved through implementing hospital-wide risk management plans,
policies and procedures, functional patient safety groups, infection
control, quality control, and occupational health and safety committees.
These elements will be managed through daily risk and near-miss reports
with interventions on all reported adverse events managed through a just
culture system.

General security of the facilities will be maintained through closed
circuit television, CCTV, surveillance of key areas, security surveillance
and controls managed through service level agreements. These measures will
result in a reduction in adverse events and litigation, improved patient
experience, perception of public hospitals by the community as well as
improved morale of staff. Additional measures are in place to address the
needs of the mental health patients who have additional safety needs within
the psychiatric facilities.

Fourthly, a number of initiatives are necessary to change staff attitudes
for the better and to maintain this situation. These include a reinduction
and reorientation of all hospital staff on organisational culture; a
revision and improvement of the new improved caring ethos campaign;
customer care training for all staff specific to their departments; linking
attitude performance per staff member to the performance management and
development system, PMDS, and performance management agreement, PMA, and
appraisal scores. Each staff member will have to sign a commitment to
customer service agreement, with public and peer recognition of the best
customer service performers in facilities. This will result not only in
improved patient experience and satisfaction regarding hospital services in
the public sector, but also in safer health care facilities and fewer
adverse events and litigations.

Fifthly, ongoing and sustained measures are necessary to manage infection
control, prevent and reduce nosocomial infections. These include the
prevention of overcrowding, correct administration of waiting patients -
especially coughing patients - biohazardous waste management, maintenance
and the development of infrastructure. This is to be done through the
implementation of risk and infection control procedures and policies,
continuous in-service training and attention to details - simple basics
like washing of hands before each patient encounter. Improved infection
control will result in better patient outcomes, reduced costs and
reductions in the average length of stay.

Chairperson, I am not going to bore the House talking about the budgetary
constraints or budget pressures that we have in the province, but all these
above-mentioned measures must be implemented with the following reality in
mind: The North West has the lowest per capita health funding in the
country.

So, with the recent presidential and ministerial announcements regarding
the implementation of the HIV counselling and testing campaign, we are
going to really do this with high spirits. We want to say to the Minister
that we are really behind her and we are going to make sure that this
campaign succeeds.
Even if there was no additional funding received for this massive
intervention, all the additional resources required for this campaign and
treatment expansion are going to be funded from the conditional grant. This
is clearly not sustainable and not assisting the province to expand its
planned HIV and Aids services, but we are going to make sure that we win
this battle.

The department commits itself to strengthen quality health services through
the primary health care system approach. It is important to recognise that
the North West department of health and social development is experiencing
financial pressures due to the inadequate funding received for the
financial year 2010. The department will, however, do the best it can with
the resources available.

We want to thank the Minister for the leadership and direction to all of us
as MECs. I support Budget Vote No 15. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon Minister Dr Dlamini-
Zuma, hon Dr Motsoaledi the Minister of Health, hon MECs of health, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, in presenting this Budget Vote we are
cognisant of the responsibility we carry on our shoulders to assist in the
fulfilment of our liberation’s historic vision to ensure that South Africa
belongs to all who live in it, black and white.
Several volatile and unfortunate incidents recently have threatened to
shake the core of our beliefs in this very same historic vision that
transcends the divisions and fault lines of our programmed prejudice. These
incidents have led us to question the character and the soul of what we
have built thus far. It is in these times of social introspection that we
have risen above petty squabbles and racial parochialism to cement the idea
of a new identity, an identity that encompasses all the facets to one
commonality that all South Africans can relate to. That commonality is the
hope that we are part of developing a whole, a whole that warrants
citizenship of pride.

It became clear that there are still a few amongst us who hanker for the
past, choosing to be identified more with hatred than reconciliation. These
nostalgic few have purposely placed themselves at odds with our pluralistic
view of a nonracial and nonsexist South Africa. However, we take solace in
the knowledge that these hidebound racists have become an even smaller
minority in our society. In spite of their flawed ideological provocation
and emotional, racial instigation, they have been answered by patriotic
South Africans with the calm and dignity that pacifies expected racial
turmoil. South Africans are seeing themselves more and more as one people,
united in their diversity. They are rapidly recognising the commonalities
in their hopes for the future.

If it is true that one should win through action and not argument or
rhetoric, then our Fifa World Cup preparations are a bold exhibition of
common nationhood. Our single-mindedness in striving to host a successful
event has already deemed us victors, even before the anticipated moment of
the kickoff. In the past few months, we have displayed our pride and unity
by donning Bafana Bafana jerseys in observance of Football Friday. We are
now moving in harmony to the melody of the soccer dance, passionately
waving our flags and chanting out our support for South Africa and Africa
at large. This euphoria has not been halted or disintegrated by the sad
murder of Mr Eugène Terre’Blanche because, as a nation, we have
wholeheartedly condemned this challenging incident. Our objections to his
bigotry in the past and the present lay in the fact it represented a step
backwards and resembled a call for violence. It is therefore fitting at
this point to quote a man of peace, Oliver Reginald Tambo, who said, “The
fight for freedom must go on until it is won; until our country is free and
happy and peaceful as part of the community of man, we cannot rest.”

That is why we are not resting. We are committed to ensuring the project of
transformation and integration does not change direction. Every day, we
battle heavy constraints and obstacles, to be further tomorrow than we were
yesterday. We have committed ourselves unreservedly, whilst comprehending
the dynamic and continuous task that lies ahead, a task of safeguarding the
identity and citizenship of the new South Africa, as well as empowering our
citizens with rightful belonging and proof of being.

It is partly for these reasons that we have enunciated the above, which
challenge us continuously to nation-building, that we in the Department of
Home Affairs have defined our vision as, “a safe, secure South Africa,
where its entire people are proud of, and value, their identity and
citizenship.” We have defined, for ourselves, three important and
interrelated outcomes which are: a secured South African citizenship and
identity; managing immigration effectively and securely in the national
interest to facilitate economic, social and cultural development; and a
service that is efficient, accessible and corruption free.

In pursuit of this vision and these outcomes, we believe that we will be
able to fulfil the vision we have set for ourselves and contribute to the
common pursuit of our people for social cohesion. We are part of a broader
social movement for transformation, and our activities could never be
isolated from the common and noble endeavours of millions of ordinary South
Africans and their dreams.

Last year we announced plans to establish the Home Affairs Learning
Academy. The academy will also deal with policy development, as well as
knowledge management. Major strides have been made in this regard. For this
financial year, our training will focus on the training of supervisors and
front office officials in customer service, operational excellence and
other needs-based interventions. Towards this end, we further requested the
secondment of managers from particularly the banks to train our officials,
especially those involved in front office operations in customer service.
We will further contribute towards government’s youth development
programmes by recruiting 244 interns, as well as 300 young people in the
National Youth Service Programme. The recruitment of interns is already
under way.

In the last financial year, we committed ourselves to improving the
operational efficiency and effectiveness of refugee affairs. We are happy
to report that we have improved the number of days it takes to issue
section 22 permits, from seven days to one day. We have increased the staff
in our refugee reception offices and have also increased the number of
their decisions from an average of five decisions per week to an average of
seven decisions per day.

More importantly, we intend to begin this year to review the refugee policy
and legislation and extensively overhaul the asylum processes. The details
of these will be announced during the course of the year. Through this
exercise, amongst others, we hope to separate economic migrants from
genuine asylumseekers and refugees, in order to enhance the protection of
genuine asylumseekers and refugees.

Furthermore, we will continue to hold regular consultations with local and
national refugee stakeholders in order both to benefit from their opinions,
expertise and insight as well as to regularly brief them on the progress
and challenges in the implementation of our programmes. Last year we also
committed ourselves to intensify the campaign against xenophobia. In this
regard, we trained 102 community development workers and 23 secondary
schools in affected areas in Gauteng. However, fighting xenophobia is
ultimately the responsibility of the public as a whole, and so this
programme must be premised on mobilising communities at large. To improve
the department’s institutional capacity to lead and co-ordinate sustainable
interventions in this regard, we are going to create a directorate and
finalise our programme against xenophobia.

The President finally signed the Films and Publications Amendment Act into
law. Both the Act and regulations are now operational. This means that
among the priorities for this financial year, we must develop a turnaround
strategy to ensure the alignment of the Film and Publication Board, FPB,
structure and systems and processes in compliance with the amended Act. We
will within 30 days finalise the appointment of the council of the FPB.

We have continued to make strides in the past financial year, particularly
in the campaign against child pornography. We are still waiting for a
report from the SA Law Reform Commission on our request for advice on the
possibility of prohibiting pornography on television, the Internet and
mobile phones. We are determined to have legislation in this regard. We are
further heartened that most South Africans firmly rejected the idea by
MultiChoice to establish a 24-hour pornography channel. We regret that
MultiChoice even thought of this in the first instance. We must continue
steadfastly to refuse to accept pornography being brought into our living
rooms. For the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup, the FPB has dedicated R15
million to the related public awareness campaign to ensure the protection
of children during this tournament.

Over the past few years, we have been seized by the challenge of the
transformation of the Government Printing Works, GPW, to position it as a
security printer of choice for government and the Southern African
Development Community region. We want to position it as a key player in the
smart card and passport industry. We have completed its conversion into the
government component, and we shall soon complete the appointment of its
advisory board and finalise the migration of its staff into the new
structure. This conversion has made it possible for us to negotiate and
implement a special salary dispensation for artisans, which should address
the challenge of recruitment and retention of skilled artisans for the
organisation. After all, the majority of the staff of the Government
Printing Works must be made up of artisans and technicians, and there must
be fewer officials dealing with administration. We’ve also recruited a well-
qualified and experienced chief financial officer in order to ensure that
we strive towards an unqualified and, eventually, clean audit. Further to
enhance its position as a security printing agency, we will procure new
equipment, as well as complete the second pavilion in a few months, so that
we relocate the entire factory to a new and refurbished plant.

I would like to commend hon Plaatjie on the issues he raised. He raised
many questions, and we will deal with them when we write our final exams.
[Laughter.] The Home Affairs National Identification System, Hanis, was a
Home Affairs National Identification System and had nothing to do with the
police. The police had their own SA Police Service Automated Fingerprint
Identification System called Afis. These are two separate programmes. Now,
as you would know, had you read your reports, we completed this process
quite a few years ago. I have actually even forgotten when it was. All the
questions that you have asked have been answered in many of the reports
that we have provided in the past. I would like to recommend that you read
those reports. [Applause.] We are offering also, hon member, to assist you
in the pursuit of your responsibilities by providing you with the answers
to all those questions.

Hon Marais, we appreciate your grudging applause for what we have achieved,
but many of the issues that you raised have actually been answered, even
today, by the statement the Minister made about the new offices we are
building and the changes in our offices that we are implementing, even as
we speak, to address issues of the disabled, of women and of the elderly.
There are many offices where we are going to either build new offices or
change some of the present offices, so that they are accessible to people,
in particular those with special needs.

Insofar as skills are concerned, there are many changes that we have
announced that we are implementing. It is inaccurate to make a sweeping
statement as you did. There are many immigrants in South Africa with
skills, who are working in our country. In fact, the biggest problem in
South Africa is not faced by immigrants with skills; it is faced by
immigrants without skills. That is why the Minister announced here, just a
few hours ago, that we are meeting with unions; we are meeting with Cosatu,
and we are going to meet with other unions and business to deal with the
issue of economic migrants, because most of the immigrants in South Africa
who have skills are employed. It is those without skills who are facing
challenges. One of the issues that we are dealing with in our refugee
policy is the issue of asylumseekers who are in our country, whether they
have skills or not. In terms of the law, they are permitted to seek
employment.

I wish to conclude by thanking the Minister for her studious leadership and
wise counsel, as well as to thank the old and the new directors-general,
the senior managers, and all the officials in the Ministry and department
for their support in the execution of our mandate. We are confident, hon
members, that together with you, we can and will do more to achieve the
objective we have set ourselves to manage both immigration and civic
services and to fight corruption in a manner that not only secures the
identity and citizenship of South Africans but also enhances our sense of
nationhood and social cohesion. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms E S MABE (Free State): House Chairperson, hon Minister Dr Dlamini-Zuma,
hon Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, members of the NCOP, my colleagues, MECs
from various provinces, directors-general, and heads of departments and
former colleagues ...

... ha ke latele basebetsi mmoho le nna ho lelapa la Dr Molefi Sefularo ya
seng a re siile, ka hore kannete re re phephi ka sena se etsahetseng, mme
le rona re utlwile bohloko jwalokaha ba bo utlwile. (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[... let me follow my colleagues and say to the family of Dr Molefi
Sefularo who has left us that we truly sympathise with you about what has
happened; we also feel the pain just as much as you do.]

Chairperson, 15 years ago we set out on a journey to change the health
system in this country. We constructed clinics and hospitals and supplied
them with health workers and medicines so that our people could have easy
and free access to health facilities so that they could improve their
health and the quality of their lives.

The Budget Vote presented by the Minister in the National Assembly and in
this august House vindicates the path that we chose many years ago and
affirms that it is indeed the correct one. The right to health for all is a
fundamental necessity in our quest to build a prosperous South Africa. The
challenges facing our health system cannot be overemphasised. The biggest
question, though, is what to do to resolve those. The Minister has
correctly captured this in his speech. Accordingly, it was only logical and
correct that the ruling party, the ANC, took a decision to place health
high on the national agenda.

The Budget Vote presented by Dr Aaron Motsoaledi is an indication of the
visionary leadership and the decisiveness of this government to overhaul
the health system for the better. In December 2009 on the occasion of World
Aids Day, the President of the Republic of South Africa announced the steps
government was going to take to strengthen the fight against HIV and Aids,
including TB. This is particularly important because South Africa is
experiencing unacceptably high levels of infection, with young people being
the most affected.

In the Free State – not the imaginary province that the hon member referred
to – we have taken steps to respond to the challenges of the day. As a
result, our TB cure rate has stabilised and our defaulter rate has
decreased from 4,9% to 4,7%. This is so because we have strong TB defaulter
tracer teams, which we are going to increase during this financial year.

In addition, a new multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, MDR-TB, unit is being
built in Welkom in Lejweleputswa District and is expected to be completed
by the end of August this year. As part of strengthening our infection
control to prevent the TB spread, we will be rolling out a massive TB
awareness campaign in the Free State. This campaign will be launched in
Phiritona, Heilbron, on Saturday, 17 April 2010.

It will primarily target school-going and out-of-school youth under the
theme “Motjha o reng” [What do the youth say]. The aim here is to empower
the youth with the knowledge and skills to prevent the spread of TB
infections at their schools and communities.

As the province, we have also taken steps to respond to the call by the
President of the Republic to mobilise our people to respond in their
numbers to the call of the national HIV counselling and testing campaign.

To this end, we have already set up the nerve centre co-ordinating
structures at provincial, district and institution levels. In addition, we
have increased the number of sites that provide treatment. The availability
of drugs, including ARVs, has since stabilised in our facilities. We
started at 40% and have improved to a comfortable 90%, but we are still
aiming to achieving 100%.

As part of our efforts to respond to one of the critical outcomes the
Minister spoke about – that of increasing life expectancy – we have taken
seriously campaigns to immunise our people. In this regard, I am proud to
share with this House that, on the first day of this programme, we
registered the following progress in terms of children who have received
vaccines: Regarding polio, we have, to date, been able to provide the
service to 1 800 infants 0-59 months of age; regarding measles, we have, to
date, been able to provide the service to 1 875 infants 6-59 months of age;
and with the 5-15 years group, we have reached 3 799 children.

As part of our response to one of the critical priorities of the 10-point
plan, namely improving human resource planning, development and management,
we have taken a conscious decision to reopen hospital-based nursing
schools. To this end, one of the schools was opened two days ago, on
13 April 2010, at the Dr J S Moroka Hospital in Thaba Nchu.

We reopened a school with learners already recruited and ready to be taught
and lecturers ready to teach. As we speak, the school is up and running. We
did this with the conviction that nurses play a critical role in securing
sustainable care for all. In addition, the Free State government has issued
184 bursaries to deserving medical students as from the beginning of this
academic year. We have also moved swiftly to fill our critical attrition
posts and, to date, we have made appointments in about 1 329 posts in
different categories.

During 2009, the occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, for medical doctors
– one of the key categories in the department’s workforce – was processed.
The department has spent R111,3 million on this endeavour. Other critical
categories such as specialists, dentists, pharmacists and emergency medical
services, EMS, have also benefited from this dispensation.

With regard to the 2010 Fifa World Cup extravaganza, we, as a province, are
ready. The experience gained during the Confederations Cup has put us in a
better position to perfect our systems and facilities. The recent
inspection by the late Deputy Minister of Health, Dr Molefi Sefularo, and
the NCOP delegation on 8 April 2010, confirms that we are ready to deliver
on our commitment to ensure availability of a comprehensive response on a
24-hour basis for the duration of the tournament.

We have noted, however, the concerns which were raised by the NCOP
delegation regarding the following: our ability to contain communicable
diseases like Rift Valley fever; the shortage of personnel in the ICU at
the Pelonomi Regional Hospital; general security; and additional beds for
casualty at the Pelonomi Regional Hospital.
I must tell this House now, however, that we are trying, using all means,
to rectify the situation and make sure that everything is in place. I would
also like to remind my colleagues here who said that they will make sure
that we are given something, to engage with those in power to assist us to
achieve what we really need to achieve.

We have also intimated to the delegation that we are faced with a shortfall
of R100 million to adequately address the following imperatives related to
the tournament: medical equipment, including ambulances; personnel; and
payment of additional overtime.

However, we want to assure this House that these matters are receiving our
undivided attention and will be resolved long before the tournament. In
addition, 60 ambulances have been procured already and we are awaiting
delivery. The process is currently under way to appoint 200 additional
emergency medical services and equipment to the value of R18 million. These
will be delivered and placed at hospitals along the N1, N3 and N8 before
the tournament begins in June 2010.

We will maintain a balance between catering to the Soccer World Cup as well
as our day-to-day emergencies. However, I want to assure this House that
our emergency services will never interfere with our day-to-day services.
We support the Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr J J GUNDA: House Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon MECs, allow me to
firstly pay tribute to one of our dear colleagues who, sadly, is not here
with us today: the hard-working, dedicated, late Deputy Minister of Health,
Dr Molefi Sefularo.

Hon Minister Motsoaledi’s candid and honest recognition of the many
challenges in our public health care sector is very encouraging and gives
us hope that our Health department is in the right hands.

Until now, our health care sector has been largely curative in nature and
little attention has been focused on prevention. This recognition has to be
the first step in building a healthy nation for the future. The ID is
therefore encouraged by the mass education programme campaigns on TB and
the immunisation of children across the country. In line with our belief
that health education forms the cornerstone of any preventative health care
strategy, the ID calls for the reintroduction of health education in all
schools across the country.

The ID fully supports the 10-point plan and welcomes the prioritisation of
its 20 deliverables. However, the plan will fail without strict monitoring
and evaluation.

The release of the recent burden of disease report brought to light some
extremely worrying trends. The high incidence of alcohol abuse in our
country is having a devastating impact on our ability to address the huge
health care challenges, especially in relation to HIV and Aids, TB and
other diseases. The government had a vigorous campaign against smoking and
we would like to challenge the Minister to have the very same vigorous
campaign against the abuse of alcohol. This should include a complete ban
on alcohol advertising. Irresponsible behaviour linked with high levels of
alcohol abuse also has a direct impact on the violent crime rate.

Billions are needed to overcome health care inequalities. The ID reiterates
its support for the National Health Insurance scheme, because it will help
poor South Africans, including our people who have been suffering for such
a long time. However, we call on the Minister to take the nation into his
confidence and release the scheme’s plans and costs as a matter of urgency.


We are encouraged by the department’s recent acquisition of flu vaccine to
treat millions of South Africans. However, South Africans who visit private
doctors are now unable to access this vaccine as the department has bought
the whole lot.

Lastly, the ID would like to hear from the Minister when he plans to make
these vaccines available to the public. The ID supports the Budget Vote. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S M DHLOMO (KwaZulu-Natal): Deputy Chair, hon Minister of Health Dr
Motsoaledi, hon Minister of Home Affairs Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, our
Deputy Minister, hon members of the NCOP, my colleagues, MECs, hon
chairperson of the portfolio committee of the province where I come from,
Ms Z Ludidi, and the other member of the portfolio committee, Dr
Roopnarain, allow me also to offer my condolences to the Sefularo family
and to our Minister of Health who, together with the Deputy Minister, has
been providing a cohesive and united leadership in guiding and supporting
us as MECs for health.

I am expected to participate in this Budget Vote and also give account of
what is expected of my province. I hope to do just that and not be tempted
to speak about other provinces where leaders of those provinces can greatly
assist us to understand the issues there. There are challenges in the
Department of Health nationally and that is the accumulative picture of all
provinces. We, in KwaZulu-Natal, are very mindful that of the four
districts that have an HIV prevalence of above 40%, three of those are in
KwaZulu-Natal, and those are: eThekwini, uMgungundlovu and Ugu.

We are, therefore, very mindful that what we do or do not do in KwaZulu-
Natal has a significant positive or negative impact on the health outcomes,
not only of KwaZulu-Natal but of the whole country. It is this
understanding, therefore, that makes us realise that we have to accelerate
health service delivery in the province. Our Minister has given his Budget
Vote, which we support, and in view of this therefore I have decided to
actually indicate some of the 10-point plan achievements in the province.

The department has appointed hospital boards and clinic committees at major
hospitals, community health centres and clinics. Even though these posts
have not all been filled and it’s a work in progress, we are happy with the
progress that has been made thus far. The management of health facilities
is strengthened in various ways including unannounced visits, encouragement
of walkabouts by managers in their institutions and attending to patient
complaints timeously.

Over the past 11 months one has been fortunate to visit 30 hospitals, 3
community health care centres and 12 clinics. Those visits were mainly to
go about thanking the management, hold hands and give them support,
identify challenges and work with them in giving support and also thank our
workers who are dedicated to continue doing their work.

We, under the instruction of our Minister, commenced with what we called
the “Look like a hospital campaign” last year, where we had six areas of
focus. These were cleanliness, staff attitudes, infection control, safety
and security of patients, accessibility to services, availability of drugs,
blood and laboratory testing, as well as a reduction of waiting times, as
our hon member Rasmeni mentioned.
Negative media publicity still exists despite the successes in most
hospitals in the province. Quality in emergency services has improved with
the addition of 124 new ambulances that strengthen our fleet to about 423.
We have two helicopters as support, with one fixed wing for aerial medical
services. However, this remains a challenge. Our province is largely rural
and some of our people still wait long hours before they get ambulance
support. There are 37 telemedicine sites that are used for training and
patient management. We need to maximise this technology, as it has the
potential to enhance patient care.

The department has put in place plans to revitalise the primary health care
approach with a strong focus on community-based services. It is
acknowledged that the department is experiencing a shortage of
professionals. On the issue of human resources, the department is in the
process of splitting the posts of finance and systems managers in order to
fill the finance posts with candidates who have appropriate finance
experience, among other things, because we have been noticing serious
challenges with regard to this matter. The department has put 17 chief
executive officers on the Master’s Programme for Public Health.

Health care professionals can be seen as a scarce resource for developing
countries. It is difficult to retain health care professionals in the
country. It is even worse to get them to work in the rural areas. For
example, a doctor who lives in Durban will be reluctant to drive 50km every
day to go and work at Stanger Hospital. The same doctor will have
absolutely no desire to go and work at Rietvlei Hospital in Umzimkhulu. How
then do we go about getting the health care professionals to work in these
remote areas? In our province, we are considering various options. These
include, amongst others, the case where the government, for example,
allocates you a bursary on the basis that you were born in Umzimkhulu; you
should then serve not just the whole province, but go and start serving at
Umzimkhulu before you can move around the whole province.

The department is focusing on appropriate skilled management for
infrastructure development and maintenance of existing facilities in
KwaZulu-Natal. We must actually say this up front so that members don’t get
shocked that in the KwaZulu-Natal department of health we underspent close
to about R2 million on infrastructure last year. I must mention that I
raised this matter in the KwaZulu-Natal cabinet yesterday, and we should go
beyond complaining and maybe get reasons why we are not doing well on the
infrastructure grant and revitalisation programmes.

All districts have drawn up their detailed plans for the HIV counselling
and testing campaign which will kick in shortly. Currently, the department
has 304 999 patients who are on treatment, which is a third of what we have
in the whole country. We aim to reach about 470 000 by the end of this
year. I notice that my time is ticking very quickly. HIV/Aids counselling
is provided for in all our facilities currently, which include hospitals,
clinical advisory committees and even mobile clinics. We have actually
strengthened this by employing more lay counsellors and mentors for these
patients.

The department has expanded the scope of the HIV programmes by integrating
TB services into the HIV programmes. This integration therefore will ensure
that all HIV-positive patients are routinely screened for TB infections, as
our Minister has indicated, and that all patients identified with TB are
put on treatment, while patients found to have no TB are started on
isoniazid prophylaxis. While we have seen an improvement from 55% to 62%,
the target cure rate for the country is 85%, and we are far from that. We
are very excited, Minister, about your bold reminder and an announcement
that all HIV-positive women should have a pap smear done. Also, all rape
victims should be seen and examined before they go and look for police
stations, and have that done first, before going to the police stations.

I should mention here that we are excited about the announcement that was
made by His Majesty our king, on 5 December 2009, which has since been
pronounced by our premier as one of the programmes that this department
must run with, and we actually have over the past week circumcised 300
males out of an overwhelming surprise of over 500 males. The remaining
number will be circumcised this coming weekend. Of the 2,5 million males to
be circumcised, we are leaving 1000 for our Minister, and we will hear from
him about when he is actually coming to circumcise them.

On the training of nurses, last year we had more than 2 255 nurses who
graduated, and some are already starting their community service.

We would like to thank our Minister, the premier, and the chairperson of
the portfolio committee in the province for all the support that they have
given our department. I would like to actually reiterate, as the speech of
the Minister indicated, that our province will be maximising our focus on
TB and HIV maternal outcomes, perinatal and neonatal outcomes and the
outcomes for children under five. Maybe what underpins these is the
realisation that, after all, health is about mothers, babies and children.
The death of a mother, such as an event related to pregnancy, is a
disaster. If I were to borrow from the words of our premier, Dr Zweli
Mkhize, he says in isiZulu: “Inyanda imuke nezibopho” [One has lost
everything].

For those who collect firewood, it means that you have lost everything. We
noted the comments that were raised by the member of the NCOP when they
visited our province, and we will be working on that. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms Q D MAHLANGU (Gauteng): Chair, colleagues, I want to recognise the
presence of the Minister of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi; the Minister of
Home Affairs, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, my role model; the Deputy Minister
of Home Affairs, Malusi Gigaba, my friend; colleagues from other provinces,
and also the hon members of this august House. Indeed, it’s good to be back
in the NCOP. Comrades, friends, ladies and gentlemen, it is my honour and
privilege to stand before you to elaborate on the plans of the Gauteng
department of health and social development, and the things that we are
doing to try and respond to the policies pronounced by the Minister and our
President.

The improvement of a health care system depends on having competent
managers who know their story. We are happy to report that we have almost
completed the task in the province. Where there were no chief executive
officers, they are appointed. In turn, we are expecting CEOs to make sure
that the resources of the state are properly utilised; and to ensure, at
the end of the day, the quality care of the ordinary citizens is improved
for the better as well as minimising the adverse incidents that we have
been registering over the past few years.

I’d like to inform this august House that we are gradually kicking the bad
elements out of the system; that is part of strengthening the health care
system. Those who are stealing patients’ food, medicines and other things
are being kicked out of the system.
We have, with members of the portfolio committee in the legislature,
launched a programme called Operation Buyisa, which is simply about
returning things that belong to the hospitals because, indeed, they don’t
belong where they are in our communities. We want to say to our communities
that they should be vigilant. Wherever you see something that is engraved
with the name of the hospital, please return it. This is part of our effort
to make sure that the state resources are efficiently utilised.

In improving the primary health care systems, we are focusing on
strengthening our clinics in the province as they are required to treat
patients before they walk into any hospital. Half of the cases that are
dealt with in hospitals are required to be dealt with at hospital level.
Some of the challenges are caused by nurses who turn people away. They take
long lunch hours and tea breaks and we want to end that culture. We are
working with unions in dealing with this issue because it compromises the
quality of care to our patients. Hon members, we want this to come to an
end because it has been going on for too long.

We are working with Cuban doctors in Gauteng. Those Gauteng doctors were
trained in Cuba to strengthen the primary health care system. I am
confident that we are going to realise this and to ensure that the ordinary
citizens in our province are able to get care at the appropriate level.

Furthermore, we want to ensure that all our clinics have appropriate
medication and people going there get cough mixtures, Panado and whatever
they need should be available. The CEO of the medical depot knows what to
do if there is a shortage in availability of medication; otherwise his job
is on the line. We are, in turn, expecting all nurses who are running
clinics to make sure that stock is available in all clinics because those
who are heading those institutions have a responsibility and a duty. We are
also saying that patients cannot be turned away because nurses are having
lunch. Patients cannot be turned away because nurses do not want to treat
them; this must come to an end.

In addition, after the World Cup all the new ambulances we are procuring
will be deployed in each and every clinic. We are confident that patients
are going to arrive on time at hospitals, especially those who need to be
transferred from the clinics to hospitals.

During this financial year, again as part of strengthening the primary
health care system, we are extending operating hours at a lot of clinics in
the province as well as at community health centres because we believe that
Gauteng is a cosmopolitan province. Sometimes people work until after
16h00. By 19h00 they want to walk into a clinic; there must be someone who
can help them, including on weekends. The majority of our clinics now do
open on Saturdays between 08h00 and 13h00. Very few are operating on
Sundays.
As part of strengthening the health care system, again, we are making sure
that the services that were procured by our Gauteng Shared Service Centre,
GSSC, in the past on the procurement of medication, equipment, linen and
food are decentralised to hospitals so that I hold the CEOs accountable on
what is happening at hospital level. It shoud not be that everything must
be done by the GSSC or head office. We believe that those things are
central to the success of what we want to do, including the advertisement
of posts as well as the employment of people, which must be done at
hospital level so that the head office focuses on issues of monitoring and
evaluation and making sure that the right policies are implemented by those
who are at service level.

The Minister is calling for a partnership with the private sector which
talks to the 10-point plan. We are working very closely with the private
sector. Some doctors’ and nurses’ rooms have already been refurbished and
the conditions are much better than they were before. We are renovating the
mother and child wards. The following hospitals have benefited so far and
many more are still likely to benefit: Chris Hani-Baragwanath; Dr George
Mukhari; the Far East Rand; Lilian Ngoyi; Charlotte Maxeke; and many more
are in line. We are working with the private sector and the following has
been done: the doctors’ quarters and nurses’ rest rooms and the mother and
child wards and theatres. Discovery is paying for some of our specialists
as part of the support given by the private sector. The private sector is
also donating equipment that we need in the province, which includes
stethoscopes, haemoglobin, HB, meters and many other things. We are
confident that, with the mobilisation of the private sector across the
board, the province will improve the health care system for the better and
the citizens will be much happier as a result.

We are working very hard to reduce maternal mortality in the province. As
the Minister and the late Deputy Minister stated before, too many women are
dying due to a shortage of blood. We have engaged with the blood bank and
many of the hospitals are going to be having a 24-hour availability of
blood. Where we cannot have the blood bank full-time, fridges given by the
blood bank will be available.

Regarding the programme on immunisation against polio and measles, our
target is to reach 100% coverage in the province with the major emphasis on
the Tshwane region; and that is what we are focusing on now. In 2009, we
reached more than one million children. Considering the work we are doing
currently, we are confident with the private sector as our strategic
partner. For example, ER24 are even supplying us with vehicles and
employing nurses for us to be able to complete this hard task of
immunisation. We want to sincerely thank them.

On the soccer World Cup, more than 50% of the soccer World Cup games will
be played in Gauteng. Our state of readiness was given impetus by the
recent visit of the late Deputy Minister Sefularo. I’m happy to say to the
hon members that, in his memory, we guarantee as a province that everything
we committed to, to him and the delegation when they came to visit the
province, is going to be delivered.

These are the things we promised to deliver: To make sure that the state of
our hospitals is such that they are ready for accidents and emergencies;
where intensive care units, ICUs, will be required, those facilities will
be made available as well as making sure that our ambulance services stand
ready to service the nations that will be coming here; and also to make
sure that those designated neighbouring clinics and pharmacies are going to
be operating 24 hours a day, as well as ensuring that employees who are due
for leave in June do not go on leave.

Lastly, we are working with the army to obtain services such as helicopter
services as well as securing the additional space we need in case we are
going to need this for mortuary services, but two of our mortuaries stand
ready to be utilised for the 2010 World Cup. Hon members, the Gauteng
province supports the Budget Vote and we stand ready to support the
national policies. Thank you very much.

Mr M S SOKATSHA (Northern Cape): House Chairperson, hon Minister of Health
Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, hon Minister of Home Affairs Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-
Zuma, Deputy Minister of Home Affairs Malusi Gigaba, my colleagues from
provinces, hon members of this Council, distinguished guests, comrades and
friends, ladies and gentlemen, let me also take this opportunity to share
the provincial condolences regarding the passing of our Deputy Minister
Sefularo. Even though I only worked with him for a very short time, I
learnt a lot from him. May his soul rest in peace.

Chairperson, never before has community participation been as indispensable
as it is today. Allow me to look back at the year that has just ended and
share with this House some of the exciting moments we experienced, and the
challenges we encountered in delivering health care in the Northern Cape
province.

In search of solutions and innovative ideas from those who do not source
them from books and websites, I undertook a campaign to establish
ministerial advisory bodies in the form of provincial and district
councils, hospital boards and clinic committees. I visited health
facilities where I met the most amazing people from our province who,
through our programmes, saw the quality of their lives improve. This proved
to be a great source of information on how government services impact on
the lives our people.

It is important to point out that, arising from these stakeholders’
deliberations, a common understanding has emerged regarding critical areas
affecting the health sector: Firstly, there is the broader context
underpinning our legislative framework, including the objectives of our
policies and their redistributive role in better health outcomes towards
improving the health profile of our people in the province. Most
importantly, the focus is on the four broad categories the Minister of
Health alluded to in his Budget Vote, namely increasing life expectancy,
combating HIV and Aids, decreasing the burden of diseases such as
tuberculosis and improving health system effectiveness by strengthening
primary health care and reducing the costs of health care.

Secondly, we have begun dealing with the institutional operational
weaknesses identified in our discussions with key stakeholders. For the
first time, we now have objective data that confirms our long-held
suspicion that our patients are not safe. Cleanliness leaves a lot to be
desired. There is a poor quality of care and dilapidated infrastructure,
and the capacity of our facilities to deliver quality health care resulted
in medico-legal litigations. Thanks go to the stewardship of our Minister
on the above issues as confirmed by our stakeholders.

In as far as health care effectiveness is concerned, strides made in this
regard can be ascribed to the health policies that prioritised the poor and
the marginalised. That included massive expansion of health infrastructure
for the delivery of primary health care services through the building and
upgrading of more than eight facilities and 18 sites accredited as ARV
sites, and increases in the number of health facilities from 152 to 228.

However, a new set of challenges includes the upgrade of facilities, poor
road conditions, inadequate staffing and increases in the number of health
professionals employed in the public health sector, including training of
mid-level workers in a range of health disciplines.

Lastly, most important to our province is that we will have a new intake of
nurses, about 90 of them, where they would be trained in our own facility
in the province.

However, disturbing incidents in a few facilities have created the false
impression that we are not doing enough to address issues of maternal and
child health. I wish to state categorically that the department is fully
committed to improving the health status of women, mothers and children of
our country and to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

Let me provide some of the information that I referred to above: Firstly,
we have strengthened various health programmes to improve service delivery.
In 2009-10, we fully immunised about 93% of children under the age of one
year to protect them against vaccine preventable diseases. However,
important cases remain a major threat to the progress we have made in this
area.

Secondly, we also provided vitamin A supplementation to 70% of children
aged six to twelve months as well as to children aged one to six years who
were seen at public health facilities, and 72% of post-partum mothers, and
our aim is to reach about 90% of this group.

Thirdly, about 203 of our health workers have been trained in advanced
midwifery, maternal health and basic antenatal care to reduce maternal
mortality.

Lastly, we rolled out the child health programme in all districts in
September 2009, and 70% of children were reached. We have also made sure
that the H1N1 vaccine and measles and polio immunisation campaign was
launched in the province by me in Deben on 5 pril 2010, and it is going on
very well in our province.

Yesterday and the day before yesterday, Cabinet had a door-to-door campaign
in three of our towns and we could see that our people are well aware of
this campaign. And by now we have reached about 3 065 children as far as
the vaccinations are concerned.

The estimated HIV prevalence rate amongst pregnant women has decreased
significantly since 2005. In a year-to-year comparison, the provincial HIV
prevalence rate amongst pregnant women decreased from 16,5% in 2007 to
16,2% in 2008. The observed trends in the past three years suggest
stabilisation but trends in the epidemic should be observed over a period
of time in order to avoid incorrect conclusions and perceptions.
The Northern Cape department of health has planned its response to the
above message through a massive HIV counselling and testing campaign, which
will be done as soon as the Minister has outlined that a date will be set.
We have made sure as a province that we made our institutions ready. We
have got co-opted centres in the provincial office and co-opted centres in
the districts and in all our facilities.

Hon members, this debate coincides with the day of the TB indaba that is
taking place today in our province today, which intends to make sure that
we measure our TB cases and make sure that we come up with plans to make
sure that we combat TB.

The advent of the multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis, MDRT, and extensively
drug-resistant TB, XDR-TB, in 2006 poses a particular challenge to the
public health care in our province. The number of TB, MDR-TB and XDR-TB
cases in the province is on the rise. The number of new TB cases increased
from 6 127 in 2004 to 8 192 in 2008. However, we are already seeing signs
of success through the steady improvement in the cure rate, which was about
62% in 2008 with a defaulter rate of 5,9% in that particular year, compared
to the defaulter rate of 13% in the previous year, which was 2007.

Due to the implementation of the tracer projects in both the Pixley Ka Seme
and Frances Baard districts, more than 80% of the TB defaulters have been
traced through the TB tracer project and resumed TB treatment.

Hon members, our human resources constitute one of the most important
assets in the delivery of health services. It is therefore essential that
we continue to create a conducive and productive working environment for
them. Our vacancy rate, hon House Chair, was standing at 41%, which has
been reduced significantly to 39% with a target of a further 25% reduction
for the year 2010-11.

We have made two strategic appointments at management level to strengthen
both the strategic and operational management. Our skills development
strategy is yielding results as more than 10 students on the Cuban medical
programme will be returning in July this year to South African universities
to conclude their final year.

The department will ensure that the health care system is properly managed
by appointing our hospital managers who are trained in leadership, health
management and governance. All districts will produce district health
expenditure reports to give an indication of how public funds have been
spent and also guide the department as to how much resources are needed per
district.

I am cutting out some content, hon Chairperson, because this speech is so
long. If I were in my own house, I could have spent more time, but now I am
in a different House. [Laughter.]
Lastly, we have completed construction and officially opened some of our
clinics. We have opened one in Pampierstad, Hartswater, Olifantshoek and
Hondeklipbaai. And we are also planning to make sure that we are going to
build new clinics - one in Norvalspont, Groot Mier, Mapoteng ...
[Interjections.] As a department from the Northern Cape, we support this
Budget Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms D Z RANTHO: Hon Minister Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Deputy Minister
Malusi Gigaba, MECs, members of the NCOP and guests, I greet you all. Hon
Minister and Deputy Minister, did you hear the complaints from the
opposition party? These are due to the fact that this department is moving.


NgesiXhosa sithi: Izinja zikhonkotha inqwelo ehambayo, xa imile ...
Uyakuzigqibezelela ke lawundini. [In isiXhosa we say: Dogs bark at a moving
vehicle only; when it is stationary ... the reader will complete the saying
for himself.]

This Budget Vote debate takes place within the overarching role of the
department with regard to regulation of movements of the people. This
relates to issues of immigration, refugee asylum seekers and active
citizenry. The ANC recognises the Department of Home Affairs with its
central role in building constitutional democracy with regular multiparty
elections. It enhances popular participation of the citizens to shape their
own destiny. The campaign that has been launched by this ANC government has
proved this democracy.

We regard Home Affairs as a strategic piece of state machinery to
contribute to the building of a developmental state. It continues to keep
the relationship between the state and its people. This relationship should
be mutual, permitting active involvement of our people to advance the cause
of democracy. It is against this background that we can assess the extent
of the budget allocation. The allocation of the budget reflects a steady
decline. This objective reality needs to be assessed against the priorities
of the strategic plan of the Department of Home Affairs and the centrality
of immigration policies and functions.

The ANC policy on migration, immigration and refugees is very clear. Our
point of departure is that if migration is managed properly, it can lead to
development, economic and gross domestic product, GDP, growth of the
country, with benefits to all. We need to understand that we are talking
about different categories of people such as economic migrants and those
who believe that certain circumstances militate against their interests in
such a manner that one is compelled to seek refuge in a foreign country.

Many countries face a pattern of migration, namely forced migration
experienced by people who are victims of war, violence, human trafficking
and so on. This is an internationally prevalent challenge. Migration has
become more complex due to the globalisation process. Labour migrants have
the potential to contribute towards the growth of the economy if their
skills are utilised appropriately for development.

My comradely advice to the Minister and Deputy Minister is that managing
migration flow needs strengthening of ports of entry and border control
mechanisms. It requires the department to be able to read and regulate the
movement of people in and out of our borders. With the hosting of the Fifa
World Cup, this becomes more urgent. Communities that are situated near the
borders seem to point at the lack of control at our borders and ports of
entry, ingakumbi kwela cala lam [especially in my area].

However, significant progress has also been made with regard to capacity
constraints and improvement of infrastructure. The Department of Home
Affairs has consistently treated the fight against corruption as a priority
and has given its full support to the anticorruption partnerships. A
national anticorruption programme was developed and adopted by the public,
business and civil society. Even the opposition parties do agree today that
this department is doing away with corruption.

With regard to the flow of skills into the public sector, the customisation
of the induction and orientation programme for pilot departments is
progressing. However, there are challenges. Basic service delivery,
infrastructure development and municipal capacity require specific
intervention. Access to services and the quality of services need to be
accelerated. Infrastructure development requires specific focus on
infrastructure rehabilitation and the capacity to manage infrastructure.
The Department of Home Affairs currently has a wide variety of software and
hardware.

In order for the Department of Home Affairs to achieve its strategic
imperative of service delivery improvement, one of the key projects to
embark on is office connectivity which seeks to address connectivity and
standardise infrastructure. This will increase the productivity of end
users; ease support and maintenance; enhance reliability; improve security
control; and reduce cost of ownership. Acceleration of service delivery
also needs offices to be accessible to communities.

Ndimvile uMphathiswa xa ebesithi masivule ii-ofisi zethu, eyam sele
ivulekile. ISebe leMicimbi yezeKhaya liyayisebenzisa kwingingqi yam yovoto.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I heard the Minister when she was saying we must open our offices; mine is
already open. The Department of Home Affairs is using it in my
constituency.]

The department has to accelerate the partnership-based approach. This
recognises that the Department of Home Affairs needs co-operation from
other government departments, and society at large. There is also a need to
strengthen the border posts. While on the one hand it is necessary to speed
up satellite infrastructure to ensure connectivity, it is equally important
to have the border posts network incorporated into the overall departmental
network. This approach could help in integrating these border posts into
the Department of Home Affairs’ single network.

The transformation of Home Affairs gradually gained momentum. We are
witnessing deep and fundamental change. However, it is noticeable that the
transformation process within the department will not be an overnight
exercise and as a result it requires more budget allocation to ensure the
necessary resources.

The new systems and re-engineered processes are crucial. The changes at
Home Affairs will be driven and sustained only if there are enough
budgetary resources, together with skilled and patriotic people to
implement the departmental plan. The ANC refers to the entrenchment of a
consciousness that seeks to serve the people with dignity and dedication.

However, it also means that as the transition from the old Department of
Home Affairs model to the new one takes place, there is a need to
consolidate some gains. The department should ensure that people are able
to do the jobs that they are required to do and are placed in positions in
terms of their strength, skill level and experience. Much of this hinges on
training and equipping people with skills. During the presentation we will
show some of the things that have already been done in this regard.

The department offers various services to the citizens of South Africa as
well as to foreigners who wish to visit or stay in the country. Most of the
time, the successful delivery of these services relies not only on internal
efforts, but also on the public  taking the responsibility to provide the
department with the correct documentation at the correct service delivery
points.

Through effective use of the budget there is a need to harness all the
support and energy. This includes building a developmental state capacity
to mobilise both human and capital resources for a better life for all. In
this regard, the key task is to implement plans and service delivery,
including the mobilisation of other stakeholders to accelerate service
delivery. This relates to the overhaul of the system and practices to
create conducive conditions for delivery. Furthermore, this requires
consistent training and development of all staff in order for them to
champion transformation.

The role of the Department of Home Affairs is ... The ANC supports the
Department of Home Affairs’ Budget Vote. I thank you, Chairperson. [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I just want to remind you that I
have two and a half minutes from my opening speech.

Thank you very much for being here and thank you to those who participated
in the debate, both on Health and Home Affairs. I think the three hours
have re-educated me on health. Thank you very much. I am even tempted to
comment, but I will not. I will just give some of my remaining minutes to
the Minister of Health.

Hon Plaatjie asked a number of questions, some of which were answered by
the Deputy Minister. I just want to talk about how the advance passenger
processing works. The airline checks in people and sends the information to
the airline liaison person. The airline liaison person then puts the
information on the system. Our system is linked to the police, to Interpol
and also to our own stop list. So if there is a hit on any of the lists, we
then inform the airline and we advise that the person does not board the
plane. Of course, it is only advice. If they allow that person to board the
plane, we inform them that we will not accept that person into the country.
They will then have to take him or her back.

In short, that is how it works. By the time the passengers arrive, we
already know that most of them have been cleared. If there are any of them
who have boarded and are not cleared, we know who to stop.

We think that will facilitate not only the movement of people but also
security because we are linked to all the other agencies as well. That is
thus how it works.

He also talked about the Who Am I Online project. The system that is
running at O R Tambo District Municipality that will be rolled out, is part
of the Who am I Online project. If you recall, it was said that we will
start with those that involve 2010. That is what we have prioritised. The
other aspects of the Who Am I Online project will happen after 2010. At the
moment it is really about the ports of entry. I think that I have answered
the questions that remained after the Deputy Minister replied.

I think it was hon Marais who spoke about immigration, migrants and
permits. I said in my initial input that we are reviewing the whole
immigration policy. Part of that would be the permitting system. Where
there is a problem with permitting, we will address it.

What I also want to say is that we should look at migrants in two ways.
There are those who are asylumseekers. If we give them refugee status, they
are allowed to stay in South Africa and work as long as they have a problem
where they came from. Then there are those who say that they are
asylumseekers but they are actually economic migrants.

We want to review our policy and separate it because if somebody comes from
Nigeria, most of them would not actually be true asylumseekers. They will
be mostly economic migrants. Once they have come through the asylumseeking
route, we have to go through that route, finish it and tell them that they
are not asylumseekers. If there is an economic migrants’ side, we might be
able to look at it.

You also talked about access. It is true that our footprint in Home Affairs
does not mirror the demographics of the country. Most of the offices of
Home Affairs are located where the apartheid offices were in the cities.
Therefore, we are opening new offices, using centres and using everything
we can to expand our footprint.

Last year we expanded it by 21 offices. This year we are planning 10. In
addition, we will have the ones that will be made available by provinces
and all of you. The previous Minister had started using mobile units,
precisely because she was trying to make sure that rural areas are reached.
We are still using those mobile units. We have 117 of those mobile units.

We have recognised that they are ordinary trucks. They are not able to
travel on very bad roads. Therefore, in addition, this year, we have added
25 Land Rover 4x4s which are really mobile offices. They can connect with
Home Affairs and do everything that an office can do. We have added these
25 Land Rovers but we will be very happy if Western Cape or any province
can also add to these mobile units so that we can reach the rural areas.

Lastly, I want to thank hon Rantho for the input. Most of it was really
self-explanatory. Regarding your friendly advice, I just want to say that
the government is looking at how to have a single border agency so that we
can all work together. In fact, the IT system that I am talking about will
also be of assistance once that agency is there because it is working
together with Home Affairs, Sars and the police. We are aware of what you
are talking about and we will try and do our best. We must take into
account that we have a very long land and maritime border. Home Affairs is
only responsible for ports of entry. The other security agencies are
responsible for the borderline.

I think I will end there. My four and a half minutes will go to the
Minister if he wants to use it. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: House Chair, I would like to thank hon Minister
Dlamini-Zuma for her contribution. We still welcome her inputs.

I only have three things to say. The first one pertains to hon De Villiers.
He said something along the lines of condoms and circumcision not being
effective or working in our fight against HIV and Aids. I just want to
reassure you there that the presentation of what we are going to be doing
takes two hours. This budget speech was only 20 minutes long.

Yesterday I presented it to the CEOs of all the hospitals in the Western
Cape. We are going to email copies of that presentation for you to look at.
But – just to summarise – we have a series of things we are going to do in
prevention: Firstly, we will have massive information education and mass
mobilisation. In this case, we have already met with all 19 SADC sectors in
terms of the work they are going to be doing. In the SA National Aids
Council, Sanac, you have labour, religion, traditional healers, youth
formations, children’s and women’s groups, as well as people living with
HIV/Aids. Every citizen is represented there.

Secondly we are going to do a massive sexually transmitted infection
detection and management exercise.

Thirdly, we are going to launch the Know Your Status campaign.

Fourthly, there will be widespread provisioning of condoms. Please don’t
discourage it. Don’t discourage it; the whole world is encouraging it. In
fact, we are going to increase the provisioning of condoms from 450 million
male condoms to 2,5 billion male condoms, and increase 1 million female
condoms to 6 million. Don’t discourage that either.

Do you see, hon De Villiers, that our approach on the issue of medical male
circumcision is not opposition-based; it is evidence-based and scientific?
It is very scientific and evidence-based and there is massive research
about it. That is why it is so important. Don’t discourage it. We welcome
the fact that His Majesty the king said that there are going to be
2,5 million circumcisions in KwaZulu-Natal. We are throwing everything at
our disposal at this issue.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, on a point of order: In terms of Rule 50, in a debate
in the Council, a member may be allowed to explain a previous speech to the
extent that the speech is being misquoted or misunderstood in a material
respect.

Now, I understand that the Minister’s quoted position on hon De Villiers’s
speech was incorrect with regard to the condoms and the circumcision.

So, Mr De Villiers would like the right, in terms of Rule 50, to explain
that speech.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): No, I think what we are trying to do –
and I want to believe that all of us understand this in the same manner –
is to allow the Minister to conclude the debate. In concluding the debate,
nothing stops the Minister from highlighting some of the issues that he
thinks are important and need to be clarified. Therefore, I do not take the
point of order, and request the Minister to proceed.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, may I specify that the specific concern is that hon De
Villiers’s speech was misquoted or misunderstood?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Harris, if you do have a problem
with the quoting of hon De Villiers’s statement, you still have an
opportunity, even after the House has adjourned, to raise that particular
matter but, in this particular instance, the Minister is summarising the
debate. Therefore I request that you sit down and allow the Minister to
conclude the debate.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, can you ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Can we allow the Minister to conclude
the debate?

Mr T HARRIS: Only if you will rule that, in terms of Rule 50, I am out of
order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): That’s exactly ... You see, I don’t
want to say that you are out of order, because the very same Rule ... you
must go further down to it, you see. We cannot allow any interference, in
actual fact, or explanations on this particular matter. Therefore I order
you to sit down.
Mr T HARRIS: So Rule 50 does not apply?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Can I order you to sit down and allow
the Minister to conclude?

Mr T HARRIS: Mr Chair, you are not answering ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Can I order you to sit down?

Mr T HARRIS: Without answering my question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Okay, will you sit down?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: House Chair, hon members, it is very important to
understand that the scientific evidence doesn’t say that circumcision is
the be-all and end-all. It is not necessarily a panacea. Scientific
evidence simply shows that circumcision reduces the chance of infection by
between 50% and 60%. We still have to encourage people to use condoms and
other measures. It is still very important, but when you put all these
things I have mentioned, together, we believe it will actually help.

The next intervention is the massive prevention-of-mother-to-child
transmission programme. It is a treatment programme but also a prevention
programme at the same time and it is also important.
The next programme concerns safe blood transfusion. In this case, I can
assure you that we are winning. Two months ago I officially opened a state-
of-the-art unit at the SA Blood Transfusion Service with funds donated by
the President’s Emergency Plan For Aids Relief, Pepfar, to make sure that
blood in South Africa is safe. Today, I can put my head on the block and
say that it won’t be easy for someone to get HIV/Aids from a blood
transfusion or from any of our hospitals. It will only be as a result of an
accident.

The last programme is the postexposure prophylaxis programme, which MEC
Dhlomo mentioned. At the moment, when a woman is raped and she goes to our
health institutions asking to be protected from HIV/Aids because she
doesn’t know the status of the rapist, she would usually be sent back to
the police to report the case and look for case numbers. The instruction we
gave to the CEOs of hospitals is that any woman who enters a hospital
claiming to have been raped must be treated first and questioned later.
That is all we are saying. [Applause.]

Many children are being abandoned, but we don’t know their status. All the
children that have been abandoned must immediately be tested and, if they
are positive, treated, in line with what the President said on World Aids
Day, namely that all the positive children below one year of age must be
treated without even their CD4 count being known.

Last is the issue of life skills, which is going to be followed up very
closely. These programmes, when taken together as a package, form our
prevention strategy and they appear on the presentation that we have made.

Hon Marais, I am not sure whether I am misquoting you, because sometimes
when members speak Afrikaans I listen to the interpretation. If what I
heard over the interpretation is wrong, it is not my fault; I responded to
what I heard there.

Before you start talking in public about people from the Eastern Cape who
come and cause problems in the Western Cape, etc, I am going to ask you
about The Lancet report you have mentioned. The Lancet is a very
prestigious British medical journal. They don’t just write any report
there. When they write a report it is very, very clearly scientific.

If you study the report, you will find that one of the professors who did
the research is a paediatrician. He is a professor of paediatrics and child
health. He gave a historical background as to why the Western Cape is
experiencing and getting what it is getting. It is very historical and very
scientific. I am not going to teach you that. Before you say people are
moving here to come and cause trouble, please go and read it. It appears in
a medical journal and is very clearly researched. It will help you very
much. Next time when you speak in public, you will know what you are
talking about.
I am not sure about the last issue, hon J J Gunda. You know, I have
actually been phoned by many doctors who said that we have taken
everything. I don’t understand what they mean. All we did was acquire
1,3 million doses of what is called a trivalent vaccine for H1N1. Trivalent
means it has the strain of H1N1 and two strains of seasonal influenza. We
bought those from the pharmaceutical industry. We are going to get the
other 3,5 million doses from the World Health Organisation as a donation.
So we are going to vaccinate these groups of people I have mentioned.

Now I am getting calls from the private sector saying that we have taken
everything. I don’t understand what they mean, because we ordered those
doses long ago. I suspect the private sector did not plan very well and
they want to blame government. We just bought 1,3 million doses because we
needed those for pregnant mothers, for children who are HIV-positive, for
adults who are HIV-positive, and for people living with chronic heart
disease and lung disease. You are aware of the fact that they were being
killed by H1N1 and that we needed to protect them. So, let the private
sector manufacture more, and then all of us will have enough. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, let me take the
opportunity to thank hon Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, hon Minister
Motsoaledi, Deputy Minister Gigaba and the MECs who participated in the
debate. We hope that you will encourage your colleagues to participate in
the debates in this important House, because this is the only platform
through which provinces are able to express the challenges and
opportunities that exist. Your presence here empowers members of the NCOP
in the performance of their oversight work. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 17:19.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          WEDNESDAY, 31 MARCH 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Water for 2010/11 – 2012/13.

     b) Strategic Plan of  the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  for
        2010/11 – 2014/15.

        Correction: The above entries replace item 7(a) published under the
                  name of the Minister of Water and  Environmental  Affairs
                  in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 3
                  March 2010, page 315. Both Strategic Plans were submitted
                  for tabling on 3 March 2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Magalies Water for 2008-
        2009, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements Performance Information for 2008-2009.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mhlathuze Water for 2008-
        2009, including the Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-2009  [RP
        259-2009].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe for the
        Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, tabled in terms
        of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)      Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Promotion   and   Reciprocal
        Protection of Investments between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Republic of Zimbabwe.


3.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


    (a)     Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the
        World Wine Trade Group (WWTG), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
        the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of
        Oenological Practices by the World Wine Trade Group (WWTG).


    (c)     Agreement on Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World Wine
        Trade Group (WWTG), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the  Agreement  on  Requirements  for
        Wine Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group (WWTG).


4.    The Minister of Human Settlements

    (a)     Exchange of Notes Amending the Exchange of Letters of 2004
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the Peoples Republic China concerning Construction of
        400 Units in Graskop, Mpumalanga Province of South Africa, tabled
        in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Exchange of  Notes  Amending  the
        Exchange of Letters of 2004 between the Government of the  Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of the  Peoples  Republic  China
        concerning  Construction  of  400  Units  in  Graskop,   Mpumalanga
        Province of South Africa.

                           THURSDAY, 8 APRIL 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2010] – Act No 1 of 2010 (assented
         to and signed by President on 31 March 2010).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Gender Equality
       (CGE) for 2008-09, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
       the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2008-09.

    b) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Gender Equality
       (CGE) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
       the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.

2.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    a) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr D Jacobs, a
       magistrate at Clocolan in terms of section 13(3)(c) of the
       Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

    (b)     Notice prescribing forms of assistance for which a postal
       service provider must be compensated and the tariffs of compensation
       in terms of section 31 of the Regulation of Interception of
       Communications and Provision of Communication Related Information
       Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002).

3.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    a) Government Notice No 54 published in Government Gazette No 32898
       dated 29 January 2010: Fees payable in respect of applications and
       the issuing of Rights, Permits and Licences, in terms of the Marine
       Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

    b) Proclamation No 1 published in Government Gazette No 32945 dated 10
       February 2010:   Transfer of administration and powers and functions
       entrusted by legislation in terms of the Constitution of the
       Republic of South Africa, 1996.

    c) Government Notice No R.75 published in Government Gazette No 32935
       dated 12 February 2010: Regulations:  Admission of Guilt Fines, in
       terms of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107
       of 1998).


    d) General Notice No 126 published in Government Gazette No 32950 dated
       12 February 2010: Notice of intention to make regulations regarding
       fees for the provision of aviation meteorological services, in terms
       of the South African Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).


    e) General Notice No 141 published in Government Gazette No 32962 dated
       17 February 2010: Proposed regulations: Application form and format
       for atmospheric emission licence and matters pertaining to the
       implementation of the atmospheric emission licensing system, in
       terms of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act,
       2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).

    f) General Notice No 162 published in Government Gazette No 32970 dated
       24 February 2010: National guidelines on environmental impact
       assessment: For public comments, in terms of the National
       Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

    g) Government Notice No R.142 published in Government Gazette No 32966
       dated 26 February 2010: Amendment: Regulations, in terms of the
       Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

    h) General Notice No 198 published in Government Gazette No 33001 dated
       5 March 2010: Draft Integrated Industry Waste Management Plan for
       the South African Tyre Recycling Process (SATRP) Company relating to
       Waste Tyre Regulations, 2009: Invitation to submit written comments,
       in terms of the National Environmental Management: Waste Act, 2008
       (Act No 59 of 2008).

    i) Government Notice No R.173 published in Government Gazette No 33002
       dated 5 March 2010: Convention on International Trade in Endangered
       Species (CITES) Regulations, in terms of the National Environmental
       Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

    j) General Notice No 201 published in Government Gazette No 33005 dated
       8 March 2010: Text for Multilateral Environmental Agreements for
       Chemicals Management, in terms of the National Environmental
       Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

    k) Government Notice No 179 published in Government Gazette No 33006
       dated 12 March 2010: Assignment of management of Garden Route
       National Park to South African National Parks (SANPARKS), in terms
       of the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003
       (Act No 57 of 2003).

4.    The Minister in The Presidency: National Planning Commission
    a) Strategic Plan of Statistics South Africa for 2010/11 – 2014/15 and
       Work Programme of Statistics South Africa for 2010/11.

                            MONDAY, 12 APRIL 2010


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the National Treasury (Update) for 2010/13
        [RP 39-2010].
National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996 to Madibeng Local  Municipality, North West.

    (b)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996 to Moses Kotane  Local  Municipality, North
        West.


    (c)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996 to Tswaing Local  Municipality, North West.
    (d)     Notice of the extension of an intervention issued in terms of
        section 139(1)(b) of the  Constitution, 1996 to Ngaka Modiri Molema
        District  Municipality, North West.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

                           TUESDAY, 13 APRIL 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson
1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations for consideration and report:

        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe on the
             Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, tabled in
             terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Republic of Zimbabwe on the Promotion and Reciprocal
             Protection of Investments.

        (c)      Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) between the Southern
             African Customs Union (SACU) and the Common Market of the South
             (Mercosur), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Preferential Trade Agreement
             (PTA) between the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and the
             Common Market of the South (Mercosur).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) for
       2008- 2013.

2.    The Minister of Social Development

     (a)    Government Notice No 261 published in Government Gazette No
        33078 dated 31 March 2010: Increase in respect of special grants, in
        terms of the Social Assistance Act, 2004 (Act No 13 of 2004).
                          WEDNESDAY, 14 APRIL 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation

    (a)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the   National   Youth
        Commission for  2008-09,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-09.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the State of Kuwait and the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa on Economic and
        Technical Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
        of the State of Kuwait and the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa on Economic and Technical Cooperation.


    (c)     Trade Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Sultanate of
        Oman, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Trade Cooperation Agreement
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the Sultanate of Oman.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on Budget Vote 15
and Strategic plan 2010– 2012 of the Department of Health, dated 14 April
2010:

The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered Budget Vote 15:
Health, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on Budget Vote 4
and Strategic plan 2010– 2012 of the Department of Home Affairs, dated 13
April 2010:
The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered Budget Vote 4:
Home Affairs, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

                           THURSDAY, 15 APRIL 2010

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Development on Budget Vote
27 and Strategic plan 2010/11-2012/13 of the Department of Economic
Development, dated 13 April 2010:

The Select Committee on Economic Development, having considered Budget Vote
27: Economic Development, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
thereon.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Development on Budget Vote
28 and Strategic plan 2010/11-2012/13 of the Department of Energy, dated 13
April 2010.

The Select Committee on Economic Development, having considered Budget Vote
28: Department of Energy, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
thereon.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Trade  and  International  Relations
on the Preferential Trade  Agreement  (PTA)  between  the  Southern  African
Customs Union (SACU) and the Common Market of the  South  (Mercosur),  dated
13 April 2010.

The  Select  Committee  on  Trade  and   International   Relations,   having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Preferential  Trade
Agreement (PTA) between the Southern African Customs Union  (SACU)  and  the
Common Market of the South (Mercosur), referred to it, recommends  that  the
House, in terms of section 231(2) of  the  Constitution,  approve  the  said
Agreement.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Trade  and  International  Relations
on the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa  and
the Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe on the Promotion  and  Reciprocal
Protection of Investments, dated 13 April 2010.

The  Select  Committee  on  Trade  and   International   Relations,   having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the  Agreement  between
the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of  the
Republic  of  Zimbabwe  on  the  Promotion  and  Reciprocal  Protection   of
Investments, referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of  section
231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.

