---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 02 June 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-06-02
---

WEDNESDAY, 2 JUNE 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000

               NO NOTICES OF MOTION OR MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I have been informed that
the Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of motions or motions
without notice. We will now proceed to the questions as printed on the
Order Paper. We welcome you, Deputy President, to taking the questions in
this important House. Thank you very much.

I just want to remind members once more that the time for a reply per
question is five minutes; time for asking supplementary questions is two
minutes; and the time for replying to supplementary questions is four
minutes. Only four supplementary questions may be asked. I will now put the
first question – which is Question 7 – asked by hon Ntwanambi to the Deputy
President.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

    Policy to prohibit recipients of social grants from paying government
                                   levies

7.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the government has a policy in place that prohibits
            persons earning social grants such as old age, child support,
            care dependency and/or social assistance from paying government
            levies like (a) school fees, (b) municipal levies and (c) levies
            relating to applying for (i) identity documents and (ii) birth
            certificates; if not; what is the position in this regard; if
            so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether the policy has been communicated to the nation, relevant
            government departments, provinces, offices and schools; if not,
            why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether the government will look at this aspect as part of the
            comprehensive social protection for the poor; if not, why not;
            if so, what are the relevant details?  CO204E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, hon members and hon Ntwanambi,
government does not have a specific policy that prohibits people who
receive social grants from paying government levies. As the hon member is
aware, government is implementing a range of measures to support the poor
in accessing services. These include the social wage, which is provided in
the form of three basic services: subsidised school transport, school
nutrition and subsidised housing, among others.

According to the latest Budget Review, consolidated government expenditure
on housing, community development, water supply, education, health
services, recreation and culture will amount to about R360 billion in the
2010-11 financial year. This is in addition to billions of rands that
government spends on social assistance in the form of old age, child
support and disability grants. Mounting evidence points to the huge impact
of all these social assistance measures on the lives of the poor and
vulnerable members of our society.

This fact is fully appreciated by all spheres of government and non-state
actors, who agree that working together we can do more to ensure universal
access, especially targeting poor rural communities. Notwithstanding this
understanding at the level of government, there are households whose
knowledge of what they qualify for is limited. That is why, as government,
we are strengthening the community development worker programme to ensure
that these cadres who service communities are up to the task. If gaps are
identified in the course of implementing any of our social protection
policies, there is no doubt that government will endeavour to review these
with a view to improving the reach and effectiveness of the programmes.
Thank you.

     Establishment of formal links, forums and/or mechanisms to enhance
           relations between government and the business community

8.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the government has established any formal links, forums
            and/or mechanisms to enhance any relations and/or interactions
            with the business community in South Africa with regard to the
            economy, government, business relations and foreign investment
            opportunities within and outside South Africa; if not, why not,
            if so, what formal links, forums and/or mechanisms;

      (2)   whether any structures of organised businesses have raised any
            concerns with regard to such formal links, forums and/or
            mechanisms; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so,
            what was the response from the government in this regard?
                                        CO205E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members and hon Ntwanambi, in the
course of doing its business, government does interact, formally and
informally, with individual and organised business formations. In the
majority of cases, these engagements occur at three levels: firstly, at the
level of policy formulation at Nedlac; secondly, in the context of
implementing our industrial policies; and, thirdly, in pursuance of
economic diplomacy.

As far as I’m aware, no structure of organised business has raised any
concern with regard to their interaction with government. As a matter of
fact, government enjoys good working relations with organised business and
other social partners. To illustrate this point, hon members may be aware
of the collaborative effort of government, business and organised labour in
responding to the effects of the recession. This multiple-stakeholder
leadership group led the process of developing and implementing the
framework response to the economic crisis, which was lauded by many
observers as a unique initiative.

This is but one example of the co-operation that we have with businesses
and organised formations. Therefore government does value and cherish
relations with and contributions of all social partners who are rolling up
their sleeves in pursuit of social and economic transformation. I thank
you.

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, Phini lika Mongameli, njengoba kubonakala ukuthi
uhulumeni uyakwazi ukuxhumana nosomabhizinisi baqhube ezinye izinhlelo,
ngaphezulu kokusebenzisana kukahulumeni nosomabhizinisi, ngabe zikhona yini
ezinye izinhlelo eziqhubekayo ezihlanganisa nomphakathi? Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson and Deputy President, it is clear that
government can link up with businesses and conduct other programmes.
Besides government working with businesses, are there other programmes
currently under way that involve communities? Thank you.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, as I have indicated, government
interacts formally with sectoral formations through Nedlac, as well as
through the presidential working groups that are focused on specific
challenges at a given time. So, indeed, there are areas where, together
with organised business, we collaborate in terms of projects in specific
areas. Thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, the Deputy President mentioned the framework of
response to the global financial crisis, which was formulated in
collaboration with Nedlac, and the successes of that programme’s response.
My question is: Does the Deputy President believe that there were problems
in the design of the training lay-off schemes, specifically as reflected in
the low take-up rate and low response rate from business?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson and hon members, the framework
agreement was put together by a structure that is representative of all
sectors - that is communities, organised business, organised labour and
government. The training element in this structure was primarily aimed at
addressing the challenge of job cutbacks in those companies that would have
been in distress.

About R6,2 billion was set aside to assist companies that were in distress.
Some of them took advantage of the availability of this fund in order to
avoid retrenching workers. However, in other industries it was not that
easy to avoid job cutbacks precisely because those industries were directly
affected by the decline of demand on a global scale.

Therefore the design of the training programme was adequate. In my view,
it’s something that would be useful even beyond the recession period.
Technically, we are now out of the recession. However, as we all know, the
process of economic recovery continues to be affected by other economies.
We know that in Europe now PIGS - that is Portugal, Italy, Greece and Spain
- are sinking deeper into an economic crisis which will impact on other
markets that would also have a slowdown effect on our recovery
possibilities. Thank you.
Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, there is a database of the youth who have
graduated from the various tertiary institutions. That database was used by
the former youth agency, but it has subsequently been transferred to the
National Youth Development Agency.

That database reflects the youth who have qualified in various disciplines
from the tertiary institutions in South Africa. That was for the purpose of
ensuring that business is able to access skills and also to assist the
youth by recruiting them from the relevant database. I would like to find
out if the government is still using the same database, whether it has been
discontinued, or whether there are moves aimed at improving the database.
Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am not sure whether that’s a new question or
not. To me it looks like a new question altogether. But if the Deputy
President is ready to answer, it is fine; I don’t have a problem.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I agree with you; this is a new
question. As hon Montsitsi has indicated, the database that was in the
possession of Umsobomvu and the SA Youth Council would have been passed on
to the National Youth Development Agency. Therefore it would be available
to any interested party that needs to access that information.

I don’t have the exact details. All I can indicate is that we are working
with the Minister of Higher Education and Training to look into the
programmes of addressing this challenge of unemployed youth. There are
about 3 million unemployed youth, some with tertiary education-level
qualifications and others in need of further training. The Minister of
Higher Education and Training is definitely looking into ways of addressing
that challenge. Thank you.

    Systematic review of structure and operations of Public Service, and
                   engagements regarding service delivery

9.    Mr M H Mokgobi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the government has undertaken any systematic review of
            the structure and operations of the Public Service since the
            2009 elections; if not, why not; if so,

      (2)   whether the government had any engagements with senior
            government officials at all spheres of government regarding
            concerns raised by communities on the (a) pace of service
            delivery in some areas and (b) ways of ensuring that the Public
            Service remains development-oriented, credible and an efficient
            mechanism of implementing the political objective of addressing
            the needs of the people; if not, (i) why not and (ii) to what
            extent will the National Planning Commission assist in this
            regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
            CO206E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson and hon members, there have been
several strands of work to review the workings of the civil service and the
public sector in general, before and after the 2009 elections.

Since the inauguration of this administration, the Minister in the
Presidency responsible for performance monitoring and evaluation was
mandated by Cabinet to lead a process called the macro-organisation of the
state. This built on previous reviews, which necessitated the creation of
new departments aimed at improving effectiveness and streamlining
government programmes.

Given the importance that government has placed on the transformation of
the Public Service, we have included this project in the 12 outcomes
designed to improve the performance of the state. The aim is to build an
efficient, effective and development-oriented Public Service.

Government, led by the President, has had a number of engagements with
public servants including school principals, municipal managers, police
station commanders and directors-general. These engagements have focused
precisely on the issues raised by hon Mokgobi, such as improving the
capacity and performance of the state in relation to meeting the electoral
mandate. In addition, these engagements have emphasised the need to
strengthen intergovernmental relations since, in many instances, service
delivery is slowed down due to poor co-ordination among the spheres of
government.

The National Planning Commission has an important role to play in shaping
the manner in which we do things in government. As Minister Manuel has said
on countless occasions, his portfolio will help us develop a long-term plan
which will impact on the organisation and capacity of the state as we seek
to improve our ability to tackle the challenges of modest growth,
employment, service delivery and human capital development. Thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, could the Deputy President tell us whether the
government is considering implementing a single Public Service for all the
three spheres of government, or is it considering engaging with other
political parties to end the deployment of party cadres into the Public
Service?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, indeed, the government is
seized with the matter of processing the establishment of a single Public
Service; that’s a work in progress. With regard to the second part of the
question, in all countries parties go to elections, and the party that
leads government has a right to deploy in strategic senior managerial
positions those who are committed and understand the manifesto of that
particular party.
In countries such as the United States there is, in fact, a book the size
of a telephone directory that identifies the posts that change with the
change of governing party. Everyone understands that at that level,
particularly at the senior strategic level, if the party that appointed
them to those posts loses elections, they move out. It is understood; it’s
established.

In the United Kingdom, the public service bureaucrats prepare two booklets.
If there are three parties, as was the case recently, they would prepare
three booklets based on the manifestos of the parties contesting elections.
They then lock up those books. Whichever party comes in, they pull out
those books and say that that’s the programme to be implemented.

Therefore this is not unique to South Africa. What we should perhaps be
taking into account is the level because our senior management positions
are at the level of directors-general, known as permanent secretaries in
other countries. They are called permanent secretaries, and we call them
directors-general. Our directors-general come in on contracts for a period
of no less than five years. Some are able to stay on for 10 years and so
on.

I think this is a very critical question, particularly with regard to the
stability of the Public Service. There is a level at which we should always
ensure that there is stability and a sense of permanence. However, there is
an upper senior level which is really where the political appointees are
located. At that level, there should be no debate about the right of any
governing party to make appointments.

The assumption that people who are associated or related with one party or
the other are inherently inefficient, inexperienced and of low skills is a
wrong assumption. For instance, if we are - like we are in South Africa - a
nation of activists, there would be no level at which you would not find
people who have one preference or the other in terms of their political
affiliation. The point, however, is that if they are public servants, they
should act professionally. That is the point that we should all agree on as
an important element in the consideration of appointments of public
servants. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, the Deputy President is absolutely right about
those senior appointments and I don’t think one can argue about that; it’s
an internationally accepted norm. However, does the Deputy President then
imply that the appointment of cadres to positions below those levels –
regardless of how they are determined - is indeed a practice that should be
looked at, and is the government looking at that?

Furthermore, could the Deputy President tell us whether the government is
investigating the validity - or the bad practice, perhaps of the state
doing business with employees of the state or their families? Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The question of deployment has been
satisfactorily replied to by the Deputy President. I don’t think we should
begin to open a debate on that. If you want a debate, you can call for a
debate. However, the Deputy President may want to respond to the last part
of the question.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, I was responding to the question well aware
that there are administrative requirements. Any public post is advertised
and the requirements are stipulated in the adverts. There are panels and,
for instance, even at the level of a director-general, Cabinet follows
certain set protocols. For example, the interviewing panel would consist of
no fewer than three Ministers, including a DG from another department, just
to ensure that the successful candidate would have gone through a rigorous
process. So those are administrative processes that cannot be overridden by
simple political appointments.

However, there are posts are just filled by political appointments. As I
said earlier, with regard to such posts, it’s a given that the governing
party would deal with them in that fashion. What was the second question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: What was the last part of your question, Mr
Lees?

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, the question was whether the government is
looking into the issue of public servants and their role in doing business
with the state or members of their families who do business with the state
as being a practice that should, perhaps, be outlawed.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, that practice is wrong and steps are being taken
to ensure that it does not happen. The report of the Auditor-General has
revealed that there are public officials who do business or have an
interest in companies that do business with their own departments. That is
impermissible. It is something that must never be allowed, and there are
processes to deal with that challenge.

That also goes for relatives. As you know, the Local Government: Municipal
Finance Management Act also specifically debars relatives of public
servants and public officials from doing business with the municipalities.
So that’s something that is being attended to. Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson and hon Deputy President, thank you for
the opportunity. In terms of one of the narratives of the Public Service
Act, the President, the Deputy President, Ministers and pemiers are allowed
to or provision is made for them to appoint special advisers in various
capacities. In terms of an answer to a question that I posed to the
Minister for the Public Service and Administration, a list was provided,
which indicated that 72 special advisers had been appointed to various
Ministers, including the President, the Deputy President and, naturally,
the premiers.

Now, I’m happy to see that the Deputy President thought it wise to appoint
only one special adviser, contrary to the President and some of the
Ministers who have four. The question that I want to pose to the Deputy
President is: In terms of the question posed, what is the role of special
advisers in this new dispensation? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, special advisers give special advice on special
issues. [Laughter.] That is what they are there for. [Interjections.] These
would be men and women who add value and enhance the capacity of the
principals to perform because the responsibilities that lie on the
shoulders of a head of state are quite onerous. Therefore it is important
that there should be a team of people that can ensure that the country is
given good and effective leadership. That is why there is no fixed number,
as it were, with regard to special advisers. The President can appoint as
many special advisers as is required. Thank you.

 Visits to provinces as part of War on Poverty campaign and report on issues
                            raised by communities
10.   Ms M P Themba (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether he or the President visited any province as part of the
            Government’s War on Poverty campaign or anti-poverty programme
            since the new government took office in 2009; if not, why not;
            if so, how many provinces were visited;

      (2)   whether the government (a) compiled a report of the issues
            raised by communities and (b) established mechanisms to (i)
            address and (ii) follow up on the issues; if not, why not; if
            so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether reports of this nature are discussed at Cabinet level or
            sent to provinces for consideration and action; if not, what is
            the position in this regard; if so,

      (4)   whether any of the Ministries and/or provinces have reported to
            the Presidency on their progress in addressing the issues; if
            not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what is the
            overall assessment of the responses of the departments and/or
            provinces in addressing the issues?
                                   CO208E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson and hon members, since the inauguration
of this administration, I have travelled with a team of Ministers and
senior officials to two provinces to witness progress made since the launch
of the War on Poverty campaign in 2008. Communities that we have visited
are located in Jacobsdal in the Free State and Lubala village in the
Eastern Cape.

During these visits, officials from national, provincial and local
government departments take note of issues raised by communities and
compile reports. These reports are then processed by the relevant
government departments using established systems such as the National
Integrated Social Information System, Nisis, of the Department of Social
Development.

It is on the basis of these reporting mechanisms that verification of
household needs and services rendered is conducted. This is also used for
referral and follow-up purposes. Individual reports are not presented to
Cabinet. Instead, consolidated reports are prepared for Cabinet twice a
year. Institutionally, the national task team, consisting of provincial war
rooms and representatives from implementing departments, is a forum tasked
with the responsibility of processing reports and following up on service
delivery issues raised by communities. The same reporting and follow-up
mechanism is replicated at provincial and local levels.

In addition to these institutional mechanisms, Ministers, Deputy Ministers
and senior officials share their experiences through the Antipoverty
Interministerial Committee, which is co-ordinated by the Presidency. Here,
consideration is also given to prioritising urgent matters raised by
communities.

Our overall assessment is that the War on Poverty campaign mechanism has
helped to highlight the value of clustering services and delivering them as
a package to poor communities, who often miss out due to a lack of
information or the distance between the community and the point of service.
Thank you.

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson and Deputy President, the Ten-Year Review report
showed defects in our existing antipoverty approaches. It also highlighted
the fact that our approach on poverty is undermined by the lack of a common
antipoverty strategy, the lack of reliable information about conditions of
the poor, the lack of monitoring of antipoverty initiatives, and ad hoc and
unco-ordinated services.

We want to check whether the Deputy President would look into the
possibility of tabling the reports generated by the Presidency so that
Parliament can use them to monitor the progress that our nation is making
in the fight against poverty, instead of using reports that are generated
by international nongovernmental organisations that have no understanding
of the conditions of our people. I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, I think the idea of the War on Poverty
campaign was to pilot a co-ordinated intervention. Out of that, the reports
that are generated would serve a useful purpose if they are indeed shared
with Parliament. They can be replicated in all other areas because the
critical element in this strategy is co-ordination. When government
departments work in silos, the impact is minimal.

I mentioned the Nisis system of Social Development because we may find that
recipients of one social grant or the other can benefit. They can actually
be assisted if one or two members of that household are identified and
given dedicated support in a sustained fashion, particularly if in that
household there are people who are trainable, or people who have dropped
out of school but can still go back. Such people can be assisted to
complete their education because that then has the impact of lifting the
household out of the poverty morass. Therefore I think sharing these
reports with Parliament can really serve a useful purpose. Thank you.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chairperson and Deputy President, in instances where there
are reports from those visits, does the government have any specific
turnaround time in place? Furthermore, in cases where there is no progress
or service delivery - according to those reports - are any sanctions put in
place or any measures taken to ensure that service delivery takes place?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, in the case of Jacobsdal – just to give
you an example, hon members - the pilot programme was launched, and we were
able to go back 18 months later to assess the impact and progress made.
When we went back to Jacobsdal, we found that one old lady, who had been
down with TB and had been living in a shack that had no flooring -
essentially inhaling dust all the time – had been put on monitored
treatment by the Free State department of health. This ensured that she
actually took her treatment.

While she was on monitored treatment, she was provided with an RDP house
that came with potable water, a kitchen sink, a bath tub and a flushing
toilet inside the house. The roof was fitted with rain gutters, and she was
supplied by the department of agriculture with a water tank to harvest
rainwater. They also provided her with a tunnel and seeds, and trained her
to grow vegetables in her yard.

When we went back 18 months later, she was cured of TB and her garden was
green and full of vegetables. She then actually addressed the public
meeting as a motivational speaker and encouraged other women to join a
similar programme.

So, to me, this is a case of how - with the correct identification of a
potential change agent in a household - the conditions of these households
can be improved. In this way, the members of such households can be pulled
out of the clutches of poverty. Thank you.

   Inroads made by Moral Regeneration Movement into social disintegration
                               among the youth

11.   Prince M M M Zulu (IFP) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether the Moral Regeneration Movement has made any inroads into the
      growing levels of social disintegration among the youth; if not, why
      not; if so, (a) how and (b) what are the further relevant details?
                             CO219E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Sihlalo, mangibonge kuMntwana uMangethe.
[Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Mangethe.]

It has been reported by the Moral Regeneration Movement, MRM, that they are
steadily making inroads into the social disintegration among the youth. To
achieve this, the Moral Regeneration Movement engages young people in
social dialogues that address various issues such as social integration and
the role of families in moulding social values.

In order to gauge the true extent of the overall impact of the MRM
programme, the Department of Arts and Culture has commissioned a formal
evaluation. The outcomes of this review will enable us to share evidence-
based details of the success of the MRM in this regard, including areas
requiring improvement.

Having said this, I wish to remind all hon members that reversing the
social disintegration of the youth is a collective responsibility which
should never be outsourced solely to teachers, government or any other
nongovernmental organisation. Disintegration begins at home and, therefore,
reintegration should first happen there as well. We have a responsibility
to nurture our children and guide them as they enter adulthood and make
life-altering decisions. It all begins with you and me. I thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, could the Deputy President tell us whether
government and/or the Moral Regeneration Movement have a view on, one, the
impact of the 3,1 million unemployed young South Africans on social
integration; two, the appropriateness of National Treasury’s proposed youth
wage subsidy, which was expected to create half a million youth jobs in two
years; and, three, the fact that Treasury’s promised discussion document on
the policy is now more than two months late. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, in an endeavour to instil or inculcate
positive values that seek to build rather than to destroy, morally and
otherwise, the Moral Regeneration Movement engages with youth across the
board; it does not only target the 3 million unemployed youth. Therefore,
as I said, the review will indicate in detail to us whether they are
succeeding or not.

With regard to the subsidy that was announced by the Minister of Finance,
that is work in progress. He is still working on how it is going to be
implemented. Therefore I am unable to give you a detailed response in that
regard since it is work in progress from his side. That takes care of the
third part of the question as well. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, I think the hon Deputy President was quite right
when he said that this whole process starts with each one of us. In that
light, would the hon Deputy President agree with me that, with regard to
the moral degeneration of the youth, the prevalence of single-parent
households is an issue that needs to be dealt with?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, well, you know, these are moral issues.
Some of the single parents are occasioned by the misdemeanours of adults
who are taking advantage of younger people, including the learners. Our
efforts should, really, be targeted at ensuring that no child in our
country is denied the opportunity to develop into a wholesome and
responsible human being simply because of the mistakes of the parents or
parent. That should be the focus of our efforts.

The extent of the phenomenon of single parents reflects the deeper problem
in our society, and I think we should address it. Let me just use an
illustration. Let’s say one has a toothache that causes an abscess. If the
dentist tells that individual that his or her tooth is rotten and should be
extracted, the dentist will first ensure that he or she treats the abscess
before extracting the rotten tooth, whereas the main problem is the rotten
tooth. Therefore we must also ensure that children of single parents are
not prejudiced in any way.

We must address the needs of children of single parents and give them the
love and support they deserve. The reason for this is that amongst them
there might perhaps be someone who could be the captain of Bafana Bafana in
the near future. We must deal with whatever circumstances might have
occasioned the delivery of that child.

In other words, the parent should be given support as well if he or she is
someone who can still be assisted in the manner I described earlier on. We
should allow that because, if the single parent becomes a good citizen, we
will all end up with a happier nation. I thank you.

    Action taken against members of the executive who fail to respond to
                       written parliamentary questions

12.   Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether he has taken any action against members of the executive
            who fail to respond to written parliamentary questions of
            members of the National Council of Provinces; if not, why not;
            if so, (a) what are the relevant details and (b) when is it
            envisaged that responses to these outstanding questions will be
            received;

      (2)   whether the prompt and adequate response to written questions
            has been included in the performance contracts of members of the
            executive; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
            details?                          CO254E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson and hon Lees, as I have reported in
the National Assembly, I’m concerned about the number of unanswered
questions in both Houses of Parliament. Ministers had to report to me
regarding the reasons for their failure to reply to a number of questions
posed last year and indicate the steps that they were going to take to
ensure that this did not reoccur. From this exercise, it became apparent
that in certain cases capacity could be improved.

I table a report at each Cabinet meeting on the number of unanswered
questions in both Houses. At the request of the Speaker of the National
Assembly, I’ve also written to all Ministers with regard to unanswered
questions from the first term. As Ministers are directly accountable to
Parliament, it is also up to the House to discuss measures it should take
to ensure that questions are answered.

The issue of responding to parliamentary questions was not included in the
performance contracts of members of the executive, but it is a matter that
could be considered when the performance contracts are reviewed next year.
I’ve reason to believe that this issue is being addressed, and that very
soon we will have fewer instances of questions remaining unanswered beyond
due dates. Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson, regarding the second part of the
question, could the hon Deputy President tell us what was the rationale
behind the decision not to sign performance agreement contracts with Deputy
Ministers?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, this was the first time that
performance contracts were signed with Ministers. Twelve outcomes were
identified, and those serve as a basis for the performance contracts. What
I’m saying is that these contracts are going to be reviewed annually. If
the measures that are introduced to try and get questions responded to do
not produce the desired results, then it is quite possible that we could
include it as a 13th outcome. It would then find its way into the new
contracts.

For now, we are confident that there is already a marked improvement in a
number of Ministries. The outstanding questions aren’t too many, and we now
try to keep a clean sheet. There are Ministries that are still struggling.
We’ve also noted that where directors-general are involved in ensuring that
questions are responded to, there’s a marked improvement, and we’re trying
to get all Ministries to learn from that experience. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Hon Chairperson, the reason I stood up is that I wanted to
say that the Deputy President has answered all my follow-up questions.
That’s why I have been so quiet and did not ask any questions.
[Interjections.]

Mr O DE BEER: Hon Chairperson, further arising out of the hon Deputy
President’s reply, I just want to know if the office of the Deputy
President is prepared to make performance contracts of the executive
available to the public as well?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, the contracts are actually between
Ministers and the President. I only sign as a witness to the fact that the
parties are entering into a contract.

This question has been put to the President before. He did say that, at the
right time, he will make them available to the public.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 15:55.
                                 __________

                     ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND REPORTS
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 2 June 2010:


         (a)      Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill [B 2B –
             2009] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Development of the National Council of
             Provinces.


         (b)      Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5B – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.

