---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-19
---

WEDNESDAY, 19 MAY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:

  That the Council —


     1) notes that two senior officials at the Companies and Intellectual
        Property Registration Office, Cipro, have been formally suspended
        over their involvement in granting a suspect R153 million tender
        last year and that the department is in a process of cancelling the
        fraudulent and sinister contract;
     2) takes this opportunity to congratulate the Trade and Industry
        Minister Rob Davies for his stern action against corruption and
        fraud in his department; and


  (3) urges the Minister to heed President Jacob Zuma’s call to ensure that
        cases of corruption receive utmost priority in order to send a
        clear message to those who continue to dig their hands in the
        public purse and manipulate government processes to enrich
        themselves and their cronies that their selfish deeds will not be
        tolerated and they have no place in this government.

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Chairperson, on the next sitting day of the Council the
DA shall move:

   That the Council —


     1) notes the unacceptable way in which the Department of Police spent
        their budget during the previous 4 years, namely —


           a) in the 2006-07 financial year R448 million was spent on 7 new
              police stations and 3 buildings had been renovated;


           b) in the 2007-08 financial year R727 million was spent on 1 new
              police station and 3 were renovated;
           c) in the 2008-09 financial year R939 million was spent on 1 new
              police station and 5 were renovated; and


           d) in the 2009-10 financial year R1,1 million was spent on 2 new
              police stations and 1 was renovated;


      2) further notes that a total amount of R3,2 billion has been spent
         in 4 financial years and only 23 police stations have been built
         and/or renovated; and


    (3)     calls for an immediate investigation into this matter.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, order! Order! Hon member, I am not
sure that is a notice of a motion. I mean it is a notice of a motion. We
are going to discuss the Budget Vote. You can participate in the Budget
Vote in that regard. I am not too sure that is a notice of a motion.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
Council I shall move:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that a faction of the flagging Congress of the People led by
         one of its, leaders Mosiuoa Lekota, released a statement yesterday
         alleging that the party’s parliamentary Chief Whip Mbhazima Shilowa
         not only misused the allocated portions of the R20 million
         parliamentary grant allocated to support the party’s parliamentary
         work, but has also solicited and abused some of the funds for
         personal battles within Cope; and


   (2)      takes this opportunity to reiterate its call to Parliament and
         the Secretary to Parliament to institute a formal inquiry into
         these allegations.


Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the Council, I shall move:

    That the Council —


     1) notes, with astonishment, that the ANC Youth League is unable to
        hold democratic elections, as was made manifest in Limpopo and over
        the weekend in the Eastern Cape;


     2) notes further that in Limpopo things became so chaotic that police
        had to be called to the meeting to restore order and that some
        senior ANC Youth League officials were criminally charged for
        allegedly stealing conference documents;


     3) believes that this bad example is negatively influencing politics
        in our country; and
     4) calls on government to take measures to introduce electoral reform
        to safeguard government from political micromanagement and to
        instil democratic values in the youth of this country.

Ms E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the Council, I shall move:

    That the Council –


     1) notes that the department of health in the Eastern Cape has fallen
        behind in previous financial years with occupation-specific
        dispensation, OSD, and human resource translation of posts, HRTOP,
        payments to medical professionals;


     2) notes that the image of the Eastern Cape department of health is
        almost synonymous with poor management, poor payment to staff and
        poor financial management;


     3) further notes that a turnaround is needed in this department with
        adequate financial support and calls on the Minister of Health to
        intervene;

     4) realises that a number of these professionals have taken this
        department to court and it was ruled that these payments be made
        within a certain period, but the department has fallen so far
        behind with these payments that the Minister of Health was
        approached in this regard;


     5) recognises that the Eastern Cape department of health cannot
        operate without additional funding, based on the small operational
        budget allocations of only 25% of the budget for goods and services
        and only 70% allocated to staff and the lack of drugs; and


    (6)     calls on the Minister of Health to investigate whether the
        transfer of funds from the national department to the provincial
        department has occurred.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your time has expired. Your motion
will be printed in full on the next Order Paper.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council, I shall move:


    That the Council –


     1) notes that the national leadership of the ANC Youth League took
        over the running of the Western Cape Youth League branch due to bad
        administration and other misconduct by the said branch;


     2) notes further that this culminates from the bad situation and
        character in the failure of the ANC structures in the Western Cape
        due to factionalism within the ANC and the fight between the Thabo
        Mbeki and Jacob Zuma groups in the province and nationally in the
        ANC;


     3) believes that the ANC will struggle for many years to come with
        these problems because they don’t have the political will to
        address the problems openly and responsibly; and


    (4)     further believes that the ANC will have no strong arm to fight
        the coming local government elections in 2011 and the DA will win
        most of the councils next year.

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the Council, I shall move:

    That the Council –


     1) notes, with shock, that President Zuma is only now shocked at the
        conditions under which people live in informal settlements like
        Sweetwater;


     2) notes that members of government are so cocooned in layers of
        comfort that they are no longer in touch with the reality on the
        ground;


     3) believes that government never meant to honour its promise of
        either a better life for all or that together they would do better;
        and


    (4)     calls on government to put its money where its mouth is and to
        implement immediate and visible measures to alter the circumstances
        of people living in informal settlements like Sweetwater.

            SUICIDE OF CONSTABLE C MABASA AND KILLING OF HIS WIFE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1) notes that a police officer, Constable C Mabasa, shot and killed
         his wife and critically wounded his 16-week pregnant sister-in-law
         who had been living with the couple in Cosmo City near Randburg on
         Monday, 17 May 2010;

      2) further notes that the police officer who was admitted ``fighting
         for his life’’ at Milpark Hospital has since passed on and his
         sister-in-law is still fighting for her life at Chris Hani
         Baragwanath Hospital;

      3) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
         this incident and other police suicides and family murders that
         have left countless numbers of children without parents and with a
         lifetime of trauma and wishes the sister-in-law a speedy recovery;

      4) calls on all police officers to use all the available psychological
         and family support and counselling services within the police
         force; and

      5) further calls on the Minister to look at other mechanisms that will
         encourage or make it mandatory for officers who have experienced a
         violent or traumatic experience or who show signs of distress, to
         receive counselling.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           TAXI INVOLVED IN ACCIDENT ON N2 AND BADEN POWELL DRIVE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

     1) notes that 12 passengers suffered serious injuries when their taxi
        was involved in an accident on the N2 and Baden Powell Drive in the
        direction of Somerset West in Cape Town;


     2) also notes that the driver was carrying 27 passengers instead of
        the 16 designated for his taxi and provincial traffic authorities
        have confirmed that eNatis records show that the driver had no
        licence and that his learner’s licence expired on 25 February 2010;




     3) further notes that 26 people were seriously injured when two
        speeding minibus taxis collided on the M4 Southern Freeway in the
        vicinity of the Durban International Airport late last night and
        that since the Metrorail strike began on Monday, some taxi drivers
        are reportedly holding communities at ransom and taking advantage
        of stranded commuters by overloading and overcharging them;


     4) calls on all taxi operators to ensure that their drivers obey the
        traffic laws and that they refrain from all sorts of selfish and
        illegal means of extorting desperate and helpless commuters; and
     5) further calls on the MEC for transport and all relevant authorities
        to intervene and make themselves visible in the taxi ranks.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

      READINESS OF SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE FOR 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —


      1) takes this opportunity to congratulate the demonstration of
         readiness by the South African Police Force to protect all foreign
         visitors and teams that are participating in the most anticipated
         2010 Fifa World Cup;


      2) calls on all communities to rally behind the police and alert them
         when witnessing any element of criminality; and


      3) takes this opportunity to say to the world that we are ready and
         calls all the people of South Africa to raise their national flags
         and blow their vuvuzelas as we rally behind Bafana Bafana and say:
         Ke nako, feel it, it is here and we are ready!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                      CONDOLENCES TO PREMIER MOKONYANE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1) notes the death of the brother of Gauteng Premier Nomvula Mokonyane
         who died at the age of 62 at the Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg
         Academic Hospital;


      2) further notes that Mr Oliver Mkhize was admitted to the Dr Yusuf
         Dadoo Hospital in Krugersdorp, west of Johannesburg, with heart
         complications and he was later transferred to Charlotte Maxeke
         Academic Hospital in central Johannesburg where he sadly passed
         away; and


      3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to
         Premier Mokonyane and her family.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

              DEATH OF LEGENDARY SPORTS WRITER, RODNEY HARTMAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —


      1) notes with profound sadness the death of legendary sports writer
         Rodney Hartman, who died after his long and courageous battle
         against leukaemia at the Linksfield Clinic yesterday;


      2) takes this opportunity to pay tribute to Hartman for his
         contribution to our country’s media, especially in advancing sport
         broadcasting and analysis;


      3) acknowledges that Hartman spent a year in the navy before starting
         his journalism career with the SA Press Association, Sapa, in
         Johannesburg and went on to write three biographies — on world
         boxing champion Brian Mitchell, cricket captain Hansie Cronjé and
         Ali Bacher;


      4) recognises that Hartman also covered the beginning of the anti-
         apartheid movement’s sport protests from Sapa’s London office,
         before joining the Sunday Times, where he was that paper’s sports
         editor and later became the inaugural sports editor of The Sunday
         Independent;


      5) further notes that Hartman was first a specialist sports writer for
         the entire Independent group of newspapers, which publishes The
         Star, and went on to occupy various executive roles, culminating in
         his appointment as group sports convenor; and


      6) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to his
         wife Carien, three sons, Justin, Oliver and Scott and daughter,
         Emma.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                  BLUE BULLS RUGBY MATCH AT ORLANDO STADIUM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1) notes that the Blue Bulls will play the Crusaders in a Super 14
         semi-final rugby match at the Orlando Stadium in Soweto;
      2) further notes that it will be the first time that a rugby match
         will be hosted in a soccer arena in Soweto, namely Orlando Stadium;



      3) recognises that this showcase will bring lots of promising
         opportunities to the people in Soweto and the executive of the
         Orlando Stadium now and in future organised planned matches; and

      4) wishes the Blue Bulls good luck and supports that they will end the
         match as the winners of the semi-final of the Super 14 rugby
         competition.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am sorry, but the time for motions has
expired. I will give one to the Chief Whip. Mr Bloem and Mr Harris wanted
to move, but the time for motions has expired. Are they important motions?
[Interjections.] I will give you one minute just for those two motions.

                        CONDOLENCES TO DREYER FAMILY

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, I move without notice:


    That the Council —

      1) notes that DA MP Anchen Dreyer lost her brother Frans when the
         airline flying from Johannesburg to Tripoli crash-landed last week;
         and

      2) extends its heartfelt condolences to the Dreyer family and
         especially Frans’s wife Estelle and his two daughters Lisa and
         Marie.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    INTERVENTION BY DEPARTMENT OF CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL
                 AFFAIRS IN RESPECT OF FAILED MUNICIPALITIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1) notes, with serious concern, how the Department of Co-operative
         Governance and Traditional Affairs has had to intervene in terms of
         section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution in respect of more and more
         failed municipalities;

      2) also notes that allegations of corruption, maladministration and
         poor service delivery are common themes and that looting, not
         governance, is characterising many municipalities;


      3) believes that this is a matter of national crisis; and


      4) calls on government to introduce amendments to the Local
         Government: Municipal Finance Management Act to better regulate the
         supply chain management and to introduce greater accountability and
         transparency before local government collapses in its entirety.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, I have seen the note that you have
sent to me. Can I come back to you and rule on this one tomorrow? I just
want to check the Rule to see whether this is a substantive motion that
should be moved or a motion without notice. I want to ensure that my ruling
is proper and correct. The member of the DA can raise this in a debate if
he wants to. We are debating the issues of departments today.

  RECOMMENDATION TO APPOINT ADV MODIBEDI ERIC PHINDELA AS SECRETARY TO THE
                                    NCOP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council, on the recommendation of the Rules Committee after
    consideration of the need to ensure stability of the administration of
    the National Council of Provinces, appoints Adv Modibedi Eric Phindela
    as Secretary to the NCOP with effect from 1 June 2010.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 24 — Police:
The MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson, Deputy Minister of Police, Mr Mbalula,
chairperson of the select committee, Mr Mofokeng – I didn’t see him here
today. Is he here? Oh yes ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: He is very much here.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon members of the NCOP, staff in the Ministry,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 2010 is the year of action of
ensuring that all people in South Africa are, and feel, safe. As declared
by the President of the Republic, His Excellency Jacob Zuma, on the
occasion of the state of the nation address, government shall accelerate
service delivery. He further made a commitment that the work of government
will be measured according to outcomes. To that extent the Justice, Crime
Prevention and Security, JCPS, cluster’s job is to ensure that all people
in South Africa are, and feel, safe in their homes, places of work and
businesses, whilst they carry on with their lives. In this context,
“people” refers to all law-abiding citizens.

Today, we want to announce the commencement of the process towards the
realisation of the imperative of the Constitution of creating a single
police service. Section 205(2) of the Constitution says:

   National legislation must establish the powers and functions of the
   police service and must enable the police service to discharge its
   responsibilities effectively, taking into account the requirements of the
   provinces.

Section 205(3) says that:

   The objects of the police service are to prevent, combat and investigate
   crime, to maintain public order, to protect and secure the inhabitants of
   the Republic and their property, and to uphold and enforce the law.

We have tasked the Secretariat of Police to investigate the feasibility of
implementing this constitutional imperative. We are mentioning this to
sensitise all people in our country that, indeed, the work has started. We
are, however, under no illusion that this is not going to be a protracted
process, but we are committed to it, and achieve it we will.

We need the creation of a new kind of a police officer in order to fight
crime and fight it effectively. We need to recruit the right calibre of
police officers. Whilst fitness and the ability to operate firearms are
some of the essentials, it is in essence discipline, upholding the
Constitution, defending the weak, enforcing the law and being generally
upright that should constitute the defining core values of the police. We
have in the past year accelerated the issue of recruitment of police
members.

Any police organisation requires capable, innovative and upright leaders to
guide its personnel. To this end, we have appointed new leadership to take
charge of the SAPS. We have put in place a new National Police
Commissioner, Gen Bheki Cele, to provide general operational leadership
guidance and direction of the SAPS. We have also reinforced our
intelligence arm with the appointment of      Lt-Gen Mdluli as divisional
head. As government, we took a stance to fight crime and fight it toughly
and smartly.

To realise this objective certain steps have been undertaken. Amongst these
is the transformation of the police ranks to ensure clear lines of command
and control, whilst instilling a sense of discipline amongst the members.
We are under no illusion that a mere change in ranks will automatically
lead to a dramatic decline in crimes. The change is but part of a bigger
approach in transforming the SAPS, with an emphasis on enforcing the
highest form of discipline within the Police Service, also from the point
of view of retraining and reskilling the police according to have respect
for their peers, their commanders and society in general. It is important
to emphasise that the change in the police ranks is an operational matter
and has no constitutional implications whatsoever.

Section 199(1) of the Constitution talks to the Police Service and section
207(1) of the Constitution speaks to the national commissioner and this
will continue to be the case. There is therefore no desire from anybody
amongst us to tamper with the policy underpinnings that inform our approach
to policing. The issue of how we mobilise and galvanise the material and
attitudinal resources of the police to help to enhance discipline, instil
confidence and resolve, and uplift the morale within the ranks, does not
and should not be interpreted to mean or suggest policy reorientation.

Transformation should not be viewed in isolation from the other pillars of
our strategy, which are strengthening partnerships with the communities,
making life difficult for criminals, utilising intelligence as a nerve
centre of policing and strengthening the legislative framework,
particularly the oversight of the Independent Complaints Directorate and
the civilian secretariat.

In the fight against criminals we shall take no chances with the lives of
police officers. We shall also not allow abuses by individual police
officers to go unchallenged. To address this, we have also strengthened the
Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD, by appointing Mr Beukman in August
2009 as its executive director.

The Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation, DPCI – also known as the
Hawks – is currently made up of 2 633 members. We have already appointed
deputy provincial commissioners in eight of the nine provinces and
additional personnel are currently undergoing vetting. In their short
existence, the Hawks have already scored successes in a number of fields.
On 6 July 2009, 287 projects from the former Directorate of Special
Operations, DSO, were transferred to the DPCI. The SAPS now has an
effective process to deal with organised crime projects investigations,
OCPI.

Concerning organised crime, the Hawks have registered 3 850 arrests, with
573 convictions. Concerning commercial crimes, there have been 8 186
arrests, with 4 960 convictions. Concerning the number of people who have
been profiled and targeted – the top 50 most wanted criminals – the Hawks
have, since December last year, arrested 28 criminals so far and the work
is in progress.

A drug laboratory with drugs to the value of R200 million was recovered in
an operation in Midrand in August 2009. A transnational drug bust recovered
drugs to the value of R600 million in Phoenix in September 2009. A drug lab
to the value of R1 billion was discovered in December 2009. Other drug
busts include the arrest in Kempton Park in February 2010 of a school
teacher in possession of ephedrine to the value of R35 million. In March
2010, a drug lab in Benoni was closed down and drugs to the value of R5,4
million were seized. These are some of the successes the Hawks have scored
in the past few months since their existence.

We are in the process of strengthening the fight against crimes against
women and children. To this end we have ensured that we are re-establishing
the family violence, child protection and sexual offences, FCS, unit. A
deadline has been set for 1 June 2010 for all vacant funded posts to be
filled, while the FCS units need to be fully operational by 1 April 2011.
We are happy to announce the appointment of Lt-Col Bafana Peter Linda to
head this unit. Having been based in the UK, where he acquired extensive
expertise in the field, we believe he will be a valuable asset.

Concerning rural safety, we have interacted with a variety of community
organisations, political organisations and so on from a wide spectrum of
ideological backgrounds. We have put the rural safety plan before the
nation. What we are waiting for is for everybody to interact with the plan,
to strengthen it where they think it is weak before we start implementing
it. This will allow the SAPS to get down to where people are on the farms
and ensure that life is safe there.

On the issue of the World Cup, we are adequately prepared. As the member
has said: “Feel it, it is here”. We are ready. Our readiness ranges from
personnel to state-of-the-art equipment, ICT and co-operation with the
security agencies from all the 31 participating countries.

Furthermore, at the beginning of March 2010 in Zurich in Switzerland, we
presented our comprehensive security plan to all the police chiefs, police
experts and everybody who deals with security matters. The plan was given
resounding approval by all the participating countries.

In ensuring that we keep in touch with the people, we have also
crisscrossed the country, interacting with community structures, especially
the community police forums. We have also been able to deal with various
issues, such as drug abuse with an emphasis on kingpins, the proliferation
of firearms and other social crimes.

Most of these communities affirmed their support for our programmes and
expressed their belief in government. They even raised issues falling
outside of policing, thus underlining the point of an integrated approach
as government in the fight against crime.

In relation to the Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority, PSIRA, a
council was appointed which is chaired by Mr Thula Bophela and it started
operations on 1 January 2010. In the near future we will also be tabling
legislation around PSIRA, particularly regulating the industry itself. A
consultation process with the relevant stakeholders has already begun. We
intend to make sure that the private security industry conforms to the
necessary standards, and displays the accountability and openness that is
required. We also seek to bring the regulation of the industry in line with
international norms and best practices.

Despite the successes that have been achieved there are a number of
challenges that we face and which are being addressed by the department.
The forensic science laboratories, FSL, for instance, have decreased their
backlog from the 2008-09 financial year to the 2009-10 financial year by
14% and are planning to decrease the backlog by a further 20% by 2010-11.

However, we have recognised that the current functioning of the FSL is far
from ideal. To address this, we are currently in a process of engaging
international and local experts with a view to assisting us in transforming
the FSL into a world-class unit.

2010 is the year of action to ensure that all people in South Africa are,
and feel, safe. On 30 April 2010 I signed my performance agreement with the
President. The overall outcome of this measurement is that, on behalf of
the Ministry, I must ensure that all people in South Africa are, and feel,
safe. Whilst this is not a task given to an individual, I would, however,
be expected to make a valuable contribution within the collective to
realise this outcome.

The government, together with the people of our land, remains capable of
tackling the challenges that South Africa faces today. Collectively, we
have a responsibility to bring about a better life for all. Together with
communities, government will ensure that criminals are dealt with severely.
This is in line with the Freedom Charter which gave birth to the
Constitution of the Republic, which proclaims that: “There shall be peace,
security and comfort”. Those who say it cannot be done should not obstruct
those who are doing it.

Siyenza ngoku. [We are working now.]

Re a dira janong. [We are now working.]

This is the year of action. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Modulasetulo, Letona le kgabane le Motlatsi wa Letona.
Ke tlotla ho nna ho nka karolo ditherisanong tsa kajeno.

Ke batla ho qala ka hore, kgaolo ya 205 ya Molaotheo wa selemo sa 1996, e
fa sepolesa boikarabelo ba ho thibela le ho fuputsa tlolo ya molao, hore ho
be le botsitso setjhabeng; ho sireletsa le ho boloka Maafrika Borwa mmoho
le thepa ya bona; ho boloka le ho kenya tshebetsong melao ya naha ena.

Boikarabelo ba ditekanyetso tsena ke ho hlokomela hore mohopolo le maano a
lefapha a tshehetswa ka ditjhelete ho phethahatsa boikarabelo. Ho na le
dibaka ka hara naha ya rona tse hlokang polokeho, hobane ha ho na dikantoro
tsa sepolesa; haholoholo dibakeng tsa rona tse mahaeng.

Re thoholetsa lefapha ka mekutu eo le e entseng, ho aha le ho lokisa tse
neng di le maemomg a sa lokang, moo ho neng ho le bobebe hore batshwaruwa
ba balehe, le tseo di sa ntseng di tlo ho ahwa di bolokehe mme di kgone ho
amohela le batho basa itekanelang.

Batjha ba naha ena ba bangata ba iphumana ba sa sebetse ha ba qeta ho bala
sekolong. E se e ka sepolesa se ka etsa ka hohlehohle ho nka batjha ba iswe
thupellong le kwetlisong ya maemo a hodimo hore ba kgone ho tlo thusa ho
lwantshana le botlokotsebe, hobane ha ba sa etse letho ba qetella ba etsa
diketso tsa tlolo ya molao.

Ditekanyetso tsena di tlamehile ho arabela bofokoding bo teng sepoleseng,
bo amanang le ho ajwa ha mehlodi twantshong ya bosenyi. Sepolesa se
tlamehile ho aba batho ba nang le bokgoni ba tsamaiso le ho fuputsa
dibakeng tseo ba hlokehang ho tsona. Dikoloi le tsona di tlamehile ho ya
dibakeng tseo tlolo ya molao e atileng ho tsona, mme le mahaeng di
tlamehile ho iswa.

Ditekanyetso tsena di tlamehile ho sebetsana le ho phahamiswa mesebetsing
ha mapolesa ho ya ka bokgoni ba bona ba ho sebetsa le hore ba fumane
meputso e hantle, e tla etsang hore ba se ke ba amohela tjotjo ho tswa
mashodung, ba leka ho phetha mabaka ka lebaka la meputso e tlase.

Ditekanyetso tsena di tlamehile ho arabela diphetohong tse tlamehileng ho
ba teng sepoleseng, maemong a hodimo a tsamaiso ya sepolesa. Batho ba
batsho, Maindia le ba mmala ba tlamehile ho bewa maemong a hodimo a taolo
ho ya ka thuto le bokgoni ba bona, e le ho fetola maemo a siilweng ke
kgethollo. Batho ba bomme ka ho kgetholleha le batho ba nang le diphephetso
mmeleng, le bona ba tlamehile ho fuwa menyetla ya bona.

Ditekanyetso tsena di tlamehile ho thusa mapolesa a nang le nnete, a
sebetsang ka botshepehi, ho ntsha ka hara bona bana ba se nang botshepehi,
ba nang le dikamano le mashodu. Ho ba le dikamano le mashodu e le mapolesa
ho ba etsa mashodu le bona, mme ba tlameha ho ntshuwa sepoleseng, hobane ha
se mapolesa ke mashodu. Ba thusang batshwaruwa ho baleha ditlamong; ba
utswang ditokomane le dithunya tsa mosebetsi; ba fang mashodu lesedi hore
na dithibella tsa mebileng di etsuwa kae, ba tlamehile ho ntshuwa
sepoleseng, ha ba na sebaka.

Ditekanyetso tsena di tlamehile ho fana ka kwetliso le thupello e hodimo ho
sepolesa hore ba kgone ho etsa mosebetsi o phethahetseng, ba iswe
mafatsheng a mang, ha ho kgoneha, hore maemo a bona a tshebetso a phahame.

Kgethollo eo ho tletlejwang ka yona sepoleseng e tlamehile ho fela, hobane
re batla ho aha setjhaba se sa kgetheng batho ho ya ka merabe. Diforamo tsa
setjhaba tsa bopolesa di tlamehile ho matlafatswa di thuswe ho kgobokanya
setjhaba sa rona kgahlano le bosenyi, mme di kgothalletswe ho sebetsa mmoho
le sepolesa hobane batho bana ba tlolang molao ba dula ka hara rona.

Setjhaba sa rona le sona se hlokomediswe hore ho bolawa ha mapolesa ho
fekisa ntwa kgahlano le bosenyi. Molao o tshwanela ho sebetsana hampe le
batho ba bolayang mapolesa, ka tsela e tla ba bea maemong a lokileng.
Mapolesa le ona a etse ka hohlehohle hore a bolokehe, ka ho apara diaparo
tsa bona tse ba sireletsang nakong ya mosebetsi.

Naha ya rona e fuwe monyetla wa ho hlophisa dipapadi tsa mohope wa
lefatshe. Mme batho ba tswang mafatsheng a ka ntle ho tla nka karolo, ba
tla tla tshehetsa dinaha tsa bona. Boikarabelo bo ho sepolesa sa rona ho
sireletsa boemafonane; dihotele; mabala a dipapadi; le dibaka moo batho ba
tlang ho boha dipapadi teng.

Mashodu le ona a tlo nka monyetla wa ho rekisa dithethefatsi, ba hwebe ka
batho, haholoholo bana, ba tlo etswa diotswa. Ditshoso tse etswang tsa ho
phatlola diqhomane ka maikemisetso a ho senya dipapadi ke boikarabelo bo
shebaneng le sepolesa sa rona, mme re tshepa hore ba ikemiseditse.

Mmuso wa ANC ke mmuso o hlomphang ditokelo le ho itseka ha basebetsi. Ntwa
ya basebetsi, ya nyollelo ya moputso ka nako ena, e tlo sitisa sepolesa sa
rona ho tsepamisa maikutlo ho sireletseng bahahlaudi, nakong ya dipapadi.
Re ipiletsa ho baetapele, basebetsi le beng ba dikhampani ho buisana le ho
dumellana hore nakong ya dipapadi ho se be le boipelaetso ba basebetsi bo
tla hloka sepolesa ho shebana le batho ba tsekang nyollelo ya meputso.

Re tshepa hore ho tla ba le tshebedisanommoho pakeng tsa sepolesa sa rona
le sepolesa se tswang ka ntle, hore ho be le tshireletso e hantle. ANC e
tshehetsa ditekanyetso. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho
speech follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, it is an
honour for me to take part in today’s discussions.

I would like to start by saying that section 205 of the 1996 Constitution
charges the police with the responsibility to prevent and investigate
illegal activities so that there is stability in the country; to protect
and keep South Africans together with their property safe; and to protect
and keep the laws of this country, in effect.

The purpose of this budget is to ensure that the programmes and policies of
the department receive financial support so that the department can fulfil
its responsibilities. There are areas in this country which do not have
adequate safety and protection because there are no police stations,
especially in our rural areas.

We would like to congratulate the department on its efforts to build and
fix those prisons that were in a state of disrepair, where it was easy for
prisoners to escape from jail. The ones that are still to be built must be
safe and should be user-friendly even for the physically disabled.

Many of the youth of this country find themselves unemployed after
graduating from high school. It would be a good thing if the department
could do everything in its power to recruit the youth and send them for
training of the highest order so that they can come back and assist in the
fight against crime, because if they don’t do anything they end up
committing crime themselves.

This budget is supposed to address the shortcomings in the police
department in regard to the distribution of resources in the fight against
crime. The department must deploy individuals who have the ability to
manage and conduct investigations in areas that have such needs. Police
vehicles should also be allocated to areas where there is a high incidence
of crime, even in the rural areas.

This budget must address issues of promotion in the Police Service
according to the police officers’ abilities so that they are remunerated
accordingly, which will help in preventing them from accepting bribes from
criminals as a way of supplementing their low salaries.

This budget must deal with the changes that must be introduced in the upper
echelons of the Police Service. Blacks, Indians and coloureds must be
appointed to high management positions in accordance with their
qualifications and abilities as a way of redressing the imbalances of
apartheid. Women in particular, as well as the physically challenged, must
also be afforded opportunities.

This budget must help honest policemen, who are dedicated, by removing
those who are dishonest and who have links with criminals. To have links
with criminals whilst being a policeman makes them criminals too. Therefore
they have to be rooted out of the Police Service because they are not
policemen, they are criminals. Those who help prisoners to escape from
jail, those who steal documents and weapons from work, and those who give
criminals information about where roadblocks are going to be set up must be
removed from the Police Service. There is no place for them.

This budget must be able to provide education and training of the highest
order for the police in order for them to be able to perform their duties
effectively. They should be sent to other countries, if possible, so that
their standard of work can improve.

Complaints about discrimination in the Police Service must come to an end
because we want to build a society where there is no discrimination based
on race. National police forums must be strengthened and assisted in order
to unite our nation against crime, and they must be encouraged to work
together with the police because the people who break the law live amongst
us.
Our people must also be aware that the killing of police officers makes it
difficult to fight crime. The law must be particularly harsh on those who
kill members of the police, so that the lives of the police can be
protected. Police themselves must also try by all means to be safe by
wearing protective body armour whilst on duty.

Our country has been given the opportunity to organise the soccer World Cup
tournament and people from participating countries will be coming to
support their teams. It is therefore the responsibility of the police to
provide adequate security at the airports, hotels, sports stadia and venues
where people will be watching the matches.

Criminals are going to take advantage of the opportunity to sell drugs, and
practise human trafficking, especially with children who are going to be
turned into prostitutes. It is also the responsibility of the police to
deal with the bomb threats that are made with the intention of ruining the
tournament. We hope that they are prepared.

The ANC-led government is a government that respects workers’ rights and
their right to protest. The workers’ protests for salary increases at this
time are going to disrupt our police’s focus on protecting tourists during
the tournament. We appeal to the leaders, workers and business owners to
negotiate with the workers and reach an agreement that there should be no
strike action during the tournament that will require the intervention of
the police as a result of wage increase protests.

We hope that there will be co-operation between our police and those from
outside so that there is adequate security. The ANC supports the budget.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, MECs, special
delegates, and hon fellow delegates, for us as delegates from the rural
provinces, normal life goes hand in hand with nature conservation and the
preservation of our wonderful range of game species and their protection
against ruthless criminals.

Two nights ago on the evening television programme 50/50, information
shared indicated that, during the past year alone, ruthless criminals have
brutally killed 75 rhinoceros to fuel their greed for illegal income from
the international trade in contraband rhino horn. Particularly encouraging
is the proactive efforts to curb this form of crime in our country,
together with plans to nullify the profitability of the trade in rhino horn
by all stakeholders.

I refer to this type of crime and the fight against it to highlight another
highly distressing crime in the rural areas, namely farm attacks and the
brutal murder of farm dwellers, both farmers and farmworkers. Information
from the Minister’s own office is that in the same period that 75
rhinoceros were killed, no less than 794 farm attacks occurred, during
which a devastating 86 farm dwellers were murdered in South Africa.

One must ask what is really being done by the police to stop or, at least,
reduce such murders, especially if compared with a very commendable and
wide-ranging measure implemented to curb the slaughtering of rhinoceros and
game poaching. Since 2006 — more than four years ago and even more
Ministers ago — the DA has been urging the government to introduce a
visible crime prevention unit to replace the commandos which were
unilaterally disbanded and removed from the rural areas.

Many promises have since been made in regard to an increase in visible
police presence and the deployment of reservists in rural areas. Of this,
very little has come thus far. On the contrary, whilst cities and urban
areas are flooded with police and SAPS vehicles, smaller towns and rural
areas still suffer from a shortage of infrastructure and particularly crime-
combating vehicles.

I often drive past the SAPS depot in Middelburg, Mpumalanga, where a
multitude of brand-new SAPS vehicles have been parked for many weeks now,
unmoved and gathering dust, to the point where it is no longer clear
whether these were white vehicles or perhaps grey, brown or black. I am
happy to today hear from the Minister that under his leadership new
measures have been instituted, and we wish him well in this endeavour.

However, I must ask, Chairperson, how the Minister explains such a build-up
of unused reserve vehicles in the face of a severe shortage of transport to
facilitate the important work of the police in the rural areas, whilst he
is embarking on increased security measures in the same areas. When will
the police be properly empowered to do their work in the rural provinces,
and when will we see a working solution to combat crime in our farming
communities?

Whilst speaking of Mpumalanga, let me highlight another problem that is
sorely hampering the effective work in that province, my province. I am
referring to the moving of the SAPS provincial headquarters from Middelburg
to Nelspruit. This move must, of course, be supported from the point of
view of having the SAPS head office in the capital of the province, but
then better forward planning would have been expected from the department.
When you move a head office, you make sure that you don’t have debt that
you leave behind. You make sure that plans are made in the new quarters
where the head offices will be housed, and you make sure that everything is
in place.

My information is that the offices that were occupied in Middelburg have
long leases, and they are now standing empty. In one instance, a new
building was built with a 21-year lease secured by the SAPS, and it is now
standing empty whilst some of the police officers in Nelspruit are working
from the corridors of the offices. Estate agents tell me that they are
inundated with calls from SAPS officials asking for accommodation somewhere
in Nelspruit.

Let me end, Chair, by going back to the problem of rural security and refer
you to a document – and I hope that the Minister has actually studied and
read what I will refer to now before he embarked on his own measures. That
is the strategy of the DA, as outlined by our leader, Premier Helen Zille,
on 6 April 2010. In that delivery, she emphasised strategies that we
proposed. You see, that is the normal reaction, but the ANC continually
says that people should not criticise but come up with plans. When I put
the plan on the table, a senior officer of the ANC laughs.

However, Minister, I hope that you are listening. The measures that we ask
you to introduce, and please give me a minute, are measures to strengthen
stressed sector policing in the rural areas, the establishment of a
specialised border and rural safety division, the establishment of rural
intelligence centres, the facilitation of sufficient resources for SAPS
stations, rural safety initiatives and the creation of the posts of
divisional commissioners to co-ordinate and lead these structures.

Time constraints have stopped me from going into the details of these, but
it is available for anybody to study and, after all, Chairperson, as I
said, we are not here to criticise only; we offer a solution. I hope you
have read it, Minister. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, I would
like to start with the Smart policing strategy. Police strategy and
management have to answer serious challenges. Through Smart policing, the
department can achieve improved crime control, better service delivery, and
cost-effectiveness. Smart policing stands for policing that is
strategically managed, analysed, researched, and technology-based.

To begin with, police must do two things: protect and have a relationship
with the public. The public must also do the same thing. It is not only the
police that must have a relationship with the public. In order to achieve
this Smart policing, the following programme is proposed: a new style of
community policing, hot spot policing, problem-oriented policing, and crime
mapping. In the United States of America, they are already ahead of us.

We need to protect the local communities from crime and violence. This has
to begin with housing infrastructure. The concept of cohousing must
seriously be considered by the department. Our government must also create
a fusion centre where intelligence, information and data are given in order
to solve crimes.

Let us come to Home Affairs, and the issue of corruption. We need to have a
project. We should have the police there, in terms of five or six officers,
so that when officials see them, they won’t commit this type of corruption.
On the issue of education, it should be seen as a lifelong learning
activity for police officers. It must strengthen the police time and again.


Posts are not filled, as you have said, Minister. If you cannot get a
suitable person, just hire a person on contract, as this will keep the work
of the police going.

Minister, I would like to congratulate you on the preparations for the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup. Really, when you see the national commissioner ... I
call him General Squeeze. We want him to squeeze all the crime from the
cocoons and caves, so that these criminals must come out and be arrested.
[Applause.]

This past Sunday, I saw the television programme Duty Calls. That
programme, Minister, is fantastic. It must go right around the country, as
they are doing, and the presenter ...

... is tweetalig. Sy kan Afrikaans uitstekend praat. Hou aan, Minister. Ons
sê baie dankie daarvoor. [Applous.] [... is bilingual. She speaks excellent
Afrikaans. Keep it up, Minister. We thank you for it. [Applause]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Who is out of order? There is no person
speaking.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, it’s a point of order. I want the Minister to
tell me what he gave this general. Maybe there is something. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, that’s not a point of order. Take your
seat, hon member. [Laughter.]

Mr M G E WILEY (Western Cape): Chairperson of the NCOP, I’m grateful for
the opportunity to speak in this debate. I’m delivering a speech on behalf
of MEC Lennit Max who is unfortunately with the Premier this afternoon. He
has asked me to come and speak to you instead.

Hon Minister, Deputy Minister of Police, hon MECs, hon members of the NCOP,
and members of the SA Police Service, SAPS — I don’t see too many of them
here — I want from the outset to congratulate the Minister on the standard
of the readiness parade held recently in Cape Town. As with any red-blooded
South African, we were all very proud to see both the person power and
resources that were on display. We wish you and all members in uniform the
best for the very onerous task they are going to have next month in keeping
both the citizens and the visitors to South Africa safe during the World
Cup. You have our greatest support in that regard.

Recently, the Minister focused on employing the right kind of police
officer, a different kind of police officer in the SA Police Service, SAPS.
The hon Minister said, and I quote:


  In order to fight crime and fight it effectively, we need to recruit the
  right calibre of police officer. Whilst fitness and the ability to
  operate firearms are some of the essentials, it is discipline, upholding
  the Constitution, defending the weak, enforcing the law and being
  generally upright that should constitute the defining core values of the
  police.

I concur wholeheartedly in this regard, and would like to applaud the
Minister for taking this particularly strong view. It is indeed true that
we need men and women in the Police Service who are proud to wear the blue
uniform and are willing to serve the people of South Africa irrespective of
their rank and stature.

However, the appointment, reappointment and promotion of police officers
are largely closed processes which only the national head of police is
privileged to perform. I wish to propose that the provincial members of the
executive committee and other important stakeholders in the safety,
security and justice cluster be granted some, even if limited, say in this
process. This will ensure that fit-for-purpose appointments and promotions
across the board will be embraced in the SAPS to further ensure the
efficient and effective functioning thereof, especially in the provinces
where they have to serve.

The hon Minister has also indicated that discipline will be reignited in
the force. This is of critical importance, as ill-discipline is rife within
the SAPS, especially among junior officers. It is exactly here where a
major challenge lies for management as the majority of South African
citizens will only ever come into contact with a junior officer at a
community service centre or while they are patrolling our streets. It is
exactly these first contacts within the Police Service that must have the
most discipline to render a helpful and friendly service to citizens even
though they sometimes do not deserve it. First impressions count.

Discipline at the lowest levels of the Police Service must be reignited and
restored, and rightly so, to its former state in order to deliver the kind
of service that our people are mandated to uphold in the Constitution of
our country. It is at the training academies that the greatest effort in
quality and professionalism must be made, as those academies are where the
foundation for our officers’ future careers is laid.

The SAPS needs more resources, especially infrastructure. Nearly 16 years
into our new democratic dispensation, people still walk long distances to
their nearest police stations. In a particular case, a woman was recently
raped on her way to the police station to report a rape which had just
happened to her. This situation is truly unacceptable. We need more
satellite stations and more contact points in South Africa, especially in
the Western Cape.

I’m particularly shocked to hear that the SAPS spent over R2 billion in the
last two years to build just three police stations and to upgrade only six.
In Ocean View, which is one of my areas of responsibility, they have had,
for the last 18 years, a temporary police station where the 13 store is so
overcrowded that it is impossible to catalogue the evidence, and the door
cannot open more than half a metre.

Speaking of buildings, it is simply a disgrace that residences for SAPS
personnel such as Parkhof in Kenilworth have been allowed to deteriorate to
such an extent that the Cape Town City Council may well condemn the
building totally. One realises that maintenance is a Department of Public
Works function, but as an employer, the SAPS should not be standing idly by
while its personnel are effectively living in squatter conditions which
they also have to pay for on a monthly basis. The state cannot afford to
become a slumlord.

Also of concern is the formula used to inform the manpower plan at police
stations. Does it keep pace with the population increase? I use as an
example the Hout Bay Police Station where the 2001 Census was used as a
benchmark for the policing plan. The population has almost tripled since
then, and yet the station is still at the level at which it was when it was
refurbished just after 2001.

Another issue of great concern is the current status of the forensic
science laboratory services in South Africa. A report by the Auditor-
General completed in November blamed a lack of staff, low staff morale, “a
total disregard” for occupational safety laws, and a lack of backup power
resulting in spoilt samples for backlogs of several years that set back the
fight against crime. The report found that in August 2009, the backlog in
routine toxicology cases stretched back six years, in Johannesburg five
years in Cape Town and four years in Pretoria.

Much like the controversy surrounding accurate figures and crime
statistics, we have no clear picture of the true figure of outstanding
cases mounting in a massive backlog for forensic science laboratories. The
official figures are somewhere in the region of 12 000. However, some
reports suggest that in the Western Cape alone, this backlog may be 18 000
cases. Whichever of these figures are true, whether the former or the
latter, it is far too much and truly a crisis.

The hon Minister announced that the forensic science laboratories had
decreased their backlog in 2008-09 by 14% and are planning to decrease the
backlog by a further 20% this financial year. This is good, but too little.
We must understand that these backlogs have a severely negative impact on
the whole criminal justice cluster, as well as the broader public morale.
These laboratories play a pivotal role in the linking of perpetrators to
crime scenes. When forensic labs face protracted delays, this actively
hampers police investigations, delays court cases and, in turn, disrupts
the effective operation of the criminal justice system.

Victims of violent sexual crimes in particular are entitled to feel that
the state will do all in its power to catch the perpetrator and also to
reassure them that this particular category is taken seriously through
efficient and quick processing of evidence. A question should be asked: Why
must victims live in fear for years because the state is dragging its feet
and lets the dangerous accused out on bail?

This matter has an especially detrimental effect here in the Western Cape
where drugs and gangs go hand in hand. This is more prevalent in this
province than anywhere else in the country. The successful prosecution of
drug-related cases is solely dependent on evidence proven by forensic
science laboratories. Without the effective and efficient functioning of
this critical service, the massive challenge posed by drugs in the Western
Cape will never be successfully combated. Cases get postponed and
eventually thrown out because of a lack of evidence. Therein lies the
truism that justice delayed is justice denied.

In conclusion, the South African criminal justice system is in fact in a
crisis. The police play a role in that regard. It is characterised by
blockages, many of which cause delays in other parts of the criminal
justice pipeline. The system, stretching across the department of safety
and security and the Departments of Justice and Constitutional Development
and of Correctional Services, has never been a unified one. I would suggest
in your tenure that one of your single most successful benchmarks should be
to try and unify those three departments. The links between the various
departments are weak, and the involvement by any other department, such as
welfare, national education and health, that has to play a key role in the
prevention of crime is minimised as a result of this logjam.

The SAPS, as well as the South African justice system, need to have a
serious rethink in this regard. The game needs to be stepped up, and
service delivery must be improved if we want to give effect to the vision
of the President of this country, to make South Africa a better, happier
and safer place to live in. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Chairperson, Minister of Police, Nathi
Mthethwa, chairperson of the select committee, Mr Mofokeng, hon members, SA
Police Service management and staff in the Ministry of Police, in the past
few weeks the SA Police Service has been engaged in simulation activities
throughout the country. These activities were meant to showcase to the
South African public and the world at large the preparedness of the Police
Service to serve and service the country with regard to curbing any
eventualities that might arise during the Fifa 2010 World Cup. Plans were
submitted by all provinces to the national office outlining, with all due
attention to detail, how South Africa will guarantee a safer World Cup.

We want to assure the country and the world that we are ready for the World
Cup. Soccer fans should just bring out the swag in their supporters’
colours, get their vuvuzelas and rehearse their “diski dance” for this
august spectacle event.

We are an activist government, dedicated to action and not rhetoric. As the
hon President already alluded to, 2010 is the year of working together to
speed up effective service delivery to the people. As the SA Police
Service, we are saying that together we can do more in the fight against
crime. The time to kiss, hug and massage crime lapsed last year; a new
cadre police officer took over.

Our message to these criminals who have turned themselves into illustrious
warriors of our time is that, just like the mighty Napoleon finally met his
defeat, you too are about to meet your Waterloo. We have arrived in full
steam to clean criminals off our streets and malls, and to instil fear in
their hearts and minds. This is dictated by the nature of the crime we
witnessed in the previous years, specifically in 2006. It was so lethally
dangerous and aggravating that it resulted in a call by some members of
society for military intervention. We then said that we need to sharpen our
instruments.

“Washa Tsotsi” is a clarion call to action; an action to dig out a tsotsi
from his hiding hole and channel him to prison where he rightfully belongs.
It is a clarion call to tsotsis [criminals] to wet their pants before they
attempt anything. Throughout last year we spoke and made commitments to the
nation that we will sharpen and strengthen any legislative loopholes to rid
ourselves of traitors against goodwill in society.

We did say, hon members, that the Independent Complaints Directorate, IDC,
should bite; the secretariat should assume shape and the Criminal Procedure
Act should be attended to; and a single police force should be ushered in
to operate under one command. We expressed our unrelenting commitment to
realise a safe country where children are able to play and live a clean
life without fear of rape or molestation; a country where women are free to
walk at any time of the day or night without fear or abuse. For these
reasons, the police should be empowered to fight for the weaker within our
society. That’s why we say “asijiki” – forward we go, backward never.

If we are to win this battle, we will need policemen and women who can
flank crime and crush it like eggs. The kind of policemen and women we had
needed some serious attention to ensure that we were equal to the task. We
needed personnel with integrity, a cadre police officer who’ll deliver us
from tsotsis. From the 2006 crime backdrop, we invaded the crime space with
the ferocity of a cornered bull and the agility of a cat. In this
offensive, we were mindful of existing laws governing our country that
needed our careful observation while executing our task.

Crime is not a friend of man or woman, but is an enemy of life. South
Africa currently has fared well in terms of crime reduction, as showcased
by the successful operations during the peak period of the 2009 festive
season in particular.

Minister and hon members, credit should be given where it is due. I am
humbled to stand here today to congratulate the efforts employed during the
2009 festive season launch of Operation Duty Calls. The police embarked on
various visible policing operations countrywide and interacted with
communities, business and various organised structures with the objective
of intensifying our fight against crime. During this period, we witnessed
and experienced a significant decline in various crimes including cash-in-
transit heists, armed robberies, housebreakings, robberies and business
robberies — particularly business robberies. When we started with our
operations, our message to these gun-toting criminals was clear.

The former President, Nelson Mandela, on the occasion of his inauguration
said:


   A person who does what any other person does, is an ordinary person. A
   person who does what no other person can do, is an exception, but a
   person who has done what no other person has ever done, is an
   institution, a national asset . . . and a hero. This is a person about
   whom, when he or she dies, we will be able to say that here lies a man or
   woman who has played his or her role in society.

This quote is fitting today, because we want national heroes and heroines.
We want national assets and institutions in our country in the fight
against crime. We need a cadre in the fight against crime. We are therefore
saying to all members of society that they should stand up and be counted
in the fight against crime.

Vital tools that support the implementation of the crime prevention
strategies include sector policing, reservists and community police forums.
These tools assist in the monitoring and assessment of the police officer.
We are in the process of also assisting with the issue of redefining and
remodelling the role of community police forums, where they will no longer
be tea-ladies and “stuur-boys” [messengers] at the police stations. This
will result, among other things, in a national consensus on the structural
and operational outlook of these community police forums, including their
relations with the provincial government and other stakeholders in the
fight against crime.  It will do away with inconsistencies and departures
from the norm, as is currently the case in the Western Cape.

A national task team was established during the reservists’ summit, to
consider employment-related matters and facilitate the recruitment of
qualifying reservists as permanent employees of the SA Police Service.
Recruitment drives were conducted in all nine provinces and a total of
2 733 reservists were recruited as SA Police Service members and 532 were
recruited as the Public Service Act requires.

There are however, some unbecoming expectations harboured by some who
failed to meet the minimum requirements. They are now trying to turn this
process into a “pass one, pass all” scenario. Our voice in this regard has
consistently been loud and clear, that every reservist will be recruited
into the SA Police Service based on merit and full compliance with the
stipulated criteria.

The tactical response teams are existing in the cluster police stations and
in international airports. Currently, there are 711 members trained and
deployed in various clusters and airports. They have shown a clear
visibility in high crime spots too, especially at shopping malls where
these criminals have been mercilessly opening fire and killing innocent
people.

This necessitated urgent attention, informed by the fact that 70% of
aggravated robberies are committed with firearms or firearms become the
weapon of choice. We then adopted a comprehensive strategy to address the
circulation and easy availability of these firearms and ammunition. We are
also thankful for the support given to the police by Parliament last year
in declaring 11 January 2010 to 11 April 2010 to be a firearms amnesty
period, through the constitutional powers vested in and accorded to the
Minister of Police.

South Africa has a significant pool of illegal firearms in circulation,
which contributes to a high rate of serious and violent crime. The sources
of these illegal firearms range from being stolen from members of the
public to being illegally smuggled into the country through our borders. A
lot was achieved during this process with members of the community
voluntarily surrendering for destruction licensed firearms through the
process prescribed in the Firearms Control Act Regulations, and, also
assisted in allowing those who missed the cutoff date for relicensing to
license their weapons in terms of the Firearms Control Act.

We are encouraged and happy that 46 262 weapons were received through our
police stations as a result of the amnesty period, and that 12 179 of these
were illegal and 27 119 were legal firearms voluntarily surrendered. And
during this period again 6 964 weapons were confiscated by the police.

Hon members, it should also be noted that some in this society we live in
had negative sentiments about this amnesty process. They even went on to
encourage people not to heed the call.

Unfortunately for them, South Africans are responsible and cannot be
dragged back by those with the evil intention of encouraging a society
where a person wields a gun unnecessarily. And our people have responded
positively to this particular campaign, by enriching it through their
participation, throughout the stipulated period. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe nePhini lakho,
ozakwethu amalungu aleNdlu, abasebenzi boMnyango wezokuphepha kuleli lizwe
abakhona, ngiyanibingelela.

Sihlalo, umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe nozakwabo kufuneka bazi ukuthi umbutho
wamaphoyisa yiwona ovikela ubugebengu ezweni kanye nodlame olusuke
lubhekiswe kwizakhamuzi zakulelo lizwe. Ngiyabancoma ukuthi babhekene
nomsebenzi omkhulu wokuphepha kwabo bonke abantu ezweni, ukuvikelwa
kwezimpahla zomphakathi, kanye nokuqashwa kwayo yonke imingcele yezwe
lethu.

Siyi-IFP siyababongela odadewethu ababuthwe njengamaphoyisa alelizwe,
nabafowethu abakhona embuthweni ngokwenza umsebenzi wokuphepha kulelizwe
uphumelele. Kunezinto ezithile engithanda ukuzibeka mhlonishwa ukuthi
amaphoyisa awekho phezu komthetho, nawo aphethwe uMthethosisekelo wezwe.

Into eyenzeke laphaya ekhaya KwaNongoma, lapho kwahlaselwa khona abantu
nabafazi babantu bahanjiswa nqunu emagcekeni. Lokho kwenzeke nakumina
uqobo, emzini kababomkhulu - iNkosi yasoSuthu uMangobe - ingonyama yezwe
lamaZulu. Lapho bangikhipha khona, ngahamba nqunu. Lokho kuyinto
engamukelekile ezweni ukuthi amaphoyisa aziphathe ngalolo hlobo. Ngathi uma
ngiya kumphathi siteshi wathi akawaphethe, nawo uma ngikhuluma nawo athi
awaphethwe nguyena, aphethwe ePitoli.

Ngithi-ke kufanele nikubheke ukuthi uma singumbutho owodwa wamaphoyisa
onoNgqongqoshe oyedwa noSekela Ngqongqoshe oyedwa, kodwa sibe nezinkinga
zokuthi laba bantu bangalawuleki. Umnyango wakho kufanele ukubheke ukuthi
ngabe labo bantu bangabantu abafanele yini ukugada ukuphepha ezweni ngoba
ngibona benezinhloso zabo.

Ngithi ukuziphatha yinto okufanele ibekhona emaphoyiseni, kanti nathi
singumphakathi kufanele sisebenzisane ngokubambisana nawo amaphoyisa
ekulweni nodlame. Okunye engiye ngikubuke ukuthi njengoba kuthiwa
akudutshulwe bese kubuzwa imibuzo kamumva, yinto ezingayenza izigebengu
ezifana nalezo ezingenamabheji, nezimoto ezihamba ngazo ezingenalutho,
zigqekeze amagede abantu, zingene endlini.

Ngiyazi ukuthi ngeke ngisikhiphe isibhamu bengenzanga izinhlelo ezithile
zokuthi ngisikhiphe. Kodwa akufanele siphindwe ngehlazo lokuhamba nqunu
ngoba singeke sikwazi ukuzivikela. Lokho kuhlokoloza umphakathi, ngoba
ngiyafisa ukuthi umphakathi ubambisane namaphoyisa.

Ngifisa ukuncoma ukuthi laphaya ngakithi kunezigebengu ezibamba inkunzi
ematekisini - niphezu kwazo impela. Lokho enikwenzayo kungumsebenzi omkhulu
ngoba lezi zigebengu kufanele ziqoqwe ziye endaweni yazo, ngoba akuzifanele
ukuhlala nabantu. Ngoba, uma singavikela abantu abafana nalabo ngabe senza
into embi kabi. Lokhu angikusho ngoba ngiseqenjini elithize, kodwa ngikusho
ngoba noMntwana uZeblon Zulu kuleya Ndlu enye, angakutshela ukuthi yizinto
ezenzekayo KwaNongoma lezi.

Siyi-IFP siyaseseka ngokuphelele lesi sabelomalo. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, our
colleagues who are members of this House and members of the Department of
Police who are present here, I greet you all.

Hon Chairperson, the hon Minister and his colleagues are supposed to know
that the police force prevents crime as well as violence directed at the
citizens of a country. I salute them because they are faced with the major
task of ensuring the safety of all the people of the country and protecting
public property, as well as monitoring all the borders of our country.
As the IFP we congratulate our fellow sisters who are police officers, and
the men who are also in the force, for making the duty of policing a
success in this country. There are certain issues that I would like to
highlight, sir, such as that police officers are not above the law; they
are also governed by the Constitution of the country.

What happened there at my hometown in KwaNongoma, where people were
attacked and other people’s wives were made to parade outside naked,
happened to me too. In the homestead of Mangobe the King of Usuthu, the
King of the Zulu nation, I was taken out of the house, and made to parade
naked. It is unacceptable in this country for police officers to behave in
this manner. I went to lay a complaint with the station commander, but he
said that he is not in charge of them, and when I talked to them they said
they are not under his command, but that they report to Pretoria.

Hence what I am saying is that we are the same police force with the same
Minister and the same Deputy Minister, but we have a problem with these
people who are uncontrollable. Your department needs to check whether those
people are suitable to ensure safety in the country because I presume they
have their own agendas.

Good behaviour should prevail in the police force and as the community we
should work collectively with the police force in fighting violence. I have
also observed that as a result of the instruction to police officers to
shoot first and ask questions later, the criminals without badges do the
same. They have unmarked cars, which they use when breaking into and
entering people’s houses.

I know that I will not give them my gun before they apply certain tactics.
But we should not experience the humiliation of parading naked again
because we cannot protect ourselves. That provokes the community, and my
wish is for the community to work hand in hand with the police.

I wish to commend you for tracking those criminals in my hometown who are
robbing people in the taxis. You are doing a great job because these
criminals must be arrested and placed where they belong, because they are
not meant to be part of society. If we protect these criminals we would be
doing an injustice to society.  I do not say this as a member of a certain
party, but I say this because even Prince Zeblon Zulu can attest to the
fact that these robberies do take place at KwaNongoma.

As the IFP we fully support this Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr B NESI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
departmental officials, patriots and friends, the national struggle for
freedom was the critical overarching vehicle to bring about peace, security
and stability in our society. In dealing with issues of crime, the ANC
proceeds from the premise that raising the quality of life also means an
improvement in the safety and security of citizens in their homes and in
their environments where they live, work and engage in extramural
activities.

The Justice, Crime Prevention and Security Cluster has been tasked with the
outcome of ensuring that people are safe and feel safe, with the Department
of Police playing a leading role in this regard. The ANC welcomes the
family violence, child protection and sexual offences Unit, which the
Minister has announced. These interventions by the department seek to
address three principles which are critical in the challenge of crime,
especially its uniquely random and violent nature in our country.

The first of these principles is that the battle against crime cannot, in
the main, be separated from the war on want. Incidents of contact crime
such as murder, grievous bodily harm and rape occur among acquaintances in
poor communities where living and entertainment environments do not allow
for a decent family and social life.

The second principle is that specific mind-sets and historical conditions
drive elements of the crime problem. These are: the proliferation of
firearms in the hands of civilians; greed and conspicuous consumption; the
psychology of patriarchal gender power relations; and attitudes towards the
weaker members of society, especially children. With regard to this point,
I want to emphasise that these crimes against the weak are rife in the
rural areas and farm areas where ...

... abantu bakuthi besabethwa ngamabhulu anocalucalulo ngobuhlanga
nazimisele ukuba wona akuhlala engoobholel’ ecaleni abangalufuniyo
utshintsho. [... our people are still being assaulted by the racist boers
who are hellbent on being unco-operative and who resist transformation.]

In this regard, when we are talking about fighting crime, Minister and
Deputy Minister, we must also emphasise ...

... ukuba babanjwe aba belungu benza le nto. Into eyenzekayo kukuba
bahlawuliswa iimalana ezingama-R200 okanye ama-R2000 babe
ngabakhululekileyo kodwa bahlalise abantu bakuthi kabuhlungu. [... that
these white people who are doing this must be arrested. What happens is
that they are just fined a mere R200 or R 2000 and are free but continue
persecuting our people.]

The ANC notes with interest the consistency of the department in improving
its capacity by employing more personnel as this will boost the visible
policing programme in so far as the patrols and community policing are
concerned.

In addition to visible policing aimed at crime prevention, provision has
been made in the budget to increase the detective capacity and improve
crime intelligence capacity. This will ensure the safety of the weak and
the rural communities. The above confirms the implementation of the
President’s promise in the state of the nation address that more police
will be employed in 2010.

The third principle is that the networks of crime have grown in their reach
and sophistication across national boundaries. These include syndicates
that deal with money-laundering, human trafficking and abuse. Critically,
focus must be placed in mobilising society to make life difficult for
criminals in our midst. This should include an overhaul of gender and
family relations and intolerance of abuse within communities.

The transformation of institutions that deal with crime, including with
regard to integrated efficiency, is also critical. This applies to
management, the expansion of personnel, the utilisation of the latest
technology, enhanced intelligence capacity, and a commitment to work with
the people. In this regard, it is very important for the police and the
community to ensure that community safety forums are in existence because
the police will never fight crime alone. The community members must be
there to assist the police by telling them where the criminals are, as well
as in the eradication of corruption within the criminal justice system.

The overall programme of national democratic transformation will gradually
eliminate some of the conditions that breed social crime; so shall our
contribution to creating an environment of peace, stability, economic
growth and social development in Southern Africa and the rest of the
continent.

In conclusion, we will undertake these tasks conscious of our
responsibility as one of the battalions of the global army for progressive
social change - a disciplined force of the left. The ANC is confident that
South Africans will persist in building enduring national partnerships to
further change our country for the better. Working together with them, we
shall spare neither strength nor courage until the strategic objective has
been attained. The ANC supports this transformative budget. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
and all protocol observed, we welcome the vision and mission of our
Department of Police; the values that the SAPS stands for need to be
implemented and upheld.

Discipline and professionalism need to be instilled in our police. There is
a programme in the Northern Cape called “Youth against Crime”. If that
programme can be implemented throughout this country, I think the police
can win the war against crime. Hon Minister and Deputy Minister, I see that
you are reminding us of where we come from by revisiting the ranking
system. However, changing ranking names will not bring back discipline.
Discipline will take a change in thinking and a change in attitude in the
SAPS. That is what will make their work easier.

The ID believes in partnership with the community, because the challenges
are enormous. The behaviour of some of the SAPS members is uncalled for.
The way in which they drive their vehicles is unacceptable. The way they
treat people in some of the police stations is also unacceptable. It is
good to have important plans. It is good to say we are going to do this,
that and that. And we see that the Minister and the Deputy Minister are
trying their utmost best. But it needs to be said today that winning the
war on crime will help us develop the economy. And the battle against crime
will help our people to understand that the values that we grew up with
should never be corrupted, but there is so much corruption in the
Department of Police.

If we can win that battle half of the crime will be finished. The budget
that is used for community police forums is inadequate. If we want the
community to really participate and the police forums to really participate
in the fight against crime and everything else, we need to budget properly
for them in order to assist them to do away with crime. I thank you.

Mr S P MABILO (Northern Cape): Chairperson, Minister of Police, Mr Nathi
Mthethwa, Deputy Minister of Police, Mr Fikile Mbalula, hon members of the
House, Chairperson of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development, Ntate Mofokeng, colleagues from other provinces, we are tasked
with the responsibility of ensuring that crime is drastically reduced and
corruption is stamped out in our provinces.

Our successes in the fight against crime in the province are as follows: We
have managed through our processes to conduct a number of campaign
activities. We managed to search a number of businesses, motor vehicles and
business properties totalling 38 426. We managed to conduct more than 470
roadblocks and have succeeded in visiting a number of farms, businesses,
elderly people, vacant houses and schools.

We successfully patrolled in our vehicles and on foot more than 25 171
times and we successfully managed to arrest a number of people for various
crimes during Operation Washa Tsotsi. We also have successfully confiscated
dagga and other substances. We confiscated more than 91 800 litres of
liquor and a number of home-brewed substances. We also arrested a number of
wanted criminals through Operation Washa Tsotsi. During the firearms
amnesty period, we succeeded in handing over a number of weapons and sharp
instruments.

In terms of the crime prevention situation in the province, our programmes
prioritise sustainable community mobilisation and partnerships in the fight
against crime, and in support of the police’s efforts to reduce crime in
the Northern Cape.

We have a campaign that we call the rescue of public spaces. Most violent
crimes happen in isolated and bushy areas near taverns. It is with this in
mind that we have engaged municipalities in the province to come on board
and assist with cleaning operations in open spaces. One of the flagship
projects of the department of safety in the province is the rescue of
public spaces project, which recently won a Silver Award in the Premier’s
Service Excellence Awards.

Chairperson, our province was honoured with the responsibility of hosting
the 2010 Fifa World Cup for the 50-day countdown. We are proud to report
that this prestigious event was incident-free. This was due to the safety
and security measures put in place by the SA Police in the province.

During the period under review the province successfully established 54
victim-friendly facilities out of a total of 91 police stations. It is our
responsibility to ensure that before the end of this financial year all 91
police stations in the province will have victim-friendly facilities.

In terms of the safer schools campaign, this is to ensure that our schools
remain institutions of learning and excellence. During this campaign we
managed to confiscate drugs, alcohol and dangerous weapons at schools
across the province. This campaign has been successful as fewer schools
have now reported having these unwanted substances.

In terms of community partnerships, the Northern Cape province is engaging
in successful community partnerships. We have a sound working relationship
with communities in our province. Our people are very co-operative and
support campaigns and initiatives of the government to fight crime and
corruption. We have strong partnerships with the SA Police Service, the
community police forum, Youth Against Crime, Women Against Crime, and all
other relevant structures meant to fight crime in the province.

Regarding gangsterism, hijackings and ATM bombings, as a province we have
successfully managed to foil a number of attempts relating to hijacking and
ATM bombings in the city of Kimberley. These criminal activities are very
rare in our province. It is for that reason that when criminals are
squeezed elsewhere they then move base to the Northern Cape under the wrong
impression that that province is a soft target. Our law enforcement
officers have proven the criminals wrong through their tough anticrime
programmes, hence the high success rate in the province and the minimal
hijackings and ATM bombings.

We acknowledge as a department the insufficient resources that we have in
the province, such as vehicles and human resources. But we are really
working hard in ensuring that we close all gaps that may hinder our
achievement in our objectives of reducing crime and corruption in the
province.

The matter of closed-circuit television, in the two townships of the city
has come a long way; SAPS head office made commitments to provide the
aforementioned equipment in both Galeshewe and Roodepan. This will assist
us in the fight against crime and corruption and it will contribute
positively towards effecting more arrests. These cameras will assist us in
ensuring that we succeed in our objectives.

In most of the crimes in the province, especially crimes that take place
over weekends, such as rape, murder, robbery and domestic violence, the
preferred weapon of choice is the dangerous weapon known as Okapi. Most
criminals use it in the perpetration of violent crimes in the province.

The department, in collaboration with the SAPS, the department of justice
and the chief state law adviser in the office of the premier have already
commenced a process aimed at the development of provincial legislation to
regulate or outlaw the carrying of dangerous knives and other related
weapons. We hope to introduce the draft Bill to the legislature of the
province during the fourth quarter of this financial year.

Gravel roads remain a challenge in the province as police vehicles are
adversely affected in terms of wear and tear. This area must be looked into
in relation to the massive infrastructural development needs of the
province and its rural nature.

Our province is vast and sparsely populated, and most people have to travel
for more than 100 km to access a police station. Hence we have ensured that
these areas are provided with satellite police stations in the context of
putting people first.

This concept of central command structures will contribute immensely
towards our fight against crime and corruption. We strongly recommend that
it be rolled out in the province before the end of this year.

The building and renovation of police stations in the province is a serious
challenge since most buildings utilised by the police are in a bad state.
The Mothibistad police station in Kuruman, which services more than 20
villages, is totally dilapidated and a new police station is required in
this regard. The second biggest township in the province, Paballelo in
Upington, also needs a new police station to service the community. The
current buildings from which the police are operating belong to the Khara
Hais local municipality.

The municipality has given notice that it wants to take its office back.
This poses a serious challenge to our law enforcement agents in the area.
Paballelo, as the second biggest township in the province, also requires
the services of a new police station. Our priority list for ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Hon Chair, our Minister, Nathi Mthethwa, our Deputy
Minister, Fikile Mbalula, and hon House, let me remind you that the Budget
Vote of the department is the Budget Vote of the ANC. Therefore, when the
Minister talks of objectives as set out in the state of the nation address
and targets for the measurement of performance as adopted by the Cabinet
lekgotla, it is indeed a confirmation of the movement at work to reduce
crime in this country.

The other issue that we picked up in the budget debate, as presented, is
that indeed the country is moving towards safety after so many years of a
violent society. We are moving towards safety, and the people are beginning
to have much more confidence than in previous years. We want to
congratulate the Minister in this regard.

Incidnets of crimes like house robberies, business robberies and car
hijacking, as well as crimes against women and children, are beginning to
decrease in terms of statistics. These are issues that are highly
prioritised in the departmental programme. It is thought that this is
because of the manner in which the department has improved the
investigative capacity of police officers in this department and further
that the detectives are also beginning to have that positive attitude that
the department has instilled in them.

We would also want to welcome the reintroduction of the family violence,
child protection and sexual offences unit by the Minister. This will go far
beyond making South Africa, as the Deputy Minister said, “a country where
everyone can play, especially our children, without fear of anything;
without fear of being abducted.” And that indeed should be supported.

We also acknowledge the programme of visible policing. However, as a
committee we recommend that it should go beyond visible policing. We should
not just see cars moving from street to street, from township to township
or village to village; we should see beyond that that the police would stop
and check as to what is happening when a group of people play dice and jive
unnecessarily. They should be searched. It should go beyond that, and also
detect planned crimes before they occur, so that criminals should indeed
hesitate when they want to commit crimes against our people. We would want
to see that happening.
Indeed, everyone should see police vans patrolling everywhere, but it
should go beyond that and there should be fundamental actions where people
are planning, even to sniff out where crooks are hiding and planning crimes
so that prevention can take place.

The other issue is that the ANC would want to call upon everyone not to
forget that all that we are doing, as this democratic Parliament, is to
erase and to fight what has been institutionalised by the apartheid legacy
— the issue of where we come from, namely a police system that was so
violent and brutal. Even now, after 16 years of democracy, people are still
afraid of the police in the context of the past, but we would want to
ensure that the police are friendly to the people because other liberal
minds would always, in the media and everywhere, say that the police are
beginning to be dangerous and militarised. There is no such thing.

When the police respond to a deadly crime, that does not amount to
militarisation; it means that the police have got the capacity to respond
to any form of crime in this country. Therefore, that idea must be taken
out of some liberal minds.

The other issue is the fact that the department is responding to its
constitutional obligations of prevention, combating, investigation and
making sure that the Republic is protected at all costs. We also want to
appeal to the Minister with regard to an issue that is capturing our
headlines, namely the terror plot, precisely because next month we are
going to host the World Cup. But, there are counter-revolutionaries who
would want to frighten the world by saying there is an Al Qaeda presence
here; there is no such a thing. Our intelligence is intact and our police
are ready. The world must come.

South Africa is a heaven and it will also be a heaven during the 2010 World
Cup. There is no such a thing as a threat of Al Qaeda, or the Taliban or
whatever. Those are pure lies because it is a counter-revolution to ensure
that African-led governments might not have the capacity to protect people.
People are welcome. Some of us will be smiling in every airport to ensure
that indeed people feel safe in this country.

Our borders will be managed by the SA National Defence Force, SANDF, as
well as the support system to the extent of our intelligence. But we would
want the department, as they meet the SA National Defence Force, to
strengthen our porous borders. Indeed, our borders are not that safe
because ever since we came in, there are certain areas where people will
get in, and that might be a threat. I think it should be emphasised that as
the army will be monitoring the borders and areas where there is porosity,
this must be looked into and a mechanism must be developed to make sure
that they are strengthened.

The strategy and tactics of the ANC identify strictly that the department
needs to be looked into, as the hon Matthews has said, with regard to the
war and the principle of that and other things. These are some of the
issues that need to be looked at in order to address the attitude of our
people who are looking at the crime issue.

With regard to the mind-set that I, of course, alluded to, some of these
things are historical. There is still that mind-set of the past wherein
people feel that when they see a police officer, they see an enemy. A
police officer is a friend; not a friend that will allow people to do
crime, but rather a friend that will take you, if you are a criminal, to a
place of safety, and you will be safe in prison. That’s what we need to
emphasise.

The other thing is the historical conditions. Amen. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson and hon members, thank you for your
contributions. Perhaps I should say that there has been both constructive
criticism and some acknowledgement of good work done by the police. I found
today’s debate different from the ones we had before. When people criticise
us, they present some views on the table, and not just oppositionist kinds
of postures.

The hon Gunda presented some key issues about the discipline and
professionalism in the police. There wouldn’t be any proper policing if
this matter was not taken on board. The part of the transformation that we
are talking about is that of the cadre of cop which we would like to create
at this time.

Hon members should take note of the fact that, ultimately, we would like
our streets to be safe. The Deputy Minister has already indicated that
whether it is in the morning, at night or whenever, our people should all
feel safe in their own country. That is our ultimate objective.

The hon Chairperson raised an issue about wrong elements within the SAPS.
We have interacted with the ruling party and other political parties in
this Parliament. We have undertaken an audit on the police personnel we
have. At the end of the day, we should ensure that those who are not
supposed to be in the force are nicely asked to go home or elsewhere. We
should only be left with members who know what they are supposed to do, and
who understand that the hopes of the entire nation rest upon their
shoulders.

The hon Watson said something about a building that is lying empty in
Middelburg. We are going to make a follow-up on that and try to find out
what is happening. I must say that it cuts across the issue of rural
safety. There is a plan. In his speech, the hon Wiley indicated that the DA
leader has some points. Those points are welcome and we would like to see
them in strength.

We are challenging everybody in the community to submit their views in
order to strengthen the rural safety plan. If there are such views, we
would welcome them. That is why we are going to be visiting provinces very
soon, together with AgriSA and the Food and Allied Workers Union, Fawu,
organisations from both sides, namely the farmworkers the and farmers. We
would be able to put across the views of both constituencies as they are.
With that approach, we believe that we would be able to deal with the
challenges.

The hon Wiley also raised an issue about accommodation. One of the things
we have spoken about is that of the building and construction of the new
police stations. We should have some barracks. It should not only be based
on accommodating people who are there.

Hon Bloem, if police management decided to move some police from your
constituency to KwaZulu-Natal and vice versa, they should be able to do
that without any hindrance. We are also looking into those matters as well.


In as far as the issue of the criminal justice system, CJS, is concerned,
there are outcomes of the criminal justice review and we are implementing
them. For instance, today it was reported that, in as far as police are
concerned, during the review the matter of detectives was highlighted. Last
year, we set a target for ourselves that within a year we were going to
employ 19% of the detectives and upskill those who were there. We have
surpassed that because we have recruited 24% as compared to what we
initially planned for.

I agree with Commissioner Makhubela, on the issue of Smart planning,
hotspots and mapping. [Laughter.] In fact, it should be strengthened
because as you know, even from the police station point of view, the
hotspot areas, mapping and so on, are looked into. The programme, When Duty
Calls, is one way of communicating with the public, because all people are
hearing are negative things about the police. We have noted your
satisfaction about the preparations and we are also looking forward to the
actual games.

The hon Mokgobi raised an issue about the reintroduction of family units.
We are going ahead with that and we will ensure that indeed our children
and women are safe in our country.

Some of the terror threats are hoaxes, and are meant to scare people away.
Somewhere in some tabloids in Britain, others said that there was going to
be a blood bath in South Africa because Mr Terre’Blanche had been killed.
They furthermore said that there was going to be a black and white full-
scale war. They just created some imaginary wars in their minds which did
not match what has been put in place when preparing for this. That is not
going to deter us.

I noted the point raised by the hon Nesi when he indicated that racism was
rife on the farms. For instance, when we met with Fawu, they clarified that
point. In order to deal with the issues raised by workers, dwellers and
farmers we have decided to approach that matter from all the parties’ point
of view.

Bab’uMageba angazi nkosi yami kuleliphuzu obulibeka laKwaNongoma ngoba
siyesazizwa lezo zikhalo, kwathi phambi kokhetho sawucela umphakathi ukuthi
ufike sizoxoxisana nawo. Sabiza izinhlangano zepolitiki, i-IFP noKhongolose
kanye nezinye ezazikhona ukuzokhuluma ngalolu daba.

Kodwa-ke futhi asizukuvuma ukuthi abantu bahlukunyezwe - izinto ezinjalo
azifuneki. Siyafisa Mageba nani niyigcizelele into yokuthi amaphoyisa
ayesebenza laphaya ngaphambi kokhetho abuye ngoba enza umsebenzi omuhle.
Ngoba yiwona athola intaphana yezibhamu ezatholwa laphaya Mageba
zangethusa, ngacishe ngaquleka ngempela ngizibona zibekwe ngononina
ngokuhlukana kwazo. Kusukela kwesincane ukuza kwezinkulu - ngathi hhawu!
lezi bhamu madoda ziphumaphi. Zifunani izibhamu phakathi kwabantu ngoba
phela yizona ekufanele zingabibikho emphakathini.

Sengisholo ukuthi-ke nalapho enza khona amaphoyisa kahle kufanele siwancome
bakwethu ngoba angazi ukuthi leziya zibhamu bezingaphuma nemiphefumula
emingaki. Ngaze ngabuza ukuthi ngempela ngiKwaNongoma - ngaphuma kancane
nakuleli hholo esasikulona. Ngabuka ngabona ukuthi cha sikhona impela -
sisekhaya. Sase siyahamba siya edolobheni sakhuluma nabantu, iningi labo
Mageba likugcizelele ukuthi amaphoyisa awabe khona ngoba asiza njengoba
imimoya yayiphakeme ngaleziya zikhathi zokhetho, ukuba khona kwawo kwasiza
ekutheni kube nokuthula.

Nokho satshelwa ukuthi ukhetho lwahamba kahle, Mageba. Ngingazi-ke noma
sasingatshelwa kahle yini kodwa nathi sasikhona. Lwahamba kahle ukhetho
kodwa lokhu akusho ukuthi abantu mabaphule umthetho futhi akusho ukuthi
asebehlukumeza umphakathi akufanele bathathelwe izinyathelo kodwa njengoba
uchazile Mageba, uma phela amaphoyisa esefika kuthiwa uMageba uphethe
isibhamu esikhulu, uqhwasha noma i-AK awavamisile ukufika ekhaya athi hhe
baba mnumzane sizocela izibhamu. Azicelwa kanjalo izibhamu kodwa uyazi-ke
ukuthi sicelwa kanjani isibhamu, Mageba. Ngiyabonga sihlalo.
[Ihlombe.](Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Mageba, my goodness, I am not sure about the point you made about
KwaNongoma, because we heard those complaints and we asked the community to
come forward to discuss this. We also called the political parties like the
IFP and the ANC and others that were there to talk about this issue.

However, we are not going to allow our people to be harassed — such things
are not tolerated.  We hope that you will also emphasise, hon Mageba, that
those police who were working there before the elections should be brought
back because they did a good job. They found heaps of guns there, hon
Mageba. I was shocked by the sight of those guns and I nearly fainted on
seeing them grouped in their different sizes, from the smallest to the
biggest. I said, “gee whiz, where do all these guns come from!” What
business do these guns have amongst the people because they should not be
in the communities?

I am saying this because, good people, we should also commend the police
when they are doing well. And I am still asking myself how many souls would
have been lost through those guns. I enquired if we were really in
KwaNongoma and even went outside of the hall to look around, when I
realised that we were really at home. We then left for town and spoke to
the people, and most of them, hon Mageba, emphasised that the police must
be present as they are a great help. Since the elections, tensions were
high and their presence helped in bringing about peace.

We were informed that the elections went well, hon Mageba. I am not sure
whether we were told the truth, but we were also present. The elections
went well, but that does not mean that people should break the law and that
those who are harassing the community should not be punished. But as you
have already mentioned, hon Mageba, when the police arrive after being told
that hon Mageba has a big gun — a self-made one or an AK-47 — they do not
normally come to your place and ask nicely by saying, “Hello sir, we are
here to ask for a gun.” That is not how you ask for a firearm — you know
how to ask for a firearm, hon Mageba. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]
Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:03.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Government Notice No R. 293 published in Government Gazette No
        33112 dated 13 April 2010: Appointment of an Authorised Dealer in
        Foreign Exchange with Limited Authority, in terms of the South
        African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 283 published in Government Gazette No
        33103 dated 16 April 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/69), in terms of
        the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 340 published in Government Gazette No
        33140 dated 30 April 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/70), in terms of
        the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) Government Notice No 52 published in Government Gazette No 32898
        dated 29 January 2010:Levies on Fish and Fish Products, in terms of
        the Sea Fishery Act, 1988 (Act No 12 of 1988).

     b) Government Notice No 53 published in Government Gazette No 32898
        dated 29 January 2010: Fishing Harbour Fees, in terms of the Marine
        Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MASILONYANA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY –
    DATED 19 MAY 2010

    1.      Background and Overview
    1.1     The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs having considered the request made by the National  Council
        of Provinces (NCOP) on the 24th November  2009,   to  consider  and
        report on the intervention notice invoked in terms of  section  139
        (1)(b) of the Constitution at Masilonyana  Local   Municipality  by
        the Free State Provincial Executive Council, reports as follows:


    1.2     In terms of section  139(1)(b)  of  the  Constitution,  when  a
        municipality cannot or does not fulfil an executive  obligation  in
        terms of the Constitution or legislation, the  relevant  provincial
        executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps  to  ensure
        the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,   including   assuming   the
        responsibility for the relevant obligation in that municipality.


    1.3     In terms of the NCOP Rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of
        the NCOP referred the notice of  intervention  in  the  affairs  of
        Masilonyana Local Municipality  to  the  Select  Committee  on  Co-
        operative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration  and
        reporting. On 5 May 2010, the  Select  Committee  took  a  decision
        during the proceedings of  its  meeting  to  conduct  an  oversight
        visits to the above-mentioned Municipality on 14 May 2010.
    2.      Purpose and Objectives
    2.1     The objectives of the oversight visit was to determine  whether
        procedural requirements have been met and to verify whether the PEC
        has used its discretion  appropriately  before  the  Committee  can
        approve/disapprove the intervention. Through the deliberations  and
        interaction with internal and external stakeholders, the  Committee
        wanted to determine how  the  PEC  was  intending  to  restore  the
        fulfilment of the relevant obligations and ensure fulfilment in the
        long-term. The aim being to  ensure  intergovernmental  checks  and
        balances aimed at guarding the  integrity  and  efficiency  of  the
        intervention process.


    3.      Composition of the Delegation
    3.1     The delegation of the Committee was composed of  the  following
        Members of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi, Limpopo (ANC);
        Hon AG Matila, Gauteng (ANC);  Hon TMH Mofokeng, Free State  (ANC);
        Hon DV Bloem, Free State (COPE); Mr TM Manele, Committee  Secretary
        (Committee Section) and Mr V Mfuniselwa,  Administration  Assistant
        (Committee Section).


    4.      Introduction
    4.1     On 24 November 2009, the MEC  for  Co-operative  Governance  and
        Traditional Affairs tabled a notice of intervention in  Masolonyane
        Local Municipality to the Office of the Chairperson  of  the  NCOP.
        Subsequent to the tabling, a notice of intervention was referred to
        the Select Committee on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
        Affairs for consideration and reporting in terms  of  Council  Rule
        101. In compliance with the Council referral, the Select  Committee
        resolved to undertake a fact-finding visit to the  Municipality  on
        14  May  2010.  In  terms  of  section  139   (2)(b)(ii)   of   the
        Constitution, the intervention  must  end  if  the  NCOP  does  not
        positively approve the intervention within 180 days, in  this  case
        before the end of 24 May 2010, since the intervention began.


    5.      Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality
    5.1     The main issues identified by  the  PEC  to  intervene  in  the
        affairs of Masilonyana Local Municipality related to the  inability
        of the Municipality to collect revenue, implementation of valuation
        roll, finalization of annual budget, failure to develop  and  adopt
        performance management framework,  and  the  inability  to  provide
        quarterly reports in compliance with Municipal  Finance  Management
        Act (MFMA).


    6. Oversight Visit to Masilonyana Local Municipality
    6.1     On 14 May 2010 the delegation of the Committee  had  interactive
        and robust engagements with the internal and external  stakeholders
        of  the  Masilonyana  Local   Municipality.   The   main   internal
        stakeholders the delegation interacted  with  in  the  Municipality
        included the Speaker,  Mayor,  Ward  Committee  Members,  Municipal
        Councillors, Administrator and the South African  Local  Government
        Association (SALGA). The main external stakeholders the  delegation
        interacted with included members  of  the  community  and  business
        forums, and non-governmental organizations.


    6.2     For the purpose of this report, the submissions  made  by  both
        internal and external stakeholders are structured based on the five
        key performance areas of the local government which are:  Municipal
        Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local Economic Development;
        Municipal Financial Viability  and  Management,  as  well  as  Good
        Governance and Public Participation.


    (A).    Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development


    6.3     Municipal Council: The submissions made by  the  Mayor  and  the
        Speaker indicated that the Council supported  the  placing  of  the
        Municipality under section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution  and  the
        appointment of the Administrator  in  dealing  with  the  executive
        functions of the Municipality. The major progress reported  by  the
        Mayor related to stakeholders’ consultation  and  participation  in
        the development of a  draft  Integrated  Development  Plans  (IDP),
        budget and the municipal turn-around strategy.


    6.4     Administrator: The major problems reported by the  Administrator
        pertained to non-compliance with the  Local  Government:  Municipal
        System Act in submitting section 46  reports  for  two  consecutive
        years,  failure  to  develop  and  adopt   performance   management
        framework to regulate the performance of staff, and  the  inability
        to provide quarterly reports in  compliance  with  the  MFMA.   The
        progress reported by the Administrator  related  to  submission  of
        section  46  reports  to  the  Auditor-General;  development  of  a
        performance management system framework; and monthly submission  of
        section 71 and verification reports.


    6.5     Municipal Councillors:  The  concerns  raised  by  some  of  the
        Municipal Councillors related to the lack of progress  in  charging
        senior management alleged to be involved in corruption  and  fraud,
        suspended  officials  organizing  and  leading   protest   marches,
        Municipal  Manager  manipulating  some  officials   and   Municipal
        Councillors, and the appointment of unskilled employees.


   6.6      Organized Labour: The  critical  concerns  highlighted  by  the
        representatives of South African Municipal  Workers  Union  (SAMWU)
        related to lack of managerial  consultation,  non-functionality  of
        local labour forum, lack of organisational structure and  the  lack
        of progress with regard to the application of section 139  (1)  (b)
        of the Constitution.


   (B).     Basic Service Delivery


   6.7      Administrator: The major concerns reported by the Administrator
        pertained to the inability  to  spend  infrastructure  grant  funds
        where expenditure was at 12% by the end of November 2009. The  main
        progress reported by the Administrator related to the submission of
        the  revised  MIG  Action  Plan  to  the  Provincial  MIG   Office,
        verification certification of MIG project  payments,  establishment
        of project steering committees, as  well  as  the  registration  of
        projects as extended public works programmes.


   6.8      Community and Business Organization: The concerns raised by the
        community and  business  members  related  to  the  non-payment  of
        contractors,  housing  allocation,  and  the  lack   of   municipal
        resources to provide services in the community.


   (C).     Local Economic Development (LED)
   6.9      Administrator: The main progress reported by the  Administrator
        included the development of an LED  strategy  and  the  revival  of
        projects in brick-making plant,  in  partnership  with  the  mining
        house, and two bakery projects.


   6.10     Community Based Organisation: Some of the  major  LED  concerns
        raised by  the  representatives  of  community-based  organisations
        related to lack of funding for youth development  programmes;  lack
        of funding for community-based youth projects,  including  the  co-
        ordination of learnership  programmes;  lack  of  intergovernmental
        approach, more especially with regard to the placement of community
        members who had participated in learnership programmes.


   (D).     Municipal Financial Viability and Management


   6.11     Administrator: The main concerns raised  by  the  administrator
        related to the overall financial management  of  the  municipality,
        which  was  in  disarray.    The  progress  reported  included  the
        reconciliation of bank statements,  deployment  of  DBSA  financial
        experts, decrease in salary bills from R2, 16  million  to  R1,  89
        million in April 2009, reduction of overtime of R120  000  paid  in
        December 2009 to R72 000 in March 2010, submission  of  section  71
        reports to  Provincial  and  National  Treasury,  as  well  as  the
        submission of a draft budget aligned with IDP.

   (E).     Good Governance and Public Participation

   6.12     Administrator:  The  concerns  raised  by  the  Administrator’s
        report related to the non-functionality of  Ward  Committees,  poor
        effectiveness of community development workers, as well as the non-
        alignment of budget  with  the  IDP.  However,  the  main  progress
        reported by the Administrator included the  functionality  of  Ward
        Committees and effective consultation on IDP and the Budget.


   6.13     Ward Committees: Members of the Ward Committees raised concerns
        related to  lack  of  consultation,  lack  of  progress  since  the
        application  of  section  139  (1)(b),  and  problems  of   service
        delivery.

   7. Committee Observations and Opinion


   7.1       The  delegation  of  the  Committee  has  observed  that   the
         Municipality has failed to perform its  legislative  and  executive
         obligation and, in the opinion  of  the  Committee,  justified  the
         invocation of section 139 (1) (b) intervention of the  Constitution
         by the PEC of the Free State Province.

   7.2      The request by the Municipal Council for intervention in  terms
         of section 137 of the MFMA  has  reflected  the  inability  of  the
         Municipality to prudently manage its finances.


   7.3      The Provincial Executive of SALGA had played a critical role in
         assisting the Municipality to request for intervention in terms  of
         Section 137 of the MFMA and Section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.




   7.4      The decision of the PEC to invoke section  139  (1)(b)  of  the
         Constitution and the appointment of the Administrator had  resulted
         in the development of a turn-around plan  aimed  at  assisting  the
         Municipality to deal with  challenges  and  stakeholders’  concerns
         related to the IDP, budget formulation, organisational development,
         financial management, good governance, public  participation,  LED,
         and service delivery.


   7.5      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
         Affairs in co-operation with the relevant  Portfolio  Committee  in
         Free State Provincial Legislature would conduct a  follow-up  visit
         to the Municipality, three months after the intervention has ended,
         in order to monitor progress made in respect of the intervention in
         the Municipality.


   8. Acknowledgement


   8.1      Having conducted the oversight visit the  Committee  delegation
         wishes to extend words of appreciation extended to all the internal
         and external stakeholders of the Municipality  who  interacted  and
         had robust engagements with the  delegation  of  the  Committee  on
         matters related to the placement of the Municipality under  section
         139  (1)(b)  of  the  Constitution  and  the  appointment  of   the
         Administrator.


   9. Recommendations


   9.1      Having conducted  the  oversight  visit  to  Masilonyana  Local
         Municipality   and   interacted   with   internal   and    external
         stakeholders, the Select Committee on Co-operative  Governance  and
         Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:


   9.1.1    The National Council of Provinces approves the intervention  as
         issued by the Provincial Executive Council in terms of section  139
         (1)(b) of the Constitution.


   9.1.2    The Administrator should fast-track the  process  of  reviewing
         and developing a database  of  qualifications  of  all  section  57
         managers and table a report to the Provincial Executive Council.


   9.1.3    The Administrator should ensure proper functionality  of  Local
         Labour Forum and the co-ordination of consultative  meetings  among
         the offices of the Mayor, the Speaker and the Chief Whip.


   9.1.4    The Provincial Executive should provide  quarterly  reports  to
         the NCOP on the progress  made  in  respect  of  service  delivery,
         financial   viability   and    management,    transformation    and
         organisational development, LED, and  good  governance  and  public
         participation.


   9.1.5    The Administrator should fast-track  the  process  of  ensuring
         that all section 57 senior managers complete the signing  of  their
         performance contracts, and further ensure that those contracts  are
         aligned with the key performance areas of the Municipality.


   9.1.6    The South African Local Government Association, in co-operation
         with the Local Government Sector Education and Training  Authority,
         should facilitate training  and  capacity  building  for  Municipal
         Councillors  and  Officials  in  order  to  further  deepen   their
         understanding of the legal framework and policies that  govern  the
         activities of the Municipality.


      7.  The  South  African  Municipal  Workers  Union  should  work   co-
         operatively with the Administrator in order to strengthen personnel
         discipline aimed at promoting municipal integrity.


      8. The Minister for Co-operative Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
         should approach the Hawks to pursue criminal investigation  in  all
         cases of financial irregularities and fraud  in  Masilonyana  Local
         Municipality as a  matter  of  urgency,  and  a  report  should  be
         forwarded to the NCOP in this regard.


Report to be considered.

2.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON THE DISSOLUTION OF NALEDI LOCAL MUNICIPALITY –
   DATED 19 MAY 2010

   1. Introduction and Background
   1.1      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs having considered the dissolution notice on the 14 May 2010
        and report on the intervention notice invoked in terms  of  section
        139 (1)(c) of the Constitution at Naledi Local Municipality by  the
        Free State Provincial Executive Council (PEC), reports as follows:


   1.2      According to section 139(1)(c)  of  the  Constitution,  when  a
        municipality cannot or does not fulfil an executive  obligation  in
        terms of the Constitution or legislation, the  relevant  provincial
        executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps  to  ensure
        the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,  including  dissolving   the
        Municipal Council and appointing an  Administrator  until  a  newly
        elected Municipal Council has been declared elected.


   1.3      The Constitution provides that  the  dissolution  takes  effect
        unless the NCOP or the Minister set it aside. In other  words,  the
        Constitution provides for a 14-day window period within  which  the
        national Minister and the NCOP have the opportunity  to  set  aside
        the dissolution.


   2.       Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality
   2.1      The rationale for the dissolution of Naledi Local  Municipality
        is based on the major problems identified by the PEC related to the
        following:
        2.1.1    Assassination of the Mayor/Speaker on 3 May 2010.
        2.1.2    Attempted murder of the Municipal Manager on 4 May 2010.
        2.1.3    Division amongst Municipal Councillors and their inability
                to convene Council meetings.
        2.1.4    Most reports generated by the administration could not  be
                assessed and finalised by Council  or  signed  off  by  the
                Mayor,   to   enable   the   administration   to   function
                effectively.
        2.1.5    The draft IDP, Budget and  Turn-Around  Strategy  was  not
                effectively consulted on with the community, owing  to  the
                Council’s poor public consultation processes.
        2.1.6    The CFO and Manager for Technical Services were  suspended
                by the Municipal Manager without the  ratification  of  the
                Council.
        2.1.7    Poor water management has led to  the  Municipality  being
                indebted to the Water Board.
        2.1.7    The Municipality has received  disclaimers  for  the  past
                three years from the Auditor-General.


   3.       Committee Observations and Opinion


   3.1      The Committee has observed that the Provincial  Department  has
        in the past years provided support to the Municipality in terms  of
        section 154(1) of the Constitution. Section 154 of the Act mandates
        national and provincial government to support  and  strengthen  the
        capacity of municipalities to manage their own affairs, to exercise
        their powers and to perform their functions.  However,  the  Naledi
        Local Municipality demonstrated its  unwillingness  to  fulfil  its
        executive obligations owing to  the  administrative  and  financial
        mismanagement,  and  current  political   instability   which   was
        prevailing in the Municipality.
   3.2      Based on the reasons for dissolution provided by the Free State
        MEC for Co-operative  Governance,  Traditional  Affairs  and  Human
        Settlements, Mr M Zwane, the Committee is of the opinion  that  the
        dissolution of Naledi Local Municipal is warranted by the Municipal
        Council’s conduct, which is the cause of the continued  failure  to
        comply with an executive obligation.


   3.3      Furthermore, the Committee is of the opinion that for the  Free
        State  Provincial  Executive   to   intervene   at   Naledi   Local
        Municipality, it is an integral part of the institutional framework
        for developmental local government. It is  a  necessary  corrective
        measure when a municipality fails to govern  and  thus  jeopardises
        the  enterprise  of  development.  It  is   also   an   aspect   of
        intergovernmental relations and, as  such,  it  must  be  exercised
        within the spirit of co-operative government as outlined in Chapter
        3 of the Constitution.
   3.4      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs, in co-operation with the relevant Portfolio  Committee  in
        the Free State Provincial Legislature, would conduct  an  oversight
        visit to interact with internal and external  stakeholders  of  the
        Naledi Local Municipality.


   4. Recommendations


   4.1      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs recommends as follows:

             1. The NCOP approves the intervention as issued  by  the  Free
                State Provincial Executive Council in terms of section  139
                (1)(c) of the Constitution.


             2. The Free State MEC for Co-operative Governance, Traditional
                Affairs and Human Settlements should table progress reports
                to the NCOP and the Provincial Legislature on the status of
                by-elections to be held at Naledi Local Municipality.


             3. The Minister for Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
                Affairs  should  approach  the  Hawks  to  pursue  criminal
                investigation in all cases of financial irregularities  and
                fraud in Naledi Local Municipality, as a matter of urgency,
                and a report be forwarded to the NCOP in this regard.


Report to be considered.

3.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO TSWAING LOCAL MUNICIPALITY –
   DATED 19 MAY 2010

   1. Background and Overview
   1.1      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs having considered the request made by the National  Council
        of Provinces (NCOP) on the 10 March 2010,  to consider  and  report
        on the intervention notice invoked in terms of section  139  (1)(b)
        of the Constitution at Tswaing Local  Municipality  by  the  North-
        West Provincial Executive Council (PEC), reports as follows:


   1.2      In terms of section  139(1)(b)  of  the  Constitution,  when  a
        municipality cannot or does not fulfil an executive  obligation  in
        terms of the Constitution or legislation, the  relevant  provincial
        executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps  to  ensure
        the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,   including   assuming   the
        responsibility for the relevant obligation in that municipality.


   1.3      In terms of the NCOP Rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of
        the NCOP referred the notice of  intervention  in  the  affairs  of
        Tswaing Local Municipality to the Select Committee of  Co-operative
        Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and reporting.
        On 5 May 2010, the Committee took a decision during its meeting  to
        conduct an oversight visit to the above-mentioned  Municipality  on
        11 May 2010.


   2. Oversight Purpose and Objectives
   2.1      The objectives of the oversight visit was to determine  whether
        procedural requirements have been met and to verify whether the PEC
        has used its discretion appropriately,  before  the  Committee  can
        approve/disapprove the intervention. Through the  deliberation  and
        interaction with internal and external stakeholders, the  Committee
        wanted to determine how  the  PEC  was  intending  to  restore  the
        fulfilment of the relevant obligations and ensure fulfilment in the
        long-term. The aim  was  to  ensure  intergovernmental  checks  and
        balances aimed at guarding the  integrity  and  efficiency  of  the
        intervention process.


   3. Composition of the Delegation
   3.1      The delegation of the Committee was composed of  the  following
        Members of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi, Limpopo (ANC);
        Hon AG Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon DV Bloem, Free State  (COPE);  Mr
        TM  Manele,  Committee  Secretary  (Committee  Section)  and  Mr  V
        Mfuniselwa, Administration Assistant (Committee Section).


   4. Introduction
   4.1      On 18 March 2010, the Premier of North-West Province  tabled  a
        notice of intervention in Tswaing Local Municipality to the  Office
        of the Chairperson of the NCOP.  Subsequent  to  the  tabling,  the
        notice  was  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative
        Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and  reporting
        in terms of Council  Rule  101.  In  compliance  with  the  Council
        referral, the Committee resolved to undertake a fact-finding  visit
        to the Municipality on the 11 May 2010. In  terms  of  section  139
        (2)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the intervention must  end  if  the
        NCOP does not positively approve the intervention within 180  days,
        in this case before  the  end  of  10  September  2010,  since  the
        intervention began.


   5. Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality
   5.1      The main issues identified by the PEC for  intervening  in  the
        affairs  of  Tswaing  Local  Municipality  related  to   the   poor
        management  of  the  Municipality;  poor   water   and   sanitation
        provision; poor standard of internal  road  infrastructure;  uneven
        provision of services to the communities and project  delays  owing
        to  prolonged  procurement  processes;   and  possible  fraud   and
        corruption activities.


   6.       Oversight Visit to Tswaing Local Municipality
   6.1      On 11 May 2010 the delegation of the Committee had  interactive
        and robust engagements with the internal and external  stakeholders
        of the Tswaing Local Municipality. The main  internal  stakeholders
        the delegation interacted with in  the  Municipality  included  the
        Speaker, Mayor,  Ward  Committee  Members,  Municipal  Councillors,
        Administrator and the South African  Local  Government  Association
        (SALGA). The main external stakeholders the  delegation  interacted
        with included members of the community, and business forums and non-
        governmental organizations.


   6.2      For the purpose of this report, the submissions  made  by  both
        internal and external stakeholders are structured based on the five
        key performance areas of the local government which are:  Municipal
        Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local Economic Development;
        Municipal Financial Viability  and  Management,  as  well  as  Good
        Governance and Public Participation.

   (A).     Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development
   6.3      Municipal Council: The submissions made by the  Mayor  and  the
        Speaker specified that the Municipal Council supported the  placing
        of the Municipality under section 139 (1)(b) of  the  Constitution,
        and the subsequent appointment of the Administrator  in  fulfilling
        the executive functions of the  Municipality.  The  major  progress
        reported by the Mayor prior to the intervention and appointment  of
        the Administrator included the development of  a  draft  Integrated
        Development Plan (IDP), budget and municipal turn- around  strategy
        to be considered and adopted by the Municipal Council.


   6.4      SALGA: The major municipal  transformation  and  organisational
        development  concerns  raised  by  SALGA  affecting  municipalities
        generally and specifically the Tswaing Local Municipality,  related
        to the lack of  capacity in the North-West Province to monitor  and
        support   municipalities   in   terms   of   personnel,    funding,
        institutional knowledge and expertise.


   6.5      Administrator: The Administrator reported  on  the  absence  of
        discipline  among  municipal  officials;   performance   management
        system;  lack  of   staff   supervision;   bloated   organisational
        structure, which was not aligned to the IDP; irregular appointments
        of  employees;  problems  with  staff  placements;  120   employees
        appointed within a period of six  months,  resulting  in  a  higher
        salary bill; poor  record-  management  system;  a  high  level  of
        employee  absenteeism  and  lack  of  commitment  from  section  57
        managers.


   6.6      Municipal Councillors: The concerns raised  by  some  Municipal
        Councillors related to low work  ethics  of  the  senior  managers,
        including the Municipal Manager; continual absence of the Municipal
        Manager from work; head-hunting of unqualified senior  managers  by
        the Municipal Manager; and the  non-  functionality  of  the  Local
        Labour Forum (LLF).


   6.7      Organized  Labour:  Some  of  the  major  transformational  and
        organisational concerns highlighted by the representatives of South
        African Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU)  related  to  the  lack  of
        skills development programmes. SAMWU indicated that there is a need
        to address good working relations among the Office  of  the  Mayor,
        Speaker and the Chief Whip, in order to ensure that  effective  and
        efficient municipal transformation and organisational development.


   6.8      Administrator: Part of the turn-around  plan  reported  by  the
        Administrator in  assisting  the  Municipality  to  deal  with  the
        challenges included the reviewing of  all  the  existing  policies,
        development of new policies, reviving  and  training  of  the  LLF,
        development of a disciplinary and grievance procedure, training  of
        management and staff, and improving staff morale and discipline  by
        the end of September 2010.

   (B).     Basic Service Delivery


   6.9      Administrator: The collapse of refuse collection, cleaning  and
        rehabilitation of streets,  and  provision  of  potable  water  and
        sanitation were the main basic service delivery problems  reported.
        The Administrator indicated that the turn-around plan would  assist
        the Municipality to effectively and  efficiently  deal  with  basic
        service  delivery  challenges,  including   improving   access   to
        electricity  and  potable  water,  maintenance  and  operation   of
        infrastructure, ensuring solid waste disposal and  refuse  removal,
        and  resolving  housing  project  challenges  before  the  end   of
        September 2010.


   6.10     Ward  Committees:  Concerns  raised  by  members  of  the  Ward
        Committees were connected to the  Municipal  Manager’s  failure  to
        deal with the service delivery problems, political interference  in
        administration, and the non-implementation of the IDP review.


   6.11     Traditional Leaders: The challenges that needed to be addressed
        according  to  the  Traditional  Leaders  related  to   poor   road
        infrastructure, lack of street lightning, delays with regard to the
        completion of the RDP houses, land  occupation,  and  the  need  to
        ensure that the terms of reference of  the  Administrator  and  the
        application of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution were  clearly
        explained.


   (C).     Local Economic Development (LED)

   6.12     Administrator: The Administrator tabled a plan  to  assist  the
        Municipality in dealing with economic development challenges.  This
        included the  revival  of  the  LED  Forum  and  the  promotion  of
        stakeholder engagement by the end of September 2010.


   6.13     Community-Based Organisation: The Organization  raised  funding
        challenges  which  relate  to   youth   developmental   programmes;
        community-based  youth   projects,   including   co-ordination   of
        leanership  programmes;  lack  of  an  intergovernmental  approach,
        especially with regard to the placement of  community  members  who
        had participated in the learnership programmes.

   (D).     Municipal Financial Viability and Management

   6.14     Administrator: The major problems reported by the Administrator
        included the salary bill of the  Municipality  which  exceeded  the
        monthly income, general financial  fraud  and  mismanagement,  non-
        payment of  statutory  deductions,  poor  management  of  municipal
        assets, the  disappearance  of  R90  000  without  trace  from  the
        municipal primary bank account, and the instituting of disciplinary
        measures.


   6.15     The turn-around plan was aimed at assisting the Municipality to
        deal  with  the  problems  related  to  financial   viability   and
        management, development of  a  fraud  prevention  strategy,  robust
        engagement with the Ratepayers Association,  improvement  of  cash-
        flow management, promotion of compliance with the Municipal Finance
        Management Act (MFMA) and the financial  regulations,  updating  of
        asset register, and the completion and adoption of  the  budget  by
        the end of September 2010.


   (E).     Good Governance and Public Participation

   6.16     SALGA: The representative of SALGA, who was also  a  Member  of
        the   Intergovernmental    Relations    Forum,    registered    his
        dissatisfaction which related to the  absence  of  sound  relations
        within  the  Municipality.  It  was  pointed  out  that   political
        infighting and divisions were rife within  the  Municipal  Council,
        and that there was also political–administrative conflict, as  well
        as failure  to  perform  legislative  functions.   There  was  also
        political interference in the administration.


   6.17     Municipal Council:  The  Speaker  of  the  Municipality  raised
        concerns with regard to the lack of resources and stipends for Ward
        Committee Members to facilitate public  participation,  on  matters
        relating to governance.


   6.18      Municipal  Councillors:  It  was   recorded   that   political
        interference in administration; implementation of decisions by  the
        Mayor, without consultation with the Municipal Council, was a major
        challenge in the Municipality. Furthermore, it was identified  that
        there was political infighting, non-tabling  of  reports,  and  the
        lack of accountability to the Municipal Council  by  the  Municipal
        Manager and Section 57 Managers. In addition, the Municipal Manager
        failed to co-ordinate  the  meetings  of  the  municipal  portfolio
        committees.


   6.19      Administrator:  The   Administrator   aims   to   assist   the
        Municipality to deal with the problems related to  good  governance
        and public participation,  including  the  revitalization  of  Ward
        Committees; the improvement of communication  with  the  community;
        the promoting of public meetings; the reviewing  of  delegation  of
        authority;  the  strengthening  of  political  oversight   on   all
        Municipal Council committees and administration;  the  creating  of
        stability within the Municipal Council; and the promoting  of  good
        intergovernmental relations by the end of September 2010.


   7.       Committee Observations and Opinion


   7.1      The delegation of the Committee has observed that, owing to  the
        failure of the Municipality to perform  legislative  and  executive
        obligations, service delivery in the communities had been affected,
        and this  resulted  in  poor  provision  of  water  and  sanitation
        services, poor standard of  internal  road  infrastructure,  uneven
        provision of services to communities; delays in the  completion  of
        LED projects, prolonged procurement processes, and  allegations  of
        fraud and corruption.


   7.2      Furthermore, the decision of  the  PEC  to  invoke  section  139
        (1)(b) of the Constitution and the subsequent  appointment  of  the
        Administrator on 10 May 2010, has resulted in the development of  a
        turn-around plan. This was aimed at assisting the  Municipality  to
        deal with the challenges and stakeholders’ concerns related to  the
        IDP,  budget  formulation,  organisational  development,  financial
        management, good governance, public participation, LED and  service
        delivery.


   8. Acknowledgement


   8.1      Having conducted the oversight visit to  the  Municipality,  the
        Committee delegation wishes to extend words of appreciation to  all
        the internal and external  stakeholders  of  the  Municipality  for
        their robust engagements with the delegation of  the  Committee  on
        matters related to the placement of the Municipality under  section
        139  (1)(b)  of  the  Constitution  and  the  appointment  of   the
        Administrator.


   9. Recommendations


   9.1       Having  conducted  the  oversight  visit   to   Tswaing   Local
        Municipality   and   interacted   with   internal   and    external
        stakeholders, the Select Committee on Co-operative  Governance  and
        Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:


        9.1.1    The NCOP approves the intervention as issued by the North-
               West Provincial Executive Council in terms  of  section  139
               (1)(b) of the Constitution.


        9.1.2     The  Administrator  should  fast-track  the  process   of
               reviewing and developing a database of qualifications of all
               section 57 managers and table a  report  to  the  Provincial
               Executive Council.
            3. The Minister for  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
               Affairs  should  approach  the  Hawks  to  pursue   criminal
               investigation in all cases of financial  irregularities  and
               fraud in Tswaing Local Municipality as a matter of  urgency,
               and a report be forwarded to the NCOP in this regard.


        9.1.4    The Administrator should ensure the proper functioning  of
               the Local Labour Forum and the co-ordination of consultative
               meetings between the offices of the Mayor, Speaker  and  the
               Chief Whip.
        9.1.5    The Provincial Executive should provide quarterly  reports
               to the NCOP on the  progress  made  in  respect  of  service
               delivery, financial viability and management, transformation
               and organisational development, LED, and good governance and
               public  participation  as  contained  in   the   turn-around
               strategy tabled during the oversight visit on 11 May 2010.


        9.1.6     The  Administrator  should  fast-track  the  process   of
               ensuring that all section 57 managers complete  the  signing
               of their performance  contracts,  and  further  ensure  that
               those contracts are aligned with the key  performance  areas
               of the Municipality.


        9.1.7    The Premier of North-West Province should table  quarterly
               progress reports to the NCOP and the Provincial  Legislature
               on the status  of  the  intervention  in  the  Municipality,
               including challenges encountered.


        9.1.8    The South African Local  Government  Association,  in  co-
               operation with the Local  Government  Sector  Education  and
               Training Authority, should facilitate training and  capacity
               building for Municipal Councillors and officials,  in  order
               to further deepen their understanding of the legal framework
               and policies that govern the activities of the Municipality.




            9.  The  South  African  Municipal  Workers   Union   and   the
               Independent Municipal Allied Trade  Union  should  work  co-
               operatively with the Administrator in  order  to  strengthen
               personnel discipline that is aimed  at  promoting  municipal
               integrity.


           10.  The  Municipal  Demarcation  Board  (MDB)  should  table  a
               comprehensive  report  to  the  NCOP  and   the   North-West
               Provincial Legislature detailing why Tswaing, as a  fiscally
               poor Local Municipality, has been graded at a level six  and
               not  a  level  four  status  in  terms  of  the  ranking  of
               municipalities for remuneration purposes. This is  based  on
               the report of the Administrator made during 11 May 2010.


           11.  The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative   Governance   and
               Traditional  Affairs,  in  co-operation  with  the  relevant
               Portfolio   Committee   in   the    North-West    Provincial
               Legislature,  would  conduct  a  follow-up  visit   to   the
               Municipality three months after the intervention has  ended,
               in order to monitor the progress  made  in  respect  of  the
               intervention in the Municipality.


Report to be considered.

4.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MADIBENG LOCAL  MUNICIPALITY  –
   DATED 19 May 2010

   1. Background and Overview
   1.1      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
        Affairs having considered the request made by the National  Council
        of Provinces (NCOP) on 10 March 2010,  to consider  and  report  on
        the intervention notice invoked in terms of section 139  (1)(b)  of
        the Constitution at Madibeng Local  Municipality by the  North-West
        Provincial Executive Council (PEC), reports as follows:


   1.2      According to section  139(1)(b)  of  the  Constitution,  when  a
        municipality cannot or does not fulfil an executive  obligation  in
        terms of the Constitution or legislation, the  relevant  provincial
        executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps  to  ensure
        the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,   including   assuming   the
        responsibility for the relevant obligation in that municipality.


   1.3      In terms of the NCOP Rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson  of
        the NCOP referred the notice of  intervention  in  the  affairs  of
        Madibeng Local Municipality to the Select Committee of Co-operative
        Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and reporting.
        On 5 May 2010, the Select Committee  took  a  decision  during  its
        meeting to  conduct  an  oversight  visit  to  the  above-mentioned
        Municipality on 13 May, 2010.


   2. Oversight Purpose and Objectives
   2.1      The objectives of the oversight visit was to  determine  whether
        procedural requirements have been met and to verify whether the PEC
        has used its discretion  appropriately  before  the  Committee  can
        approve/disapprove the intervention. Through the deliberations  and
        interaction with internal and external stakeholders, the  Committee
        wanted to determine how  the  PEC  was  intending  to  restore  the
        fulfilment of the relevant obligations and ensure fulfilment in the
        long-term. The aim  was  to  ensure  intergovernmental  checks  and
        balances aimed at guarding the  integrity  and  efficiency  of  the
        intervention process.


   3. Composition of the Delegation
   3.1      The delegation of the Committee was composed  of  the  following
        Members of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi, Limpopo (ANC);
        Hon AG Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon DV Bloem, Free State  (COPE);  Mr
        TM  Manele,  Committee  Secretary  (Committee  Section)  and  Mr  V
        Mfuniselwa, Administration Assistant (Committee Section).
   4.       Introduction
   4.1      On 18 March 2010, the Premier of North-West  Province  tabled  a
        notice of intervention in Madibeng Local Municipality to the Office
        of the Chairperson of the NCOP.  Subsequent  to  the  tabling,  the
        notice of intervention was referred to the Select Committee on  Co-
        operative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration  and
        reporting in terms of Council Rule  101.  In  compliance  with  the
        Council referral, the  Committee  resolved  to  undertake  a  fact-
        finding visit to the Municipality on  13  May  2010.  In  terms  of
        section 139 (2)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the  intervention  must
        end if the NCOP does not positively approve the intervention within
        180 days, in this case before the end of 10 September  2010,  since
        the intervention began.


   5. Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality
   5.1      The main issues identified  by  the  PEC  to  intervene  in  the
        affairs of Madibeng Local Municipality  related  to  the  irregular
        personnel  appointments,  nepotism,  poor  water   and   sanitation
        provision, poor standard of internal  road  infrastructure,  uneven
        provision of services to the communities, and project delays due to
        prolonged procurement processes and possible fraud and  corruption.




   6.       Oversight Visit to Madibeng Local Municipality
   6.1      On 13 May 2010 the delegation of the Committee  had  interactive
        and robust engagements with the internal and external  stakeholders
        of the Madibeng Local Municipality. The main internal  stakeholders
        the delegation interacted with in  the  Municipality  included  the
        Speaker, Mayor,  Ward  Committee  Members,  Municipal  Councillors,
        Administrator and the South African  Local  Government  Association
        (SALGA). The main external stakeholders the  delegation  interacted
        with included members of the community, business  forums  and  non-
        governmental organizations.


   6.2      For the purpose of this report, the  submissions  made  by  both
        internal and external stakeholders are structured based on the five
        key performance areas of the local government which are:  Municipal
        Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local Economic Development;
        Municipal Financial Viability  and  Management,  as  well  as  Good
        Governance and Public Participation.


   (A).     Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development


  6.3  MEC  for   Finance:   The   major   municipal   transformation   and
        organisational development concerns raised by the MEC  for  Finance
        (Ms L Mabe), which led to the placing  of  the  Municipality  under
        section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution, were related to the  labour
        disputes that were  not  completed  on  time,  irregular  personnel
        appointments, nepotism, and irregular  dismissal  and  demotion  of
        personnel  as  a  result   of   political   interference   in   the
        administration of the Municipality.


  6.4 Municipal Council: The submissions made by the Mayor and the  Speaker
        reflected that the Municipal Council supported the placing  of  the
        Municipality  under  administration  and  the  appointment  of  the
        Administrator in  dealing  with  the  executive  functions  of  the
        Municipality. The major progress reported by the Mayor  related  to
        the stakeholders’ consultation and participation in the development
        of draft integrated development plan (IDP), budget, municipal turn-
        around  strategy,  and  the  engagement  of  communities  to  avoid
        protestation.


  6.5 Administrator: The Administrator’s  report  was  based  on  the  poor
        functionality  of  Ward   Committees,   poor   reporting   to   the
        communities, poor organisational structure,  lack  of  performance-
        based appraisal system, high vacancy  rate,  favouritism,  and  the
        continued use of contract workers.


  6.6 Municipal Councillors: The Municipal Councillors identified the  lack
        of progress in charging senior management who were  alleged  to  be
        involved in corrupt and fraudulent activities, suspended  officials
        organizing and  leading  protest  marches,  the  Municipal  Manager
        manipulating some officials  and  Municipal  Councillors,  and  the
        appointment of unskilled employees as the main problems confronting
        the Municipality.


  6.7        Organized  Labour:  The  representatives  of   South   African
        Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) raised concerns related to the lack
        of access to information with regard to the progress made since the
        placing of Municipality under administration, non-functionality  of
        the local labour forum, lack of resources and tools of  trade,  and
        the process that was followed leading to the promotion and demotion
        of employees.


  (B).      Basic Service Delivery


  6.8 MEC for Finance: The MEC indicated to the Committee  that  the  major
        challenges  with  regard  to  basic   service   delivery   in   the
        Municipality  were  based  on  the  poor  provision  of  water  and
        sanitation, poor standard of internal road  infrastructure,  uneven
        provision of services to communities, project  delays  due  to  the
        prolonged procurement processes and possible instances of fraud and
        corruption.


  6.9 The MEC further indicated that the breakdown in service delivery  has
        also been demonstrated by service delivery protests by  communities
        within the municipal jurisdiction, as well as the  emergence  of  a
        Ratepayers Association who have boycotted the paying for  municipal
        services rendered.


  6.10      Administrator: In terms  of  this  key  performance  area,  the
        challenges reported  by  the  Administrator  related  to  the  poor
        maintenance of  water  purification  plants,  water  contamination,
        fragmentation of water service provision, lack  of  maintenance  of
        roads  and  a  storm  water  management  plan,  incomplete  housing
        projects,  illegal occupation of vacant land,  and  the  fact  that
        there were too many contractors for waste removal.


  6.11      The turn-around plan reported by the Administrator  was  geared
        to assist the Municipality to effectively and efficiently deal with
        the basic service delivery challenges including  a  review  of  the
        water and sanitation arrangements, installation of pre-paid meters,
        completion of  a  water  and  sanitation  feasibility  study,  bulk
        increase  of  electricity,  development  of  a   water   management
        strategy, and the reviewing and  termination  of  service  delivery
        contracts.


  6.12      Community and Business Members: Both these stakeholders  raised
        similar challenges with regard to poor road construction,  lack  of
        bridges, lack of  transport  for  people  living  in  rural  areas,
        inadequate access to water and electricity, overflow  of  sewerage,
        vandalism of water pumps, and  the  non-cutting  of  grass  in  the
        municipal jurisdiction.

  (C).      Municipal Financial Viability and Management

  6.13      MEC for Finance: The MEC identified major obstacles with regard
        to financial viability and management in  the  Municipality.  These
        related to the allegations of fraud and corruption levelled against
        the former and current administration and  the  Municipal  Council;
        non-implementation of findings and recommendations of the  Auditing
        and Accounting Firms; allegations of fraudulent activities, such as
        the sale of prime municipal land; receiving of kickbacks  from  the
        service  providers;  and  the  irregular  awarding   of   municipal
        contracts.


  6.14       Administrator:  Under   this   key   performance   area,   the
        Administrator  reported  major  challenges  with  regard   to   the
        overstated  operational  budget   and   wastages,   poor   contract
        management  and  services,  poor  debtor  management,  billing  and
        systems  collapse,  overcharging  for  consumer  electricity,   and
        instances of fraud and corruption.  The  turn-around  plan  was  to
        assist the Municipality  to  deal  with  the  problems  related  to
        financial viability and management, including  the  adoption  of  a
        draft budget, recalling of  the  retired  town  engineers  and  the
        invitation  of  skilled  residents  to  serve  in  several  Council
        structures, and further disciplinary measures  against  allegations
        of fraud and corruption.


  6.15      In order to deal effectively with  cross-cutting  matters,  the
        Administrator  emphasised  the  need  for   National   Government’s
        intervention  to  deal  with  the  PIC  loan,  for  the  Provincial
        Government to address service delivery issues, and for the District
        to address certain bulk services (i.e. water and sanitation,  waste
        management, roads and disaster management services).

  (D).      Good Governance and Public Participation

  6.16       Administrator:  Some  of  the  good  governance   and   public
        participation concerns highlighted in the   Administrator’s  report
        related to the non-functionality of some of  the  Ward  Committees,
        political   interference   in   the   administration,   and    poor
        communication and feedback to the communities.


  6.17      However, the Administrator reported progress made with  respect
        to the establishment  of  a  stakeholder  consultative  forum,  and
        consultation  with  internal  and  external  stakeholders  on   the
        development of a turn-around strategy.


  7.  Committee Observations and Opinion
  7.1 The delegation of the Committee is of the opinion that the invocation
        of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution and  intervention  by  the
        North-West PEC was justified. The appointment of  the  Administrator
        on the 10 May 2010 has resulted in the development of a  turn-around
        plan which is aimed at assisting the Municipality to deal  with  the
        inherent challenges and stakeholders’ concerns related to  the  IDP,
        budget   formulation,    organisational    development,    financial
        management, good governance, public participation, LED  and  service
        delivery.


  8.  Acknowledgement
  8.1 Having  conducted  the  oversight  visit  to  the  Municipality,  the
        Committee delegation wishes to extend words of appreciation  to  all
        the internal and  external  stakeholders  of  the  Municipality  who
        interacted and had robust engagements with  the  delegation  of  the
        Committee on matters related to the placement  of  the  Municipality
        under section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution and the appointment  of
        the Administrator.


  9.  Recommendations
  9.1 Having conducted the oversight visit to Madibeng  Local  Municipality
        and interacted with internal and external stakeholders,  the  Select
        Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and   Traditional   Affairs
        recommends as follows:


        9.1.1     The NCOP approves the intervention as issued by the North-
                West Provincial Executive Council in terms  of  section  139
                (1)(b) of the Constitution.


        9.1.2      The  Administrator  should  fast-track  the  process   of
                reviewing and developing a database of qualifications of all
                section 57 managers and table a  report  to  the  Provincial
                Executive Council.


        9.1.3     The Administrator should ensure the proper functioning  of
                the Local Labour Forum and the co-ordination of consultative
                meetings between the offices of the Mayor, the  Speaker  and
                the Chief Whip.


             4. The Minister for  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
                Affairs  should  approach  the  Hawks  to  pursue   criminal
                investigation in all cases of financial  irregularities  and
                fraud  in  Madibeng  Local  Municipality,  as  a  matter  of
                urgency, and a report be  forwarded  to  the  NCOP  in  this
                regard.


        9.1.5     The Provincial Executive should provide quarterly  reports
                to the NCOP on the  progress  made  in  respect  of  service
                delivery, financial viability and management, transformation
                and organisational development, LED, and good governance and
                public participation.


        9.1.6      The  Administrator  should  fast-track  the  process   of
                ensuring that all section 57 managers complete  the  signing
                of their performance  contracts,  and  further  ensure  that
                those contracts are aligned with the key  performance  areas
                of the Municipality.


        9.1.7     The Premier of North-West Province should table  quarterly
                progress reports to the NCOP and the Provincial  Legislature
                on the status  of  the  intervention  in  the  Municipality,
                including challenges encountered.


        9.1.8     The South African Local  Government  Association,  in  co-
                operation with the Local  Government  Sector  Education  and
                Training Authority, should facilitate training and  capacity
                building for Municipal Councillors and officials in order to
                further deepen their understanding of  the  legal  framework
                and policies that govern the activities of the Municipality.




        9.1.9     The South African Municipal Workers Union should work  co-
                operatively with the Administrator in  order  to  strengthen
                personnel discipline aimed at promoting municipal integrity.


        9.1.10     The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and
                Traditional  Affairs,  in  co-operation  with  the  relevant
                Portfolio   Committee   in   the    North-West    Provincial
                Legislature,  would  conduct  a  follow-up  visit   to   the
                Municipality three months after the intervention has  ended,
                in  order  to  monitor  progress  made  in  respect  of  the
                intervention in the Municipality.


Report to be considered.

5.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NGAKA MODIRI  MOLEMA  DISTRICT
   MUNICIPALITY – DATED 19 MAY 2010

   1. Background and Overview
   1.1      The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs having considered the request made by the National  Council
        of Provinces (NCOP) on 10 March 2010, to consider and report on the
        extension request of the  intervention  in  terms  of  section  139
        (1)(b)  of  the  Constitution  at  Ngaka  Modiri  Molema   District
        Municipality by the North-West Provincial Executive Council  (PEC),
        reports as follows:


    1.2     In terms of  section  139(1)(b)  of  the  Constitution,  when  a
        municipality cannot or does not fulfil an executive  obligation  in
        terms of the Constitution or legislation, the  relevant  provincial
        executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps  to  ensure
        the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,   including   assuming   the
        responsibility for the relevant obligation in that municipality.


    2. Problems Identified at the Municipality by the PEC
    2.1     On 16 July 2009 the Provincial Executive Council (PEC) in North-
        West Province  resolved  to  invoked  section  139  (1)(b)  of  the
        Constitution in the Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality.  The
        main issues which led the PEC to invoke the provisions  of  section
        139(1)(b)  of  the  Constitution   and   assuming   the   executive
        responsibilities at Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality,  was
        a result of a thorough  eight months assessment of the situation by
        the Provincial Department of Local Government and Housing, as  well
        as  the  National  Department  of   Co-operative   Governance   and
        Traditional Affairs. During the assessment  period,  a  ministerial
        task team led  by  the  Minister  of  Co-operative  Governance  and
        Traditional Affairs was established to identify areas  and  sources
        of  conflict  that  impact  negatively  on  service  delivery   and
        governance in the Municipality.


    2.2     The findings of the ministerial task team relates to performance
        of functions by the  Municipality  beyond  its  constitutional  and
        legislative mandate; dysfunctional political governance  structure;
        approval of salary adjustment agreement was in breach of  the  main
        collective   agreement;   non–compliance   with   the   legislative
        provisioning  governing   local   government   sphere;   irregular,
        fruitless and wasteful expenditure; breakdown of  service  delivery
        and instability caused by mismanagement of union strike;  dismissal
        of the Municipal Manager and allegation of  fraud,  corruption  and
        mismanagement.


    2.3     Subsequent to  the  ministerial  task  team  findings,  the  MEC
        responsible  for  Developmental  Local   Government   and   Housing
        appointed an Administrator to execute all executive obligations and
        functions of the Municipality, with effect from July 2009.


    3. Reason for the Extension of the Intervention Period
    3.1     The Premier of the North-West Province, Ms Modiselle,  requested
        an extended period of six months for the appointed Administrator to
        continue assuming the executive obligations  of  the  Ngaka  Modiri
        Molema District Municipality. This was  based  on  the  outstanding
        work which was not completed, in order  for  the  Administrator  to
        facilitate a smooth  hand-over  process  for  the  Municipality  to
        resume its executive functions.


    3.2     Some of the outstanding  work  relates  to  the  appointment  of
        section 57 managers  including  the  Municipal  Manager,  financial
        challenges of the Municipality, legal delays  with  regard  to  the
        officials who were charged, pending legal judgements with regard to
        a contractor (Mvula Trust) and  the  performance  audit  has  since
        started. Furthermore, the Administrator was  awaiting  instructions
        from  the  Auditor-General  with  regard  to  disciplinary  actions
        against the Mayor. However,  achievements  have  been  recorded  in
        other key performance areas.


    4.      Committee Observations and Opinion
    4.1     The Committee is of the opinion that there  is  a  need  to  pay
        greater attention on service delivery issues, and the  Municipality
        must be responsive and address the problems raised by the community
        with the necessary  speed.  The  Municipality  should  treat  every
        service  delivery  problem  with  the  necessary   seriousness   it
        deserves. That all stakeholders in the municipal jurisdiction  must
        assist the transformation process,  within  the  framework  of  co-
        operative government work.


    4.2     Furthermore, the Committee wants to emphasize that the extension
        of the intervention period should serve in  facilitating  a  proper
        hand-over process after all  the  pending  main  issues  have  been
        successfully addressed in the Municipality. Equally,  the  extended
        period should facilitate the normalisation of the  current  hostile
        environment, as well as the filling of critical vacant position  to
        address capacity challenges in the Municipality.


    5. Recommendations
    5.1     The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
        Affairs recommends as follows:


            1. The NCOP approves the extension of the intervention period at
               Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality by  a  further  six
               months, as requested by the North-West  Provincial  Executive
               Council in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.


            2. The Minister  for  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
               Affairs  should  approach  the  Hawks  to   pursue   criminal
               investigation in all cases of  financial  irregularities  and
               fraud in Ngaka Modiri  Molema  District  Municipality,  as  a
               matter of urgency, and a report be forwarded to the  NCOP  in
               this regard.


Report to be considered.

6.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
    Development on  Budget  Vote  23  of  the  Department  of  Justice  and
    Constitutional Development for 2010/11, dated 19 May 2010

    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development  having
    considered Budget Vote 23: Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


    Report to be considered

7.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
    Development on Budget Vote 24 of the Department of Police for  2010/11,
    dated 19 May 2010

    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development  having
    considered Budget Vote 24: Department of Police, reports  that  it  has
    concluded its deliberations thereon.


    Report to be considered

8.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate L B
    Maruwa, dated 19 May 2010

    Introduction


    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
    considered evidence relating to the report on the provisional
    suspension from of Magistrate Mr L B Maruwa, an additional Magistrate
    at Daveyton District Court, Gauteng, tabled by the Minister for Justice
    and Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


    Background

      1. The Select Committee heard evidence from the representatives of the
         Magistrates Commission concerning the matter of the provisional
         suspension from office of Magistrate Mr L B Maruwa on 3 March 2010.


      2. Mr Maruwa was appointed as Magistrate on 1 January 1995. Mr Maruwa
         appeared on 24 August 2007 before the Springs Regional Court on 11
         counts of fraud. On 29 September 2009, Mr Maruwa was convicted of
         fraud on all eleven (11) counts.


      3. The Conviction of Mr Maruwa flowed from the fact that while
         presiding over a case involving a traffic offence allegedly
         committed fraud by endorsing the court records to wrongly reflect:



             i.  that  the  court  wherein  he   presided,   was   properly
                constituted in that the prosecutor in  his  capacity  as  a
                prosecutor was present,
            ii.  that  the  prosecutor  put  charges  to  the  accused  who
                committed the traffic offence,
           iii. that the prosecutor had no address on the merits,
            iv. that the prosecutor proved no previous convictions, and
             v. that the prosecutor had the opportunity to take part in the
                subsequent enquiries in terms of section 170(1) of  Act  51
                of 1977 for the failure of the accused to appear  in  court
                in the listed traffic  offences  reflected  in  the  charge
                sheet.


      4. The Springs Regional Court on 9 November 2009 sentenced  Mr  Maruwa
         to a fine of R5000, 00 or 12 months imprisonment.  Mr  Maruwa  paid
         the fine.


      5.  The  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Magistrates  Commission,   having
         considered the allegations and Mr Maruwa’s representations  at  its
         meeting held on 26 November  2009  resolved  in  terms  of  section
         13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 to provisionally  suspend  Mr
         Maruwa from office with remuneration on the following grounds.

             i. The allegations against Mr Maruwa are  of  such  a  serious
                nature that it  would  justify  his  removal  from  office,
                should he be found guilty of the misconduct charges against
                him.
            ii. The conviction of fraud on eleven counts by a court of  law
                are of such a serious nature as to  make  it  inappropriate
                for him to perform the functions of a magistrate while  the
                outcome of an investigation into his fitness to hold office
                is  investigated.  It  is  inappropriate  for  a   judicial
                officer, convicted of fraud, to  sit  on  the  Bench.  This
                undermines the dignity and image of the Bench.


    Committee recommendation




    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
    considered the report on the  provisional  suspension  from  office  of
    Magistrate Mr L B Maruwa,  recommends  that  the  National  Council  of
    Provinces  confirms  the  provisional  suspension  from   office   with
    remuneration as Magistrate of Mr L B Maruwa.


    Report to be considered.

CREDA INSERT - Insert T190510e – Insert 9 – PAGES 1580-1582

10.    Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate M T
    Masinga, dated 19 May 2010

    Introduction


    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
    considered evidence relating to the report on the provisional
    suspension from office of Magistrate Mr M T Masinga, an additional
    Magistrate at Emlazi, KwaZulu Natal, tabled by the Minister for Justice
    and Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the
    Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


    Background
      1.    The Select Committee heard evidence from the representatives of
           the Magistrates Commission concerning the matter of the
           provisional suspension from office of Magistrate Mr M T Masinga
           on 3 March 2010.


     2.    The Chief Magistrate, Durban, in a letter  dated  2  April  2009
           reported that Mr Masinga on 19 March 2009 appeared in the Durban
           Magistrates Court on a charge of contravening  section  17  (a),
           read with section 7 of the Domestic Violence Act (Act No 116  of
           1998). It is alleged that he assaulted his  wife  with  a  blunt
           axe, that he kicked her, hit her with open hands and  threatened
           to kill her. He also assaulted his daughters.

      3.    The criminal proceedings were initially  remanded  to  14  April
           2009. Mr Masinga was granted bail of an amount of R1000.00.  The
           criminal case was thereafter transferred to the Regional  Court,
           Durban, where Mr  Masinga  appeared  on  additional  charges  of
           attempted murder and two counts of assault.

      4.    On 14  July  2009,  the  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Magistrates
           Commission informed Mr Masinga in writing  that  the  Commission
           contemplates to recommend that  he  be  provisionally  suspended
           from office (with or without remuneration), pending the  outcome
           of an investigation into his fitness  to  hold  office.  He  was
           requested to show cause, in writing, why such a decision  should
           not be taken.


      5.    At its  meeting  held  on  26  November  2009,  the  Magistrates
           Commission considered the matter and resolved to  recommend  that
           Mr Masinga be provisionally suspended from  office  in  terms  of
           section 13(3) (a) of the Act.


      6.    The Commission is of the view that the existing evidence against
           Mr  Masinga  is  of  such  a  serious  nature  as  to  make   it
           inappropriate for him to perform the functions of  a  Magistrate
           while the allegations are being investigated.


      7.    lt would be inappropriate for a judicial officer,  appearing  as
           an accused before a court of law on charges of attempted  murder
           and assault to still sit on the Bench.

      8.    The Commission holds the view  that,  without  anticipating  the
          outcome of the investigation into his fitness to hold the  office
          of Magistrate, the existing evidence against  Mr  Masinga  is  of
          such a serious nature that it  would  justify  his  removal  from
          office, should he be  found  guilty  of  the  misconduct  charges
          against him.

    Committee recommendation




    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
    considered the report on the  provisional  suspension  from  office  of
    Magistrate M  T  Masinga,  recommends  that  the  National  Council  of
    Provinces confirms the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate
    of Mr M T Masinga.


    Report to be considered.

11.    Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate W J
    M Prinsloo, dated 19 May 2010

    Introduction


    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
    considered  evidence  relating  to  the  report  on   the   provisional
    suspension from  office  of  Magistrate  of  Mr  W  J  M  Prinsloo,  an
    additional Magistrate at Ermelo, KwaZulu Natal, tabled by the  Minister
    for Justice and Constitutional Development in terms of section 13(3)(b)
    of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:


    Background


      1.    The Select Committee heard evidence from the representatives  of
         the Magistrates Commission concerning the matter of the provisional
         suspension from office of Magistrate W J  M  Prinsloo  on  3  March
         2010.

      2.    The investigation instituted by the  Commission  confirmed  that
         ten  complaints  by  a  female  clerk  employed  at   the   Ermelo
         Magistrate’s Office, Ms  S  C  Van  Wyk,  were  filed  against  Mr
         Prinsloo. It is alleged that Mr Prinsloo,  during  the  period  18
         April 2008 to 5 May 2008  on  ten  different  occasions  conducted
         himself in an unbecoming and embarrassing manner by phoning Ms Van
         Wyk and leaving lewd and suggestive messages on her voicemail.

     3.    On  14  July  2009  the  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Magistrates
         Commission requested Mr Prinsloo to show cause why  a  decision  to
         provisionally suspend him from  duty  pending  the  outcome  of  an
         investigation into his fitness to hold office, should not be taken.
         On 8 September 2009 Mr Prinsloo, in his response stated that:
                i.     The incidents happened more than a  year  ago.  Since
                    then no similar incidents have occurred,
                ii.    The incidents happened during a very  difficult  time
                    in his personal life,
               iii. The criminal case has  already  been  withdrawn  against
                    him,
                iv. The dispute between  the  complainant  and  himself  has
                    already been resolved through the mediation process,
                 v. ln view thereof he should not be suspended and  that  no
                    further steps should be taken against him,
                vi. One of the resolutions made during the mediation process
                    was that the complainant would request that all criminal
                    and misconduct  steps  be  withdrawn  against  him.  The
                    complainant has addressed a letter dated 25 August  2009
                    where she requested that the  misconduct  steps  against
                    him be withdrawn, and
               vii.  Once  all  criminal  and  misconduct  steps  have  been
                    withdrawn against him, he will apply for a suitable post
                    as soon as posts are advertised.

    4.     At its meeting held on 26 November 2009 the  Commission,  having
         considered Mr Prinsloo’s response and Ms Van Wyk’s letter  as  well
         as further representations from Mr Prinsloo, his Judicial Head  and
         the Chief Magistrate,  Nelspruit  resolved  to  recommend  that  Mr
         Prinsloo be provisionally suspended from office in terms of section
         13(3)(a) of the Act. The following considerations weighed with  the
         Commission:


        I. Allegations against Mr Prinsloo are of such a serious nature  as
           to make it inappropriate for him to perform his functions  while
           the allegations are  being  investigated  and  that  should  the
           allegations be proven true, he would be  liable  to  be  removed
           from office.


       II. Given the current public opinion against the abuse of  women  by
           men, Mr Prinsloo’s continued service on the Bench would severely
           damage the image of the judiciary. His continued service may  be
           construed as some indication of insensitivity.


      III. Judicial Officers are expected  to  be  exemplary  in  order  to
           inspire confidence in the administration  of  justice.  Although
           the  accusations  are  still  to  be  proven;  the  sheer  moral
           depravity of the allegations is such that Mr Prinsloo should  be
           taken off the Bench in the meantime.


       IV. The nature of Mr Prinsloo’s response to the allegations  implies
           that he may elect not to deny the allegations.  The  complainant
           made it a condition of her withdrawal of  the  criminal  charges
           that  Mr  Prinsloo  be  transferred   from   the   office.   The
           recommendation is therefore that he be  provisionally  suspended
           from office.


    Committee recommendation




    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
    considered the report on the  provisional  suspension  from  office  of
    Magistrate W J M Prinsloo, recommends  that  the  National  Council  of
    Provinces confirms the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate
    of Mr W J M Prinsloo.


    Report to be considered.

