---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-03-10
---

WEDNESDAY, 10 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                       APPLICATION OF SUB JUDICE RULE

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before we start with the business
of today, I would like to take this opportunity to recognise, in the
gallery, a delegation from the National Assembly of the Republic of
Hungary, led by His Excellency Mr Mandur. They are visiting as my guests
and guests of this Parliament. You are most welcome here and we hope you
will have a fruitful visit to our Parliament. [Applause.]

Hon members, again before we start, I would like to deal with a ruling
matter from the Questions session of last week. During Question Time on
Wednesday, I indicated that I would get back to the House with a ruling on
the application of the sub judice rule. This was necessitated by objections
by some members to an assertion by the Deputy Minister of Police that he
could not give answers to a particular question on the basis that the
matter was sub judice.

I was also asked to rule on whether two questions that were similar in
substance should have been allowed. I had time to study the unrevised
Hansard and would now like to rule as follows: Rule 67 of the Rules of the
National Assembly provides that “no member shall refer to any matter on
which a judicial decision is pending”.

To be sub judice means a matter must be awaiting adjudication or be under
adjudication by a court of law. The rationale for this Rule is that
Parliament should not influence, or seem to be seeking to influence, the
administration of justice. The mere intention on the part of a person to
lodge a case does not make the matter sub judice.

Order! To balance the application of the sub judice rule and the right of
members to freedom of speech, this House had ruled in the past that if a
member discussed in general terms a matter that was before the courts, the
sub judice rule was not contravened, provided the member did not refer to
the matter that was sub judice in a way that prejudiced the case.

It is often not possible for the Chair to ascertain immediately the
relevance of the sub judice Rule on a particular matter. For that reason
the Chair would caution members to observe the spirit of the Rule or ask
that the matter be postponed until a determination has been made. I must
also remind members that it is an established practice in this House that
it is not for the Chair to ascertain the accuracy or otherwise of a
statement made by a member.

Hon members, I cannot emphasise enough that Question Time is a treasured
occasion for members as it presents them with the opportunity to hold
members of the executive accountable for their functions, bearing in mind
that it is not every day that this House has the opportunity to ask
questions to the executive. It is, therefore, desirable that every effort
is made to provide members with the information they seek to obtain through
their questions. It must only be in exceptional cases and for good reasons
that a question on the Question Paper for the day is not responded to.

Therefore, best practice dictates that should a Minister have legitimate
concerns about particular questions, such questions should be brought to
the attention of the House beforehand so that members are duly informed.

Had that been the case last week, the proceedings could have been
different. While the Deputy Minister may have believed the matter dealt
with in the question fell under the sub judice rule, information at my
disposal is that the matter is currently not before a court and is
therefore not covered by the Rule.

Members will recall that proceedings on the question by hon J D Kilian were
effectively suspended, pending verification of the facts. In view of what I
have stated above, namely that the sub judice rule does not apply to this
instance, should hon Kilian still wish to obtain the information she sought
through the question, she may utilise the option of a question for written
reply. Alternately, she may approach the Speaker with a request for the
question to be asked outside of the cluster. The same principle will apply
in respect of hon T W Coetzee’s question.

I would now like to reflect on the other matter which was raised by the
Deputy Minister of Transport, namely whether it was correct to have
questions that are substantially or exactly the same on the same Question
Paper for reply. This was with reference to Questions 21 and 34. Best
practice would again dictate that this is undesirable.

Care should have been taken in the editing of these questions to eliminate
duplication. I am assured in this regard that measures have been put in
place to prevent a recurrence of this in future.
In conclusion, I wish to remind all hon members that this House operates
within the context of the Constitution, Rules, convention and practice. I
am very concerned at the manner in which members tend to respond to the
Chair when rulings are made, especially if they happen to disagree with a
ruling.

I would like to assure the House that it is never the intention of the
presiding officer to stifle debate or deny members their right to freedom
of speech. That’s exactly what you are doing now. [Laughter.]

A ruling should, however, be queried in the proper way. A member may
disagree with a ruling of the presiding officer, but must accept the word
of the presiding officer and may not argue or cross-examine the Chair.
Presiding officers have a duty to ensure the smooth running of proceedings,
and continuous Points of Order definitely do nothing to enhance debate or
the image of this House. Thank you very much, hon members, I hope you will
bear that in mind. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, may I address you on this ruling?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon member.

Dr C P MULDER: Thank you, Ms Deputy Speaker. What you are pointing out is
exactly right. But, firstly, it is also best practice that members
shouldn’t repeat previous Points of Order, which is happening from time to
time. Secondly, before the hon Speaker or Deputy Speaker or presiding
officer makes a ruling, perhaps he or she should allow other members of the
House to address the presiding officer on the Points of Order being taken
before a ruling is made because, obviously, it’s not always easy for the
presiding officer to make an immediate ruling. Maybe it is a good thing and
best practice to allow other members to address that presiding officer on
the Point of Order being made before a ruling is made. After a ruling has
been made, that’s a different question. But before a ruling is made, it’s
best practice to allow members also to address the hon presiding officer.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are correct, hon member. I am not sure which
incident you refer to, but in rulings I’ve made as a Chairperson, I didn’t
take Points of Order only when people wanted. After I had made a ruling,
they wanted to disagree about that ruling. If that’s what you mean, you’re
right. When the Chair makes a ruling – that’s exactly what I was saying –
in most cases when we say we are going to look at the matter and come back
to make a ruling, it is because we want to be sure.

So, when the presiding officer is saying “This is what I’m ruling”, you
might disagree but you cannot sit there and say it is wrong. Imagine if I
did that to a magistrate when I was being sentenced; if I said, “I do not
agree”. There would be chaos in this country if we do that. [Applause.]
Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, may I address you further on that same
point? I agree with what you are saying. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: But ... [Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: All I’m saying, Deputy Speaker, is there are instances when
the presiding officers do not refer the matter for consideration, but
immediately take a Point of Order and make a decision. The point I am
making is: It is best practice to allow further Points of Order to be taken
before you make up your mind and give a ruling. That’s something different.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I hear your point and I hope no presiding
officer would do such a thing. Thank you.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY
                               SOCIAL SERVICES
                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

   Measures introduced to attain international standard in ratio of social
                         workers to total population

    4 Adv A D Alberts (FF Plus)asked the Minister of Social Development:
      What (a) is (i) the ratio of social workers to the total population
      and (ii) the international standard in this regard and (b) measures
      has she introduced to attain the international standard?
                                                   N0395E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Deputy Speaker, my response to the
question asked by hon Alberts is as follows: The ratio of social workers to
total population is currently standing at 1:5 000. We also have about 4 799
student social workers who are in training. It should also be noted that
the existing number of social workers reflects only the social workers
employed by government. The ratio has, therefore, been calculated based on
the existing number of social workers employed by government.

I must mention, though, that we still lose social workers to other sectors
of the economy in our country through career change. Hon Deputy Speaker and
hon member Alberts will be happy to note that the figures we are referring
to indeed offer new entrants a social work career, in addition to those who
are already there, and cover the whole spectrum of South Africa’s
demographic.

The international standard for the established norm and ratio for social
workers happens to be 1:5 000. It is a coincidence that we have the same
figure, but South Africa is on par with the international standards. There
is, however, a demand for more social workers due to the fact that South
Africa is a developing country with high levels of poverty, deprivation and
HIV incidence, which compounds the problem.

The Department of Social Development has developed a recruitment and
retention strategy for social workers, to recruit and retain social workers
within our country. As part of the implementation of our strategy in South
Africa, we also provide scholarships to students who want to pursue social
work as a profession.

Since the inception of this programme, the National Treasury committed an
amount of R50 million in the 2007-08 financial year, R105 million in 2008-
09, R210 million in 2009-10, and R22 million in the 2011-12 financial year.

In 2008, 816 students graduated, and 1 600 in 2009. Our department offers
career fairs annually to high school students to intensify the marketing of
the social work profession. We also implemented, very successfully, the
occupation-specific dispensation, OSD. The regrading of social workers’
salaries was implemented as part of our retention strategy for social
workers, and these are the measures that we are applying in that regard.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister. Is hon Alberts here?

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, Mr Alberts is not able to be in the
House today. Is it in order if I ask a follow-up question on his behalf?

Thank you, hon Minister, for a comprehensive answer. The basic question is:
We are obviously looking at the situation because we want to assist the
most vulnerable in our society: women and children. What measures can be
taken, from government’s side, to bring things more in line with what is
happening in the private sector with regard to social services? What
measures can be taken to enhance the remuneration packages of our social
workers in state employ to sort out this problem?

We are thankful that the ratio compares so favourably, but we still need to
retain our social workers. What can be done? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Deputy Speaker, as I said, the OSD
has been successfully implemented within government. The same has not
happened and cannot happen in the private sector, nor in the NGO sector,
particularly because the OSD was a government-implemented programme.

We are, however, very aware of the challenges faced by the private sector
as well as the NGO sector with regard to getting their salary packages on
par with those of government. Indeed, we have engaged with the private
sector, in particular the NGO sector, to try and find mechanisms to support
those NGOs that employ social workers who are not at the same level as
those in government. Indeed, we need that support so that government is
assisted effectively.

When we have completed the discussions and mechanisms that we are
exploring, we will certainly begin to implement all those mechanisms. Thank
you very much.

Mrs S P KOPANE: Deputy Speaker, let me thank the hon Minister for the
response she gave us. Minister, how can the government pass the Children’s
Act when there is only 17% of social workers to implement the Act?

The government’s own costing report clearly stipulates that to implement
the Act properly more than 66 000 social workers are needed. We have a
shortfall of 83%, Madam Minister. This does not take into consideration the
number of social workers needed for other Acts, such as the Older Persons
Act, that also require a large number of social workers. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Earlier in my response I indicated that
we are currently on par with international standards. However, I also did
indicate that South Africa, being a developing country, will require more
social workers.

Certainly, we agree that greater numbers are required, not only to
implement the Children’s Act, but also to support the Department of Basic
Education in the recently agreed-upon measures that we are to apply –
measures of conditionalities that were attached, and many other fields.

As I said, we are currently training social workers. Fortunately, Treasury
and the entire government saw the need for us to increase the number of
social workers that we are training. I did indicate that we are doing
career fairs. We are, on an annual basis, increasing these numbers, and we
believe that, all things being equal, we shall get to the point where we
want to be.

I indicated earlier that people do change careers and leave the profession.
If more social workers who are already trained do not move out to other
sectors, we believe we will make it if we continue with training the way we
are doing. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, may I ask the hon Minister what progress is
being made to improve the ratio of social workers in the Eastern Cape
where, last October, the ratio was 1:6 000? At the time, the department
said it was double the burden of the rest of the nation.

How successful has the marketing been, generally, in attracting youth with
Grade 12, and especially young men, because currently three quarters of the
social workers in South Africa are women? Is the marketing aimed at both
men and women, or do we need to re-examine this? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, again, I did indicate
earlier that we are looking at the entire spectrum of the South African
demographic when we recruit. And we are working with provinces very
intensively. Provinces themselves, jointly with the national Department of
Social Development, do this marketing drive together. The hon member is
asking about the Eastern Cape in particular: In that province, similarly,
we are continuously embarking on the recruitment of social workers.

I must say also - something I did not mention earlier - that even when we
say we are on par, the reality is that there is still some inequality and
inequity in provinces and in the provincial spread. That is the kind of
thing we are working on, as asked by hon Dudley. Thank you.

Ms H N MAKHUBA: Madam Deputy Speaker, let me thank the hon Minister. The
IFP is happy to hear today, Minister, that currently the Department of
Social Development has in place ways of encouraging young people to study
social work at tertiary level.

However, once these students qualify in this field, do we have any
retention strategies in place to ensure we do not lose these critical
skills to other countries, as has been the case with our doctors and
nurses? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, may I say that if hon
members read the newspapers last week, they would be aware of indications
that the majority of our people who left this country, particularly
professionals, are beginning to come back home. That is most welcome.

Fortunately for us in the Department of Social Development, we have not had
quite such an exodus of social workers, but as I said earlier on, we are
implementing the OSD. That programme of our government is intended to
ensure that we remunerate our professionals in the field of social work in
such a manner that they will stay. That on its own is part of the retention
strategy.

Indeed, the salaries and packages they are getting right now compare
favourably. That is a very strong element of retention. However, it is
never going to be easy to compel people to stay within a particular
profession. From time to time, people move from one profession to another.
That aspect we are not able to do anything about.

The only thing we do is to offer bursaries, scholarships, etc. We also do
our best in terms of the working conditions we provide, and to ensure that
we implement this OSD. That is, for now, as far as we can go. We are doing
that with all the other bodies that manage and govern the social work
profession. Thank you very much.

                 Impact of extension of child support grant

54.   Mrs Y R Botha (ANC) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (a) What impact will the extension of the child support grant have on
      children attending school, (b) how will this extension improve the
      livelihood of the affected families and (c) how will intergenerational
      poverty be eradicated?                  NO572E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, the response to the
question asked by hon Y R Botha is as follows. Indeed, hon Deputy Speaker,
there is a large body of empirical evidence that confirms both the
developmental and poverty-reducing effects of child support grants. Various
studies have found that children who receive this kind of grant are
significantly more likely to be enrolled in schools in the years following
receipt of the grant than equally poor children of the same age.

To evaluate grant types and their causal role in helping children to get to
school, other studies have compared the outcomes of children receiving the
grant with those of their siblings who were too old to benefit from this
grant. In this regard it was found that siblings of grant recipients, when
they are actually compared to the younger children, were less likely to be
enrolled in schools.

It was also found that a household in receipt of a child support grant is
associated with a reduction of approximately 22% to 25% in school
nonattendance. Thus, the grant appears to have a positive impact on school
enrolment and attendance.

Studies also indicated, hon Deputy Speaker, that many children stop
attending school when they reach the cut-off age of grant eligibility. Even
though school enrolment and attendance is high at the lower levels of
education, many learners are unable to complete secondary schooling. The
most common reason for this nonattendance is that there is no money for
school fees. Therefore, the extension of the child support grant will
indeed increase the chances of older children to enrol, attend and, indeed,
complete their secondary schooling.

Empirical research indicated a 20% reduction in household poverty where
there is a child in receipt of a child support grant. By extending the
eligibility age to 18 years, that reduction will be 21,4%.

Studies also indicated that social grants are effective in addressing
hunger as well as basic needs in general. In a household that receives
social grants, spending focuses more on basics such as food, fuel, housing
and household operation for the purpose of getting children studying and in
school. Less is spent on tobacco and debt servicing than in households that
do not receive grants.

Therefore, it is assumed that the further extension of the child support
grant would continue to strengthen families by providing households with
more resources to improve their wellbeing. Poverty and its consequences
erode the opportunities for children and youth to attend school, creating a
vicious cycle of destitution and undermining the household’s capacity to
accumulate the human capital that is so needed.

Hon Deputy Speaker, empirical evidence also indicates that social grants
given to those children in South Africa are developmental in nature.
Children from households that are receiving grants are more likely to
attend school and the extension of child support grants will undoubtedly
enable these children to complete their education. The better educated our
labour force, the more competitive they would be in the labour market, and
higher productivity will mean higher wages and salaries. The progressive
extensions of the child support grant hold the potential to diminish
intergenerational poverty in our country. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs Y R BOTHA: Deputy Speaker, just a follow-up question to the hon
Minister: We all know that, contrary to what some people say, social
security is the government’s biggest poverty alleviation tool. Could the
hon Minister please provide the House with the number of children who will
be accommodated on the social pensions, Socpen, system, the extension of
the child support grant? Can the hon Minister also provide us with the
total number of grant beneficiaries currently in the social security
system?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Deputy Speaker, indeed, as I said,
our children will benefit and be able to attend school. The number of
children who need to be enrolled through this extension is now standing at
2,1 million. As for where we are now, the number of current recipients
9,6 million, but the total figure of all recipients of grants, including
the veterans, stands at 13 780 338. The last time we did the count was late
last year. The new enrolment just for January already shows a move towards
this number of 2,1 million children.

We do believe the enrolment will benefit more children and we appreciate
the support and assistance given by our government and Treasury in general,
also having covered our children who were born in December 1993. That means
we now cover all children from 1 January up to now. Not even a single child
will fall outside of this support, so the total will now include the
entrance of 2,1 million new children. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Hon Minister, I thank you for the presentation you have
given in reply to the question about children’s grants. The question I
would like to pose to you pertains to this grant being misused, especially
by the young mothers who normally collect it but don’t use it for the
purpose it is intended for. What I would like to find out from the
department is: Are there mechanisms in place to address this matter so that
the grant does what it is supposed to do, which is to take care of
children? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, we have heard anecdotes
of young mothers who are spending the money on their hair and things like
that. We are taking these issues seriously. But I must say that the studies
and research we have done produced empirical evidence allowing us to
determine that, in terms of the registration of new children entering the
system, most of the registrations are actually done after two years of age.
That tells us, in fact, that if young mothers were indeed registering their
children for the purposes of using this money for something else, they
would register them right in the first month after birth.

So, this is actually something that we have been able to prove. However,
recently we have adopted a mechanism of attaching conditions. I must say
that these are soft conditions, not hard conditions, meaning we are not
going to be taking any money from any child. There is an agreement between
ourselves and the Department of Basic Education that there will be an
exchange of reports from time to time on children who may not be attending
school. We can then release social workers to go into those families and
find out what the challenges are so that we are able to deal with the
problems.

In other words, if the child’s benefit is being used for anything else, we
will be able to detect that through this mechanism and be able to deal with
that particular case instead of just sweeping everything under the carpet
and it becoming just anecdotal.

It is a matter that we take seriously, as I said. That’s why we introduced
these conditions. It doesn’t mean we will take those monies away from
children, but we will really drill deep down into what the problems are and
how the money is being used and correct that. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mrs H LAMOELA: Madam Speaker and hon Minister, the previous question dealt
with the chronic lack of social workers. How will the government monitor
whether children receiving the child support grant are indeed attending
school and benefiting directly from the grant when there are not enough
social workers to monitor the situation? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Deputy Speaker, I suppose this
question was expecting the previous answer to be that we don’t have social
workers, but we didn’t say that. We said their numbers are on par. However,
we recognise that we still need to do more. We need to get more social
workers, given that we are a developing country. We also indicated that
there is a plethora of legislation that we need to implement, including
these new conditions which are not necessarily imposed by any legislation.

So in all that work we recognise that there really is a need for more
social workers. By the way, there is something I haven’t mentioned: We also
have practitioners out in the field who are doing the lighter jobs which do
not require a high level of professional skill. So, those people are
assisting us at present, but we are doing our best to get more social
workers to implement the entire spectrum of the work that we need to do.
This ranges from the implementation of the Children’s Act, support work to
strengthen the family as the basic unit in our society and working with the
elderly to even the new programmes that are being employed in the area of
health and the entire spectrum of work that Minister Motsoaledi will be
doing.

But, as Minister Motsoaledi will say, we will also be calling upon retired
social workers to help in case there is the need to do that. That call has
been made but for now we don’t really have a shortage. We are just
recognising that the work we do is enormous and we need to get more and
more hands. We are training at the same time, as I said earlier on. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Madam Deputy Speaker, in asking this question to the hon
Minister I do realise that the implementation of policy and programmes
resides with the provinces and the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, at the
provincial level. However, hon Minister, during a recent visit to many
secondary schools in my area, one of the issues that stood out prominently
was the inability of children up to the age of 18 years to access these
grants.

It was not because of age, but because of difficulties in obtaining
identity documents, IDs, or because parents were late, and other
difficulties. I’m wondering whether the department would facilitate a
coming together of the Departments of Education and Home Affairs and target
specific schools where they can assist young people at school to obtain the
relevant documents so that they can qualify for this grant. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Deputy Speaker, let me firstly
remind hon member Singh that we are not registering the 18-year-olds yet.
We are still dealing with those who have reached 16 years of age. We are
moving incrementally towards 18. But yes, there has been a challenge
stemming from the inability to get the necessary documentation for some of
the children so that they can actually register.

This department and the Department of Home Affairs have come up - we’ve
been working together for quite some time now - with a process or a
mechanism that ensures you can use alternative documents, or supporting
documents, for identification of whatever sort. We have a set of agreed
documents that can be used so that the children or the young mothers or
people who still need access to IDs will have these alternative documents.

There is a whole set of things that we are using to make IDs available so
that our children or the mothers - the beneficiaries - can be registered
and their children can get these funds. If there is a problem anywhere, we
would have to attend to it. We would love to know of specific cases. Thank
you very much.

        Investigation into concerns regarding use of Tamiflu vaccine

77.   Mrs C Dudley (ACDP) asked the Minister of Health:

      (1)   Whether he will institute an investigation into concerns with
          regard to using the Tamiflu vaccine in the national swine flu
          immunisation campaign which starts on 15 March 2010, after it was
          withdrawn in America because of dangerous side effects; if not,
          why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether he will take any measures to ensure that the public is
          informed regarding the risks before the immunisation campaigns
          begin; if not, why not; if so, what measures?
                                        NO610E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, the answer to the question asked of
me is as follows. Hon member, nowhere in the world is there a vaccine
called Tamiflu. It does not exist. Tamiflu, rather, is the commercial name
of a drug; also Tamivir, which is an antiviral, but we do not have any
vaccine by the name of Tamiflu. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Yes, Speaker, before I give the follow-up questions, I would
like to say that, according to a confidential warning letter written on 29
July 2009, a copy of which was leaked to the British press, the Head of
Immunisation of the UK government’s Health Protection Agency warned British
neurologists that the swine flu vaccine, which was briefly used in a mass
vaccination programme in 1976 in the USA until it was abruptly withdrawn
because of dangerous side effects, is likely to cause Guillain-Barré
syndrome, GBS, which attacks the lining of the nerves, causing paralysis
and the inability to breathe. It can be fatal. Obviously – and there was
another study which showed that the likelihood of GBS was 800% after the
immunisation – these are matters for concern.

So, the question I’m really asking is, have we looked into these concerns?
Are we absolutely sure that this is not going to be problematic? Our
immunisation roll-out starts on Monday, I believe. Has the vaccine ever
been tested on children or expectant mothers, particularly since these are
two primary groups targeted to receive the vaccine? Will you take any
measures to ensure that doctors, particularly neurologists, are informed of
the risks before the immunisation campaigns begin? If not, why not? And if
so, what measures can you let us have? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, I am sure you will appreciate that
that is a new question altogether. I was asked a question about the use of
the Tamiflu vaccine, which is supposed to have been banned in the United
States of America, and I reported that there is no such vaccine anywhere in
the world. We are not going to vaccinate anybody with Tamiflu. So, if you
want to ask another question about something that happened in the UK in
1976, can that question come? We will be able to respond to it then, but
this is the question I have been asked for today.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Chair, on a point of order: We have an immunisation
roll-out on Monday. This is very serious, and it might be funny just to ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, you were supposed to
ask a follow-up question according to the response of the Minister.
Therefore, take your seat.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Sorry, Chair, I think there is a misunderstanding, because
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): No, hon member, I am not going to
deal with misunderstandings between you and the Minister. Just take your
seat.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Chairperson. The department is set to start an H1N1
flu immunisation campaign on Monday, and that is stipulated in the
question, hon Minister. That is 15 March. However, the vaccine has not been
approved by the MCC yet. This highlights, once again, the lack of ability
by the department to deal effectively with potential epidemics. How does
the Minister intend to start a campaign when the vaccine has not been
approved? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Look, we have made a
date, the possible start date of the vaccination campaign. If we are not
ready; if, by any chance, the Medicines Control Council, MCC, has not yet
passed that particular vaccine, we will definitely postpone the campaign.
The vaccines we are using here have been passed elsewhere in the world. I
announced in this House, during the debate on the state of the nation
address, the vaccines that have been ordered from countries around the
world, the vaccines that have been passed by relevant medical authorities
around the world, and the number of vaccines that are being donated to
South Africa.

If there is any technical problem that the hon Waters knows of or might
have encountered or has mentioned, then we will inform people accordingly.
Vaccination is not an emergency, in this case. We are just vaccinating
people before the winter period in which, we believe, the H1N1 virus will
become a problem.

Mr D A KGANARE: Thanks, Chairperson. Hon Minister, you can ridicule the hon
Dudley when you understand the context within which she was asking the
question, but the issue is ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, you have to raise your
question according to the response of the Minister. Whether he ridiculed
the member or not is none of your concern. Okay, continue then.

Mr D A KGANARE: I am there. It is unfortunate that I am told to ask the
question before I’ve finished the sentence, because that was my preamble to
the question. And there is nothing stopping me from having a preamble to a
question.

Hon Minister, if the MCC has not approved the vaccine, and you have created
the impression that the roll-out will take place as from Monday, why did
you not communicate that you might have to change the deadline?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, I am not really sure what this war
is all about here. I have not ridiculed anybody. I have just stated facts.
I was asked a question about a vaccine called Tamiflu, which does not
exist. Where does ridiculing come in? I am not ridiculing anybody.

But on the issue of immunisation, Madam Speaker, the decision whether a
drug is safe to immunise people with, or to give to people, is not made in
Parliament. All around the world, it is done by scientists. It is never
made in Parliament by me, but by scientists. [Laughter.] [Applause.] All
the vaccines that are available now have been passed, even by the World
Health Organisation. That is the body of scientists and authorities from
around the world, authorities in medical matters, even higher than this
Parliament. If they decide that this vaccine can be used, we actually use
it.

So, I am not sure whether we should debate it here in this Parliament. We
do not have that knowledge. I do not know where you will have got it from,
because I have never seen you going to any university of medicine to study
these things. [Laughter.] So, why don’t you leave it to scientists?
[Applause.] Please, allow the scientists to deal with this matter and let
us stop politicising these issues!

Dr A N LUTHULI: Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Minister, for your answer to
the question, but I think this question has just been thrown open now, in
whichever way one wants to take it.

Can the hon Minister perhaps tell the House what the side effects are of
Tamiflu tablets, which are used to treat the virus? Perhaps that is what
the question should have been, as we are agreed that there is no such thing
as the Tamiflu vaccine. It does not exist. The vaccine is the H1N1 vaccine.
So, perhaps we should move in the direction that perhaps the original
question was really about Tamiflu tablets, which are actually for the
treatment of the virus - it is not a vaccine. So, perhaps the hon Minister
can help the House and enlighten them on the side effects. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: That, Madam Chair, I am indeed able to do. That I
am able to do. Tamiflu was used very successfully during the H1N1 outbreak
we experienced. I even wrote you letters, hon members, if you remember, and
I told you about Tamiflu. All of you received those letters. We do not know
of any significant side effects during that campaign, or whether anybody
complained of side effects of Tamiflu that makes it worth withdrawing, nor
do we know of any part of the world where Tamiflu has been withdrawn
because of side effects. It is used successfully as an antiviral against
H1N1, and throughout that campaign we never experienced any problems. Thank
you. [Applause.]

         Policy and budget regarding development of hostels at mines

76.   Mr B W Dhlamini (IFP) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

      Whether his department has a policy and specific budget for the
      development of hostels at mines; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                                  NO604E

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: House Chairperson, hon Dhlamini’s
question is about whether or not we have a budget and a policy for
upgrading hostels at mines. The answer is, fortunately, no. The hostels on
mine properties are the domain of the mining houses and various other
corporations. Nevertheless, those corporations have a duty to upgrade those
hostels in line with government policy that says we must do away with
single-sex hostels, which are associated with degrading human conditions.

Let me give further information. From our side as government, we do have a
policy as well as a budget for those hostels owned by government, in this
case the various municipalities. I would like to invite hon Dhlamini to
come with us to visit Dube hostel - Umntwana [Prince] knows that hostel
very well - which is near my home. There he will experience the first phase
of the improvement of that hostel, part of the process that will see the
upgrading of all hostels that need it. We will be travelling with the
President of the Republic to visit the hostel at Dube, so that you can see
how the policy as well as the budget is being implemented regarding our own
hostels. But, regarding those of mining companies the answer is no.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Is Mr Dhlamini in?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Deputy Speaker, I would like to apologise on behalf of
Mr Dhlamini, who had to go away. Also, I would like to accept the
invitation that the Minister has extended to him to visit Dube hostel.
Thank you.

Mr A M FIGLAN: Deputy Speaker, in terms of the Mining Charter the Minister
is required, in consultation with the Minister of Minerals and Energy, to
develop a housing and living condition policy for the mining industry. This
requirement would have been finalised by February 2009. Therefore, can the
hon Minister tell us whether this has been implemented? If not, why not? If
it has been implemented, in which provinces have units been upgraded? Also,
could the Minister tell us how many units have been upgraded, and what type
of upgrades have been installed? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: House Chair, well, that is a new
question altogether; it is not a follow-up. However, let me again state
that the policy is in place and it only affects the upgrade of systems
owned by government. The Department of Human Settlements itself does not
own any properties. These properties are owned by municipalities.

Working together with the municipalities, we are making sure that these
upgrades will take place. Secondly, we are also making sure that ownership
eventually gets transferred to the people themselves. Thirdly, we want to
make sure that those hostels and other such structures are integrated into
the various townships and villages in which they are located.

During the days of apartheid, such structures were kept away from people
and people were isolated whilst they were located within townships and
villages. The integration of all these systems is part of the mandate of
the Department of Human Settlements, so that all people have a sense of
belonging. Thank you.

Mr T BOTHA: House Chair, can the Minister confirm - as he said earlier -
that Dube is now closer to Houghton, because it’s near his house?
[Laughter.] Furthermore, can the Minister tell us whether government is
doing anything regarding the private sector’s request for assistance in
converting some of the hostels or building decent accommodation closer to
the mines?

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: House Chairperson, may I ask the hon
member to please repeat the question because I was taking notes.
[Laughter.]

Mr T BOTHA: House Chairperson, my question is based on the fact that, at
some point, some of the mining houses approached government and expressed
the new that they would like government to provide subsidies to areas where
they wanted to build houses closer to the hostels and to convert the
hostels into proper, decent accommodation. Could the hon Minister tell us
whether that is being pursued?

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: House Chairperson, I would also like to
refer the hon member to the answer I gave in reference to why it is
important for mining houses to take care of their own. However, government
legislation is very, very clear in respect of human settlement: Where
people work must be where they play and, also, stay.

The mining houses - and I’ve said this in the past have the obligation to
build houses for their own staff; the thousands of mineworkers who go
underground every day. Secondly, in terms of the new mandate, when building
houses for their staff, they have to take into account the fact that those
mines are located within specific existing communities. Northam Platinum
mines, where 3 000 houses had to be built for staff, including people from
the local community, is a key example to keep in mind. Therefore, the
Department of Human Settlements is no longer about housing.

In as much as mines are there, they should not be stand-alone entities. It
is about the integration of communities and the consolidation of resources,
both of these mining houses and of the municipalities, provinces and
government assisting these communities. So, working together with
communities at provincial and local government levels, and including the
mines, we are putting an integrated strategy on the ground.

I would like the House to rest reassured that my task as Minister is to
ensure that such policies eventually assist the poorest of the poor by
deterring the mining companies from using loopholes in government policies
- because sometimes it’s their money - to get away with what they have been
doing over a period of time. I thank you.

 Research findings and interventions regarding learner retention in schools

45.   Ms F I Chohan (ANC) asked the Minister of Basic Education:


      (a)   What were the findings of the research that was conducted into
           learner retention in schools and (b) what interventions were
           identified by her department to address any challenges in this
           regard?                      NO562E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, the question relates to the
retention and drop-out rates in our schooling system. The reply is that up
to around Grade 9, we have almost 100% retention. This number reduces
thereafter, because we begin to lose learners when they get to Grade 11 and
12.

To the second part of the question I want to reply that we have almost
universal enrolment until the age of 16.

To the third point I want to reply that the survival rate for Grades 10, 11
and 12 between 1980 and 1984 – from research that Minister Pandor did – was
72%, 60% and 46%. This means that for Grade 10 the survival rate is 72%,
for Grade 11 it is 60% and for Grade 12 it reduces dramatically. The
learner retention at FET level indicates that the percentage of people with
Grade 9 who reach Grade 12 tends to remain almost static over the years.

The member wants to know what methods we are using to retain learners. We
use different methods. Repeaters are provided second opportunities. There
is also some misunderstanding about the calculation of the drop-out rate,
as we’ve said before. What tends to happen is that statisticians or
commentators look at how many kids were registered in a particular year and
calculate how many of those kids are there after 12 years. Normally, when
learners have reached Grade 12, some of them have branched off to FET
colleges and some have continued to matric. There is normally a
misunderstanding when retention is calculated.

One reason for the dropping out of learners is repetition. When children
fail, they feel discouraged and don’t repeat a grade. Sometimes it is a
question of parental management or control, or it’s because of age. We see
they drop out at the stage when they become older teenagers – around 16.
Issues of criminality, teenage pregnancy and other social reasons also
cause learners to drop out after Grade 9.

On the question of what interventions we have, I want to say that we are in
the process of gazetting a policy on learner attendance. The policy
encourages schools to investigate circumstances around learner absenteeism.
Sometimes learners drop out after they have absented themselves from school
for a very long time. If you are able to get them back while they are still
absenting themselves, you are able to retain them in the system.

Another intervention is to expand the FET sector, to ensure that those
learners who have no capacity, ability or even interest to pursue an
academic field have another opportunity in an FET college.
The other interventions involve working closely with stakeholders and we
run ongoing campaigns to encourage parents and children to ensure that they
do not drop out of school.

We are also running the Foundations for Learning campaign, which is geared
at improving the quality of teaching and learning at schools, because poor
teaching does discourage children from continuing their schooling. Schools
that underperform have a high drop-out rate. Schools that perform well are
able to retain their children longer. Again, it is all about the
dysfunctional nature of some schools, which discourages children from going
to school.
Again, the department will attempt to ensure that there is greater
adherence to the norms of age and grade by reducing repetitions through the
improved quality of teaching and learning. I thank you.

Ms F I CHOHAN: Thank you, Chair, and thank you to the Minister for a
comprehensive response. Clearly, dealing with this issue requires more than
10 minutes. Can I raise the issue of the survival rate between Grade 10 and
12? I am not sure whether it means that it is a survival rate. When you get
to Grade 12, is it 46% of the original cohorts from Grade 1 or is it 46% of
the cohorts from Grade 8?

I am also keenly interested to know whether there are accurate studies or
reports that indicate if the FET facilities and sector education and
training authority facilities are actually being taken up by those very
learners who failed to complete their schooling. Are these places taken up
by ... [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: I hope I understood the question. The
report I am working from is a report conducted by Minister Pandor in 2008.
It is really dealing with the retentions up to 1984. It is, therefore,
quite outdated. The point I am trying to make is that if you have a million
learners that register this year and after 12 years there are only 500 000,
there are reasons for there being only 500 000. I am saying that some
learners are repeating, and, therefore, you will not find 100% of them.
Some would have fallen pregnant. We allow them to come back, and that is
part of the strategy to retain them. There is huge criminality and some
learners go to prison. The point is, that 46% does not accurately reflect
the number of learners who have dropped out. Some of them could have been
diverted to FET colleges. They are not going to FET colleges because they
are dropping out; they are going as a matter of choice. They do not want to
go through the academic stream.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, black children continue to be at the
receiving end of the education system, which is clearly ailing. Recent
studies have shown that drop-out rates are much lower in white and Indian
communities than in coloured and black groups. This can be explained by
historical reasons, but factors affecting such drop-outs are many and
varied, from inexperienced teachers and teachers teaching subjects for
which they are not properly qualified, to too great a dependence on foreign
teachers. My question to you is: What steps are you going to take to make
conditions attractive to those learners who dropped out because of the
conditions in their classrooms? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, that is what I would have admitted
upfront, even in the NCOP. As much as we admit that there is a crisis in
our education system, it is not a crisis in the entire system. It is a
crisis for black or African children; it affects black or African children
in particular.

You have stated some of the reasons. Other reasons are the continued
poverty amongst our people and the continued lack of development in our
communities. Some other factors affect African kids more than kids of other
races.

Those things continue to harm the development and growth of an African
child. As a department, in terms of our turnaround strategy, we focus on
those areas, especially in black or African schools. In these schools we
still have continued challenges. That is why, in our turnaround strategies,
we are focusing on those areas. [Interjections.] Let us not talk about your
identity. I am saying blacks and Africans in particular. We will talk about
your identity afterwards.

The point I am making is that we are introducing the no-school-fees policy
because that is one of the factors causing African kids to drop out. We are
introducing buses, because the distances learners must travel to schools
are great. We use all sorts of methods to retain them. Allowing them to
come back to school after a pregnancy is also a method to retain them. All
our turnaround strategies are beginning to address those challenges that
affect black children in the schooling system. It covers everybody.

Dr J C KLOPPERS-LOURENS: Chair, I am going to speak Afrikaans. Would you
like to switch on your microphone?

Minister, die werklike uitvalsyfer, korrek bereken vir die afgelope drie
jaar, tussen 2007 en 2009, wissel tussen 76% en 78%. Baie redes is gegee,
maar die leerders wat leerprobleme het, dra sekerlik by tot hierdie hoë,
skokkende uitvalsyfer.

Is u bewus daarvan dat 10% van alle leerders in ons skole aan
aandagafleibaarheidsindroom ly? Tans word daar geen remediërende werk in
ons skole gedoen om hierdie leerders te help nie. U departement het alle
hulpsentrums gesluit, alle hulpklasse is gestop en spesialis-onderwysers
bestaan gewoon nie meer nie. Hierdie behoefte word dus nie aangespreek nie.
Wat is u departement van plan om te doen om hierdie leerders by te staan,
te begelei en te help? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Minister, the actual drop-out rate, when correctly calculated for the past
three years, between 2007 and 2009, varies between 76% and 78%. Many
reasons were given, but the learners with learning disabilities are
certainly contributing to this shockingly high drop-out rate.

Are you aware that 10% of all learners in our schools are suffering from
attention deficit disorder? Currently, no remedial work is being done in
our schools to support these learners. Your department closed all help
centres and all support classes were stopped, and specialist teachers
simply do not exist any more. This need, therefore, is not being addressed.
What plans does your department have to support, guide and help these
learners?]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: I am going to answer in Sesotho. Get
yourself ready for a response in Sesotho. [Laughter.]

Bothata bo teng mme jwalokaha ke hlalositse, mathata a mangata mme a
fapane. O bua nnete ha o re tsietsi e nngwe e hlaha hobane ... [Kena
hanong.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[There is a problem, and as I have mentioned, there are many problems and
they all differ.  You are quite right when you say that another problem
exists because ... [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members. Can we have
interpretation please?

LETONA LA THUTO YA MOTHEO: ... ho na le bana ba nang le ditshitiso
dithutong tsa bona, jwaloka bana ba sa itekanelang. Ke dumellana le wena
moo mme lenaneo la rona la ho ntshetsa pele thuto ya rona, le shebana le
oona mathata a teng hore bana ba nang le bothata ba ho ithuta, ba
sitisehang, re ka ba thusa jwang. Re ntse re atisa lenaneo dikolong kahoo,
o nepile mme re a dumellana mme nke ke ka phehisana le wena. Ke keletso e
ntle mme ke a e ananela. [Ditlatse]. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: ... there are learners who have factors
affecting their education, such as learners with disabilities. I agree with
you on that and our programme aimed at developing our education is focusing
on such problems so that learners who have learning difficulties or
barriers can be assisted in some way. We are still expanding this programme
in schools, and, therefore, you are quite right, we agree, and I won’t say
you are wrong. I appreciate your good advice. [Applause.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, an investigation conducted at several schools in
Johannesburg and Pretoria revealed that not only the high rate of failure,
but also factors affecting retention and drop-out rates could be ascribed
to the fact that learners struggled because they didn’t know how to read
and memorise; to learn; to prepare for tests, exams and assignments; they
didn’t know how to deal with stress during exams and didn’t know how to be
self-motivated.

Interviews with school principals and other educators also revealed that
they felt that the teaching of learning skills should be incorporated into
life orientation and be introduced to learners in Grade 10 and upwards, at
the very least.

To provide a solution, programmes like these have actually been developed
and even presented to the Director-General of Basic Education and certain
school principals. It doesn’t seem to be able to get any further. I was
wondering if you have programmes like this that you are planning to
implement? How do the people who have developed these programmes actually
get them to become useful, because they are available and they really would
make a difference? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: The reasons you are citing for
underperformance are indeed some of the reasons that affect our learners.
Our Foundations for Learning campaign is informed by some of the programmes
that are there. In terms of the programmes that we have – I am not getting
through to the director-general and I am not aware of them – I will look at
them and see how we can integrate them into the system.

Also, there is a huge market in education. Now that we have said that
education is an Apex Priority programme, just about any person who has been
to school has a solution. I spend days listening to solutions that are just
like previous solutions. Without shooting them down, I will come to look at
those programmes. We will look through them, together with the acting
director-general, and we will use them, if we believe that they will assist
us. Thank you.

              Declaration of education as an essential service

70.   Dr J C Kloppers-Lourens (DA) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      (1)   Whether education will be declared an essential service; if not,
            why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether she will make a statement on the matter?   NO596E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, the question is whether we
will declare education an essential service. Labour law explains essential
services as those which society cannot do without even momentarily because
of the potential loss of life or limb. Education does not qualify. Services
which are truly essential and are classified as essentials, such as health,
fire and police, are expected by law to be available 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, and 365 days a year.

Public schooling operates Monday to Friday, eight to three, and only 200
days of the 365. Hence, it does not qualify. If the point is that education
is a very important service – yes, it is, but according to the law it does
not qualify to be an essential service. It is an Apex Priority programme -
the ruling party has education as its first priority. Yes, it is an
important programme but it cannot be declared an essential service
according to the law of this country.

Dr J C KLOPPERS-LOURENS: Chairperson, Minister, I do not agree with you.
Poor education endangers or inconveniences the lives and the health of
people. It does create a lot of inconvenience in schools and in the lives
of our children. You are well aware of the fact that children are the
future of this country. Can you please explain to me why health and police
are declared essential services as opposed to education, which is not?
After all, you and the President constantly underline the fact that
education is the most important portfolio in this country and in the
government.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, I said that according to the
law a service has to be available for 365 days a year if it is to be
declared an essential service. It has to be available 24 hours a day and
seven days a week. That is what the law says. I don’t determine what the
law says. We agreed with you that it is an important service, but it’s not
an essential service. There is no risk to life or loss of life if kids are
not at school on Sunday. Why should we make schools run on Sunday because
we are scared that they will die? If they don’t die on Sunday, why would
they die on Saturday?

Mr Z S MAKHUBELE: Thank you, Chairperson. Notwithstanding your response,
hon Minister, the President, in his meeting with leaders and stakeholders
in the education fraternity, said that teachers should be in class on time
and teaching. What is the Ministry doing to ensure that this commitment is
realised, as well as improving the national senior certificate pass rate in
2010?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, hon member, you would have
picked up on our campaign where we are using the law to make sure that when
teachers have to be at school, they are there. They can only absent
themselves for health reasons or unavoidable circumstances.

We are looking at time books and at other measures. We are also working
very hard with the labour unions to assist us. But the bottom line is, even
if you bring in an inspectorate, the only people who can monitor teachers
to be in class on time and doing their jobs are the principals. We are
working with principals and governing bodies to ensure that.

With regard to improving the quality of our schools, the report
commissioned by Minister Pandor states: “For any school to succeed, it has
to be functional”. We are focusing our energy on making schools highly
functional and on dealing with dysfunctionality affecting our schools. All
other support cannot work until such time as you get your schools
functional. We are focusing on school functionality.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Deputy Chair, can the Minister please tell us the
following. We all agree that unions play a very important role in our
education system. They can also play a more important role in the future of
education, particularly if they can agree to the implementation of
performance assessment. That is essentially what this question is about:
How will the Minister manage to convince the unions, the alliance partners
of the ruling party? She must bear in mind that she can no longer present
any further excuses to the parents of this country and to the learners in
our education system if schooling hours are disrupted by union industrial
action.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, regarding the question of
assessment, I am not aware of teachers having said to us that they don’t
want to be assessed. We need to admit upfront that the assessment tools of
government itself, which have been put in place and agreed to at the Labour
Relations Council, have not been effective on the part of government.

Unions have never refused to allow assessment procedures. I don’t want to
blame unions where they are not wrong. The weakness has been on our side.
That is why we are improving our assessment tools, so that they will work.
We are working on it. It is not that unions are refusing to be assessed.

On the question of disruptions, at the beginning of the year all our
teacher unions, nationally, came and we are getting to an agreement with
them on labour peace. As the department we have to clear things on our part
which are sources of conflict. They have committed themselves to working
hard and making sure that they can manage their workers. We are very tough
on them. We are entering into a memorandum of agreement. I can assure you
that we will have labour peace. We won’t be giving parents excuses. We have
never given them excuses. I am honest: It is not the weakness of the
teacher unions but of the system, where teachers were not properly
evaluated. We are working on it and correcting it.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: The main goal is to achieve quality education. You will
not achieve this objective as long as schools have become - to borrow a
phrase – “black boxes”, where nobody knows what is happening in the
classroom. Even the Minister doesn’t know what is happening inside the
classrooms. The department becomes ambivalent when it comes to introducing
inspectors.

Two to three weeks ago, unions expressed their rejection of the call by the
President in his state of the nation address for the re-introduction of
inspectors of schools to inspect teachers and learners. What is the
Minister going to do about this rejection? Are you going to wait for
collective bargaining? [Time expired.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEMFUNDO EYISISEKELO: Baba uMpontshane angikhulume ngesiZulu,
mhlawumbe ngizophendula kahle. Ekuqaleni kukaMbasa i-Needu izongena
isebenze. Sivumelene ngalokho futhi ayikho inkinga nengxabano kulokho. I-
Nedo izoqala ukuhlola othisha kanye nalo lonke uhlelo. Ngoba ezinye
izinkinga ezikhona, akuzona izinkinga zothisha kepha yizinkinga zohlelo
njengokuthi uma izincwadi zingafikanga kuthi kanti nezikole azilungisiwe.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)
[The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Mpontshane, let me speak isiZulu -
maybe I will respond well. Nedo will start operating at the beginning of
April. We agreed about that and there are no problems or conflicts
regarding that. Needu, the National Education Evaluation and Development
Unit, will start assessing teachers as well as the whole programme. Some of
the problems are not created by teachers but are operational problems, like
when books are not delivered on time and when schools are not in good
shape.]

Therefore, we are saying, we are going to assess and evaluate the whole
system and have a development.

Into yabahloli, mina nawe sike safundisa siyazi ukuthi leya nto ayizange
isebenze, sesiyayithanda ngoba ingasekho. Ngike ngafundisa iminyaka,
umhloli ubeza kanye nje. Mina ngiyakhumbula ukuthi ngahlolwa kanye nje
futhi ngihlolwa ngumuntu ezongihlola ngento angayazi, engazi nokuthi
ngifundisani kodwa ngoba kuthiwa nje ungumhloli kwakufanele abe lapho.
Ayizange isebenze leyo nto. Ayilahlwa nje ngoba ingathandwa noma ngoba
singafuni ukuthi othisha bahlolwe, cha. Yalahlwa nje ngoba abanye
babeyisebenzisela ukuzihlangula, ... yinto engazange ilethe ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

The inspectorate system has never worked - you and I know this very well
since we were both educators at some stage. We know that that system has
never functioned; hence we like it now that it is no longer in use. I have
been a teacher for years and the inspector used to come only once in a
while. I remember that I was assessed only once by someone who did not know
what he was doing and did not even know what I was teaching, but because he
was an inspector he had to be there. That system could not function. It was
not discarded just because we did not like it or because we do not want
teachers to be assessed. No. It was discarded because others were using it
as an excuse for not performing ... it did not bear any ...]

... ke hore ha e a tlisa molemo o itseng. [... that is, it did not bring
any results.]

Asethembe ukuthi mhlawumbe i-Nedo izosebenza kangconywana ngoba uma isiqede
ukuhlola izohlala, ilethe intuthuko. Ngaleyo ndlela sicabanga ukuthi iyona
ezolungisa lolu daba. Asiyilahli ngoba mhlambe othisha bengayifuni noma
silinde ukuthi kuvume bona - asilindanga lokho. NgoMbasa iyaqala i–Nedo,
izobe inkulu ngaphezuzulu kokuhlolwa - ukuhlolwa kothisha ngenye nje
ingxenye yalokhu kuhlolwa. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

Let us hope that maybe Needu will function better because after it has
completed the assessments it will remain on the site and bring development.
In that way, we think it is the body that will correct this situation. We
are not discarding this system just because the teachers are not in favour
of it or maybe we are waiting for them to first agree – no, we are not
waiting for that. Needu will start operating in April and it will be bigger
than the inspectorate – assessing teachers is just a part of this
inspectorate. Thank you.][Applause.]

  Criteria regarding exclusion of patients from dialysis treatment in state
               hospitals and state-supported dialysis centres

44.   Rev H M Dandala (Cope) asked the Minister of Health:

      Whether the impoverished background of a person was used in state
      hospitals and state-supported dialysis centres to exclude renal
      patients from accessing dialysis treatment; if not, what has been the
      situation in 2009 at state hospitals and state-supported dialysis
      centres nationally; if so, (a) how many patients from an impoverished
      background were denied entry into the dialysis treatment programme in
      2009 and (b) at which centres?
                  NO561E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Chair, I must warn that the question asked by
the hon member is extremely complex, very sensitive and highly emotional,
because issues of renal dialysis are more often than not linked to
transplant surgery. As hon members might know, the decision to do an organ
transplant of any sort - whether it is renal or whether it relates to any
other organ - is always a contentious issue. Fortunately, this question has
been asked by a person who, I presume, in his career as a reverend has been
faced with dilemmas of human compassion, ethics and matters of life and
death.

The decision whether to dialyse or not is usually made by a group of
physicians; it’s never left to one doctor. The group of doctors make this
decision taking cognisance of the resources that any particular country is
able to accumulate, and that is where the complexities and emotions come
in. I want to assure you, Reverend, that I personally would not like - at
any stage of my life - to be in the boots of any group of doctors who must
make a decision about whether to put a person on dialysis or not, or
whether to do a transplant eventually.

It is quite often the devil’s alternative, if you understand what I mean.
Whichever decision one takes, the devil is always there to smile, because
one is always going to be found wanting. I’m not talking about a problem
that’s confined to South Africa; it’s a universal problem. Having said
that, I want to acknowledge up front that there are not enough dialysis
facilities anywhere on this continent. In fact, many of our neighbours
might be depending on us.

However, when the physicians sit down to decide whether or not to put an
individual in dialysis, the fact that a person comes from an impoverished
background is not the primary reason why he or she is excluded from
accessing dialysis treatment. This group of physicians usually makes this
decision based on their experience. They have to assess whether there is
going to be a reasonable chance of success or that the dialysis treatment
will be of benefit to that particular individual. In this process
physicians don’t usually allow themselves to be persuaded by the social
circumstances of the particular person.

However, because everything in life is interlinked, sometimes the medical
decision the group of doctors makes may actually have been socially
determined for the individual involved. For instance, they might decide
that if a person has an intractable infection, they might not be able to do
a dialysis on that particular person because, eventually, they can’t do an
organ transplant on that particular person.

Also, we do have people who can’t undergo this type of procedure because
they suffer from tuberculosis, TB, and have only one lung. Nevertheless,
one knows very well that suffering from TB might be because of social
circumstances. So, life is interlinked and the physicians make a decision
based on that. At no stage will they ever be allowed to look at a person
and say he or she is too poor for a transplant or dialysis. They won’t do
that.

However, after the decision is made, it is very easy to link these factors.
For instance, if physicians decide that they are going to do a peritoneal
dialysis, there needs to be clean running water at the patient’s home for
them to do so. If the individual does not have clean running water, science
should not be blamed. It is a social problem that the country is faced
with.

So, when we discuss this issue, I want us to be aware of the complexities
that scientists are faced with when they have to make such a decision. It’s
never an easy decision but they are trying their best within the available
resources. Therefore, I usually accept the decision the physicians make. I
never go out and question them because I understand the background to their
decisions. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Chairperson, I wish to thank the hon Minister for the very
sensitive manner in which he phrased his response to this question. Let me
quickly affirm my understanding of its sensitive and emotional nature. The
reason I asked the question is because sometimes – I think this is
understandable – when people come from a poor background where, perhaps,
there may not be running water, exactly as in the illustration the Minister
used, they are likely to understand that as having been a prejudicial
decision.

What I want to ask as a follow-up is whether the Minister does not think it
would be helpful if there was another process outside the hospital itself -
perhaps comprising an interprofessional group - that would offer a type of
counselling that would allow people to understand that they have not been
prejudiced because of their poor conditions. I would also like to know the
following. If, indeed, conditions of poverty, like the lack of adequate
housing or water, are pertinent to providing dialysis treatment, should we
not have some kind of interministerial approach – outside the hospital –
that people can appeal to so that they can be satisfied that they have not
been unfairly dealt with? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: I think the Reverend’s proposal is a very good one.
We will definitely look into it. As I’ve said, there is a link between
medical factors and social factors. I’m sure that this will actually be
considered when the Minister of Human Settlements presents his strategic
plan. We no longer want a department of housing where one just puts up
houses and leaves. In trying to deal with matters of this kind, one has to
put up “human settlements”, where there will be clean running water,
electricity, tarred roads, schools, clinics, etc.

The House might be aware that a few weeks ago there was a big radio debate
about somebody who was denied an organ transplant because, it was said,
that particular person was poor. I phoned a professor, who said that the
person involved was suffering from severe TB, had only one lung left and
never came for treatment. According to the professor, that particular
person was disqualified because of that.

Obviously, that individual’s TB condition is because of where he or she
comes from. The inability to go to the medical centres to comply with
treatment is also a social problem. However, because of the fact that the
lung was completely damaged, there was no way they could put this person on
dialysis. It would have been like sentencing the individual to death. That
is why I spoke about dilemmas and ethical dilemmas. Unfortunately, doctors
are faced with these problems every day.

Mr P F SMITH: Chair, I wonder if the Minister would mind very much if I
broadened the question a little. I understand that this is a sensitive
issue and people have to make very difficult decisions. I think we all
understand as a starting point that there are limits in what the state can
spend on medical treatment. The question I would like to put to the
Minister is whether there are specified limits to the amount of money to be
spent on a particular procedure for a given patient. I presume that there
are certain procedures that are simply too expensive to be considered.
Certainly, that is the case in private medical aids, and they have been
challenged in court. However, I don’t know whether that is the case in the
state system.

Secondly, I would like to know whether criteria other than success, which
the Minister mentioned, are used, because presumably factors like age and
life expectancy would have a bearing as well.

Thirdly, I would like to know whether the procedure that is used to make
these decisions - as the Minister explained to us - is applied uniformly
throughout the country. In other words, if one is a patient in hospital A
in province B, and is in dire need of some assistance, would he or she
perhaps get a different answer if he or she was in another province?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Chair, in response to the issue of rand
limits - that is to say, whether there is a limit to the money that can be
spent on treating a human being or not - I say that is obviously never done
in the public sector. It is definitely done in the private sector.

However, I can give this House an example of a case that arose when we were
debating the issue of the national health insurance, NHI. This is a highly
contentious matter. A doctor prescribed a drug that would have cost
R400 000 per annum. The medical aid refused and said it can’t afford that.
The concerned patient went to court and, of course, won the case because
it’s his or her life and right.

In the public sector we don’t make such decisions, unless we don’t have the
services. We can’t offer people what we don’t have. However, if we do have
the services, we do give them to the people. For example, if the child who
was born with her heart on the outside of the chest - unfortunately she
passed away last week – had gone to a private hospital, it would have
charged that poor family more than R1 million. However, because it was a
public hospital, we were able to do it. We don’t put rand limits, unless,
as I’ve said, we simply don’t have resources.

Regarding the issue of success and pertinent criteria, I agree that if, for
instance, a patient is quite advanced in age and suffers from
uncontrollable diabetes, he or she won’t get a transplant because the new
organ would be damaged as well. So, physicians will make such a decision
and that is where issues and dilemmas of ethics come in. For example, one
cannot tell a person that he or she is too old and he or she must go and
die but, unfortunately, it’s a reality.

With regard to the issue of uniformity, the House knows that our country,
unfortunately, is not uniform in terms of riches. For example, one cannot
offer the people in Limpopo the same thing that is being offered people
here in the Western Cape. This does not only apply to health but to
education as well. I’m sure the Minister here next to me will agree with me
that what kids get in education in Limpopo is not the same as what kids get
here in the Western Cape. I remember, for instance ... [Time expired.]

Ms E MORE: Chairperson, given the chronic lack of staff at state hospitals
and the fact that dialysis machines are not being used optimally, could the
hon Minister tell us whether the government has approached the private
sector to assist in the operation of these machines?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, my response to the question by the hon
member is that I’m not aware of us not being able to optimally use dialysis
machines when they are available. The biggest problem we face is the space
for dialysis itself. If there could be space and machines, I don’t think
the skill to dialyse is so difficult that we actually need the private
sector to help. The manner in which the private sector can help is to offer
their facilities at a reasonable price to help the public. At the prices
they are charging now, it might not be very easy to do dialysis for a large
number of people.

Mrs T E KENYE: House Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Minister
for explaining the issues which relate to “prognosis versus dialysis” to
us. We have the Minister’s response, but could the hon Minister indicate
whether the Soobramoney judgment in the Constitutional Court has informed
policies around the exclusion of certain people from receiving renal
dialysis. If so, in what way? If not, what implications will this judgment
have in future? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I think this is the point I’ve been
making. Yes, there is a Constitutional Court judgment regarding the
Soobramoney case. The Constitutional Court did rule that indeed, given
certain criteria, a person can be excluded from dialysis. The court ruled
that it’s within the right of medical doctors to exclude a person. In
support of this, the court quoted the issue of expenses and whether a
successful outcome is guaranteed - issues that I alluded to earlier on. The
court also quoted the issue of whether the country can actually afford a
particular hospital.

However, when we make our protocols we try our best to base the protocol on
medical conditions as reasonably as we can. Nevertheless, the
Constitutional Court did make a ruling that it is constitutional to be
excluded. I believe it is unfortunate when one looks at it from the point
of view of human compassion, but such a ruling does exist.

  Steps taken by department to deal with alleged corruption by contractors
       and to ensure proper management of human settlement development

59.   Ms B N Dambuza (ANC) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

      What is his department doing to (a) deal with the problem of alleged
      manipulation and corruption by contractors who are assigned to co-
      ordinate housing beneficiary lists, especially in Matatiele and (b) to
      ensure that municipalities take responsibility in co-ordinating and
      managing human settlement development in their areas?
                  NO578E
The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Madam Speaker, the question is in
relation to how contractors, or a specific contractor in Matatiele, are
manipulating, or are alleged to be manipulating, lists of beneficiaries of
houses and how we are dealing with that situation.

In response, we are saying that we are watching the Matatiele human
settlements situation very carefully with regard to the question of
corruption. A number of steps have been taken.

The provincial department, working with us, has scheduled a meeting with
the housing committee, including the contractor and municipalities, to try
and obtain the names of those persons who had allegedly acquired housing
units fraudulently as a result of the activities of the said contractor.

Once the information is available, the matter will be investigated further
and put before the Special Investigating Unit. To ensure that housing
allocations are done in an equitable, fair and just manner, my department
has developed a National Housing Needs Register from which all prospective
beneficiaries will be sourced. It is envisaged that the new system will
minimise corruption in the allocation of housing.

To further enhance the process, the department has also developed
allocation guidelines to assist the provinces and municipalities. We ensure
transparent and fair processes for the allocation of housing subsidies. We
believe that these measures will go a long way in strengthening our
policies.

However, Speaker and hon Dambuza, what applies to Matatiele must apply
everywhere. Hon members would also be aware that we have launched a
comprehensive national audit on fraud and corruption to respond proactively
on all these matters, whether they are in Matatiele or anywhere else.

Let me state without any equivocation that we are not going to retreat in
our fight against corruption. We are putting measures in place to tighten
up on monitoring, working together with Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, Cogta, and other relevant players.

We want to bring normality to Matatiele and other areas. Those contractors,
builders or government officials who get involved in corruption will be
brought to book. I am happy to announce - we will make a further
announcement in our budget speech as the situation develops - that we have
already arrested more than 300 people, including government officials. The
majority were at national government level and the minority at provincial
government level. [Applause.]

Colleagues, corruption is something that we all must fight on both sides of
this House, if the poor are to get their services correctly. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Madam Chairperson, let me thank the Minister for his
comprehensive response. As the ANC, we appreciate and commend the strategy
to enhance the housing allocation process. However, subsequent to that, can
the Minister assure the House that such guidelines or policy measures shall
address, in particular, the importance of working together with Department
of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Cogta, in applying the
government’s accountability to the public in order to maintain and restore
confidence, rather than relegating such an important function or such
powers to the contractors? It is, after all, the responsibility of the
government to ensure that public interaction is done by the public
representatives. Hence there has been a belief. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Dambuza,
let me assure or reassure the House that we will remain seized with this
matter, as I indicated. It is correct, hon Dambuza, that outsourcing such a
critical function, against the background of how people outside there are
protesting and sometimes engaging in wrongful violent protests, should be
reviewed. Outsourcing to private contractors such critical functions as
housing lists, how people queue and the allocation to beneficiaries is
something that we want to review. I will be having a meeting tomorrow with
our Minmec, all nine MECs, in Durban and I will put this before them.

Contractors must be removed from handling housing lists because there is
always the danger that at the end of the day their decisions, not those of
government officials or of government political leaders, will be the ones
that influence the course of history outside there. [Applause.]

It is important, therefore, that this House is assured that we will remain
seized with this problem. We are going to put a Special Investigating Unit,
SIU, onto the people involved and onto those contractors who have
manipulated the lists. Let me tell you also that five lawyers have been
disqualified and struck off the roll because they were involved in
machinations of this type. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T BOTHA: Madam Speaker, I think it is important to say that the list is
not always corrupted by the contractors. It is actually corrupted by
counsellors and officials themselves, given that for the contractors to
allocate or to apply for a development in a particular area, they have to
state the number of beneficiaries according to the categories.

Is it possible for the contractors or the list process to be done away with
because without the list process, you would have to change the policy of
your contractors who applied to do a development for rental accommodation,
affordable housing, bankable housing and so forth? How will you deal with
that without the list process, taking into account that the counsellors
themselves are corrupt? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Madam Speaker, I wish the hon member had
not crossed the floor to Cope because he was the last adviser to the
Minister of Housing. I am prepared to give you back the position as my
adviser. [Laughter.]

We agree that there are sensitivities to the list process and we believe
that if it is done manually it will always be open to manipulation.

I have established an information communications technology, ICT, system
around housing lists, which will be launched next month. This will enable
the Minister and any one of us here, through a laptop with a special code
and a computer password, to track any list in all nine provinces, in the
cities, in a specific housing project – we currently have more than 8 000
housing projects on the ground. You can actually login and know who is on
the list, how that list is moving and so on.

What is crucial for our people, and why they are not accepting anything
less, is that being in the queue as a beneficiary is not a problem. The
problem is seeing the queue remaining stagnant. Today you can be number 44,
but tomorrow you can be number 68. They want to see progress. That’s all we
owe them - as Nyerere once said, people are not asking for houses now,
education now, health now - those types of things. What they want is
demonstrable evidence that we take them seriously - to apply this ICT.

Leave the manual system to ensure that I, when I’m sitting in the Ministry,
and anybody here, can press a computer in this House and have access to
these lists. Only when we have publicised these electronic lists can
journalists, members here and portfolio committee members follow the
process. We believe that it will lead to a reduction, not the complete
eradication, of corruption. We are getting there. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Chairperson and hon Minister, we appreciate that there are
now ways and means of preventing the situation where there would be
unqualified beneficiaries. But, there is still the problem of people who
are being allocated houses because they qualify but, down the line, they
sell the houses. What is to be done about that? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, it is a catch-22 situation.
Firstly, all South Africans, and all of us, have equal rights. Secondly, as
government, and with resources passed by this House, we allocate housing to
the poor. The objective or the intention is not to imprison them into that
asset forever. They should not just be owners of an asset but must also
participate in the property market; be able to have a house and to sell it.

There are strict rules that apply to Reconstruction and Development
Programme, RDP, houses. They can only be sold after a certain period of
time. I agree with you, hon member, that in some instances we find people
selling those houses and getting rid of these government-provided assets
before the allocated timelines. That is what we have to prevent. They sell
these houses to unscrupulous elements within business, law firms, certain
banking officials and, in certain situations, to immigrants coming from as
far afield as Pakistan, Zimbabwe, Nigeria and so on.

Nothing is wrong with people coming here. But there is something wrong with
people coming to this country and robbing the poor, taking away those
important assets that have been given by government in the form of
subsidies. So we want to act within that. But, as we do so, we should not
be disempowering ordinary people from being just like all of us here:
having an asset and being able to trade that asset at a given moment so
that they can materialise it and move on. But I’m saying that we are going
to look very carefully at how we prescribe and proscribe these timelines,
to prevent abuse of the system. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs A STEYN: Chairperson and Minister, this problem is not confined to
Matatiele. From our oversight visits, it would appear that both contractors
and counsellors have carte blanche over the beneficiary list.

Given this situation, I’m glad to hear you say that you are looking at
guidelines. However, guidelines are just that: they’re guidelines and they
don’t necessarily have to be followed. Under the circumstances, therefore,
will you consider introducing an equitable, uniform policy that can be
enforced as far as this beneficiary list is concerned? Lastly, Mr Minister,
could I have access to that code you referred to, please? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Madam Speaker, I didn’t hear the last
words of the second part of the question. Oh! Do you mean the access code?
I see. Let me start with that question. The access code or, as I said, the
password, will be made available, but I said that we are launching the
monitoring ICT system next month. Allow us to launch it first. Let’s
monitor how it works, correct the teething problems and then it will be
open to members here in this House so that we can follow any project
anywhere in the country.

I agree with you that the situation does not only apply to Matatiele. You
will remember that in my comments earlier on I said what applies to
Matatiele must apply countrywide. So I take your advice and will implement
what you are saying, if need be. Thank you.
  High Court ruling ordering City of Johannesburg to pay rent on behalf of
                              illegal occupants

65.   Mr A C Steyn (DA) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

      (1)   Whether he has been informed of the ruling of the High Court in
           Gauteng in which the City of Johannesburg was ordered to pay
           rent to a property owner on behalf of persons illegally
           occupying a building in Berea (details furnished); if so,


      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?    NO590E

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Hon Chairperson, the hon Steyn asked an
important question regarding a ruling made by the Gauteng Division of the
High Court. He asked if we were aware of this ruling and if we were
prepared to make a public statement about it.

Yes, the Ministry is indeed aware of the ruling of the South: Gauteng High
Court, wherein the City of Johannesburg was ordered to pay rent to Blue
Mountain Properties on behalf of persons who were illegally occupying their
commercial property located within the Johannesburg central business
district.

At this stage, and bearing in mind what was said earlier by the Deputy
Speaker, it will not be appropriate to make a statement on the matter
because the City of Johannesburg is in the process of filing an appeal
against this judgment. The matter, therefore, remains sub judice. However,
we view this matter with serious concern. It does have far-reaching
political, policy and budgetary implications.

As the Minister, I, together with the Gauteng province and the City of
Johannesburg, will remain seized with this matter. This also includes the
Minister of Justice, my colleague, hon Radebe, who brought it to the
attention of the Cabinet last week. After consultation, we will go deeper
into this matter in my Budget Vote on 21 April 2010. I hope by that time
the situation will have gone some way to being resolved.

Let me mention that the danger we are confronted with is a series of court
case judgments which are policy-making. There is a judgment on shacks in
Ekurhuleni, KwaZulu-Natal, Delft N2, and so forth. We make laws here, not
forgetting that courts make laws known as case laws. The problem is that
these case laws are beginning to impact on human settlement policy. We are
confronted with a situation which, if it’s not addressed amicably in co-
operation with those who passed the judgments, may end up causing chaos in
the country.

To conclude, some of these cases promote illegality - which is called the
legalisation of illegality – whereby people can occupy your piece of land
and you cannot evict them before you find an alternative piece of land or
accommodation for them. In this regard, there are Small Enterprise
Development Agency, SEDA, ramifications. Thank you.

Mr A C STEYN: Hon Minister, I fully agree with you that this judgment can
be devastating, not only to municipalities but certainly to the Department
of Human Settlements. Now, should the appeal fail, hon Minister, would you
consider bringing legislation to this House in terms of which we can
counteract the negative effects that this judgment will have on housing and
the provision of housing going forward? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Whilst respecting the sacred and
fundamental principle of the separation of powers, we must understand that
judges have a hand. I hope we will find a solution. We would be discussing
this question with the Chief Justice and, like I said, the hon Minister
Radebe is engaged on this matter and, with our support, brought it to the
Cabinet.

At this stage, I shouldn’t jump the gun by saying whether we would consult
you, the members of this House, to ask for permission to pass a piece of
legislation to address this. We want to see how this matter will resolve
itself in the process of the filing of this appeal by the City of
Johannesburg.

Mrs G M BORMAN: Minister, this certainly does have dire consequences for us
and, certainly, for municipalities. Could I ask if you have any idea of the
size of this problem, because you’ve been out there pretty much these last
nine months? I also want to ask: If this is a very large problem, will
municipalities be able to meet this obligation? If not, would government
consider assisting municipalities when they are perhaps faced with their
ratepayers having to foot the bill for illegal occupations? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Hon Borman, at this stage, as I’ve
indicated, because of the appeal it is not feasible to quantify the size of
the problem. The size of the problem is equal to the case itself and to the
judgment. There was an appeal; we are waiting for the outcome.

Of course, we must be warned that if that appeal does not succeed, the
ramifications are not just, hon Steyn, for human settlements. They will
affect everybody, everyone sitting here, because you would have to pay
wherever the poor, or whoever it might be, are occupying land, a house or
anything anywhere. If the appeal is not successful, you’ll just have to pay
rent for those people who cannot afford it. Also, this Blue Mountain
Properties is a private company and you will have to pay them too. It means
that the Treasury will be fundamentally affected. This matter has very far-
reaching implications. We can only pray.

Mr T BOTHA: Minister, this issue is very serious. If you look at the
existing legislation, that is, the prevention of illegal eviction Act, PIE,
is there not perhaps an answer to be found? Look at the existing Act –
actually, take it off the shelves. It has been there for a long time and it
should have been addressed long before this. You might be part of the
problem by not implementing that Act. Thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: I am glad to receive a question from my
adviser, and we are waiting for you to come back – all of you. You know who
you are. [Laughter.]

Hon members, the PIE Act was promulgated in this House. Its intention was
to assist people who were being evicted from certain places – land they
occupied on farms, and so on. It doesn’t apply to this case. It is actually
the PIE Act upon which these judgments are based. You remember that it was
hon Sisulu who mounted a challenge against the PIE Act in the famous
Grootboom case, and we lost.

All these judgments, about shacks in Delft, Ekurhuleni, Gwala and now, of
late, the Johannesburg judgment, are based on that Grootboom ruling.
Illegality is now protected by law; therefore, it is a very serious
situation. Today, any number of people can come and occupy the premises, or
even this House, and you cannot evict them unless and until you have found
alternative accommodation. That’s how serious this matter is.

So, the essence of the problem starts with that Act, which was passed here.
However, the Act was not passed for the purpose of preventing the “illegal”
eviction of people who do this thing today. It was attempting to address
the past – history – but unfortunately history has caught up with us.

    Steps by department to have rehabilitation centres established and to
                     prevent abuse of harmful substances

53.   Mrs W J Nelson (ANC) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      What steps (a) is her department taking to ensure that rehabilitation
      centres are established in each province and (b) is she taking in
      conjunction with the MECs to prevent the abuse of harmful substances
      in recreational facilities, schools and clubs?
                                   NO571E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the response to the
question asked by hon Nelson is as follows: In terms of section 17(1) of
the Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Act, Act 70 of 2008,
the Minister of Social Development must, in consultation with the MEC,
establish, maintain and manage at least one public treatment centre in each
province for the reception, treatment, rehabilitation and skills
development of service users.

The Department of Social Development is in the process of developing
regulations for Act 70 of 2008. These regulations will, amongst others,
guide provinces in the establishment and management of state treatment
centres and halfway houses. Upon completion of the regulations that we are
working on, Act 70 of 2008 will replace the Prevention and Treatment of
Drug Dependency Act, Act 20 of 1992.

Currently, there are six public treatment centres in the country and the
Department of Social Development is planning to establish seven more public
treatment centres over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period.

We can give an indication of where the existing centres are and where we
need to establish some. In Gauteng there is a centre at the Dr F F Ribeiro
Clinic; in Mpumalanga at Swartfontein; in the Western Cape at De Novo and
Kensington; in KwaZulu-Natal at Madadeni and Newlands Park. That is six
centres altogether. We intend to establish more centres in the North West,
Limpopo, Free State, Eastern Cape and Northern Cape, and two more in the
Western Cape.

Chairperson, 45 private treatment centres are currently registered with the
Department of Social Development and 23 of them are funded by the
department.

The Department of Social Development also conducted a door-to-door campaign
in all provinces from 2007 to 2009 to obtain political buy-in. We had a
discussion with the MECs and provincial heads of department with the
intention to strengthen the implementation of substance abuse prevention
programmes as outlined in the National Drug Master Plan which was
established for operation between 2006 and 2011.

The Department of Social Development also has a programme called “Ke Moja”
[No, thanks], which is a drug awareness programme aimed at creating
awareness of harmful effects of substance abuse amongst children and youth
both in and out of school. In order to successfully implement the
programme, different state departments at both national and provincial
levels are working with our NGOs, which are doing a wonderful job in the
field of substance abuse.

Training was also conducted in the nine provinces during 2007 and leading
up to early this year and currently assists in the roll-out of the
programme. This is happening in recreational facilities in schools, clubs
and other community institutions that are also working with the Education
department and other departments. The Ke Moja programme is an integrated
strategy and the necessary programme manuals were developed to guide
stakeholders in implementing it ... [Time expired.]

Mrs W J NELSON: Chairperson, let me first thank the Minister for the
comprehensive answer we have received. I think the Minister is aware that
people struggling with drug problems can only be assisted once they
acknowledge that they have a problem and that they have to go for treatment
for that problem.

How, then, is the department assisting those people who acknowledge that
they have a problem but, due to financial constraints, are unable to go to
a private facility in those areas or provinces where we don’t have state
institutions? How is the department assisting those people?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, as I have already
indicated, there are 23 centres that are being supported by the Department
of Social Development. Even though they are privately managed, they are
funded by the department. We expect those centres - even where we don’t
have state centres - to actually support those of our people who are not
able to fund themselves.

Indeed, it is true that people can be assisted only when they are willing
to be helped and I think it is necessary that we as a nation really
acknowledge this problem. The issue of substance abuse is a crisis because
it is gradually eroding our nation. We have to move beyond party politics.
Even those centres that are privately owned need to begin to help the
people who are really in dire need and find themselves, through error or
any other reason, in the situation of abusing drugs.

Some of the drug abuse stems from the voluntary use of alcohol, but when we
look at the figures right now, at the state of affairs, the reality is that
we have a very big challenge to which we will have to rise as a nation.
This august House is welcome to talk to us about that problem – it is an
enormous challenge.

Mrs S P KOPANE: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for the response she has
just given us. When I was doing an oversight visit to different provinces,
especially those said to have rehabilitation centres, I was informed that
the rehab centres are becoming the breeding ground for drug lords. What
steps is the government taking to ensure that the rehabilitation centres
are totally drug-free zones? Secondly, when last were inspections done to
check whether those centres are functioning within the minimum required
standards?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, we have not heard any
reports of the nature that the hon member is referring to, about centres
being turned into operational areas by drug lords. We appreciate this
information. A monitoring team is currently visiting some of the centres.
For instance, Noupoort has been visited, and some other centres too. We
will continue using the monitoring team to go to various centres, because
it is required by law that we continue monitoring them, just in case there
are issues such as what the hon member is referring to.

If there is indeed such a practice out there, we would welcome information
of that nature from hon members. As I said, this is a matter of national
importance, and almost a crisis, which we need to curb right away, before
it kills our nation. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, Minister. The time
allocated for questions has expired. Outstanding replies received will be
printed in Hansard. We now come to Notices of Motion.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House discusses the high turnover rate of accounting officers,
   chief financial officers and other senior management staff of government
   departments and entities, and the effect thereof on sound governance,
   accountability and service delivery.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House, I shall move:

That the House debates the fact that the democratic gains of the people of
South Africa, as well as the proud legacy of a founding father of our
democracy, Mr Nelson Mandela, are being called into question by an hon
member of this House. This is a serious matter. Thank you.

Ms E MORE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA, the following motion:

   That the House, in the light of the fact that 24 March is World TB Day –

      1) debates the effects of TB within our communities; and


      2) comes up with a possible solution to prevent the spread thereof.

Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA, the following
motion:

   That the House –

   (1)      debates the increased amount of criminal behaviour on the part
         of members of the SA Police Service; and
      2) resolves to determine a means to deal with such existing
         criminality and the prevention of possible future criminality.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

  That the House debates optimising the benefits of the 2010 Fifa World Cup
  and beyond.

Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

  That the House debates ways of ensuring the safety of paramedics when
  they respond to call-outs, particularly in informal settlements, where
  some have had stones and bricks thrown at them, some were assaulted,
  while others were shot at.

Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


   That the House –


     1) notes that the Minister of Arts and Culture had been due to speak at
        the opening of a show by young black women artists at Constitutional
        Hill in Johannesburg, and that she left prematurely after viewing
        pictures of naked bodies embracing intimately;

     2) further notes that the Minister declared the material immoral and
        offensive, particularly since there were children present; and

     3) congratulates the Minister on her principled stand in not accepting
        immorality and on her commitment to promoting social cohesion and
        nation-building, of which the wellbeing of the family unit is
        central.

Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the issue of the premature selling of RDP houses
   to South Africans, as well as foreigners.

It’s another serious matter. Thank you.

   APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY PRESIDENT KGALEMA MOTLANTHE AS NEW CHANCELLOR OF
                        LIMPOPO’S UNIVERSITY OF VENDA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: House Chairperson, I move
without notice:

   That the House -


      1) notes the appointment of Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe as the
         new chancellor of Limpopo's University of Venda, Univen, at an
         official ceremony on Tuesday, 9 March 2010;


      2) further notes the significance that goes with this important
         position and that the university will benefit from having a person
         of the stature of Deputy President Motlanthe as chancellor;


      3) recalls that Deputy President Motlanthe is not new to education: He
         was involved in establishing the J B Marks Education Trust, which
         provides bursaries to mineworkers and their dependants, and the
         Trade Union School, as well as the Elijah Barayi Memorial Training
         Centre;


      4) recognises the work done by the former chancellor, Mr Cyril
         Ramaphosa, who has successfully completed two terms;


      5) congratulates the Deputy President on his new appointment as
         chancellor; and


      6) that the ANC recognises the importance of educating the people:
         Together we can instil a culture of learning!


Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: I am  not  sure  why,  in  a
motion without notice, any reference to a political party has  to  be  made.
The Deputy Chief Whip  said  that  the  ANC  recognises  the  importance  of
education.  I  believe,  sir,  that  on  this  occasion,  the  whole   House
recognises it. That is the wording that should be followed. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I thought that  motions  are  usually
given to parties and that you have concurred, so I  will  not  know  whether
you have concurred or not.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, may I simply and very sincerely say that  if  the
Deputy Chief Whip of the ANC removes the  words  “the  ANC  recognises”,  we
will have no problem with that motion at all.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, if it  has  to  be
turned into a motion, then let that be, but you  cannot  remove  the  words,
“the ANC recognises”.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): So the ANC feels that they  will  not
move? Can I thus repeat the question? If there are no objections, I put  the
motion.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, one does not want  to  object  to  a  thing  like
this, but I think that the ANC knows as well as we do that when you  propose
a motion without notice – and I do apologise for the fact that  we  did  not
draw this to their attention beforehand – it must  not  be  party-political.
We do not stand up on behalf of the DA and propose motions  without  notice.
I am simply asking the Deputy Chief Whip to remove  that  one  last  clause,
which is slightly irrelevant under  the  circumstances,  because  the  whole
House agrees with him, not just the ANC.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, I  think  the  point  of
order is correct: A motion without notice should be non-political.  However,
I am not sure whether this motion was circulated and concurred with  by  all
parties. If parties did not raise  any  objections  at  the  time  when  the
motion was being circulated, then, obviously, it becomes a problem when  you
come into the House and raise concerns here.  However,  if  you  did  concur
with the words of the ANC at the time ... Can we just get that clarity  from
the Deputy Chief Whip?

Mrs J D KILIAN: Chairperson, may I please address you?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Could  the  Deputy  Chief  Whip  just
respond to that first?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY:  Chairperson,  the  motion  was
circulated to all parties and we did not receive any objection.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Chairperson, may I please address  you  on  this  matter?  I
also circulated a motion but, because of its sensitive  nature,  I  actually
went across the floor to consult with the ANC Whips. I would  have  expected
them to do the same.

We certainly did not receive this motion, and we would have objected to  it.
We cannot support it as it is. We are, after all, talking about  the  Deputy
President of the country. That is an office that is nonpartisan. The  Deputy
President is not only an ANC office bearer.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE:  Chair,  unfortunately  the  IFP  did  not  receive  this
motion. However, we would  support  it  if  the  clause  read  “this  House”
instead of “the ANC”. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the ACDP will also support the clause if it  read
“the House”. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I am really very sorry about this. I  really  had
no intention of causing  this  kind  of  controversy  here  this  afternoon.
[Interjections.] I want to say that we did receive  the  motion.  I  am  not
suggesting for a minute we did not. I did err in the fact that  we  did  not
consult with the ANC beforehand. I am simply making a  very  relevant  point
that, when we have motions of this nature, we do not  refer  to  parties  in
them. We will support the motion if the wording is changed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member,  that  point  was  raised
earlier, in terms of the point of order. Hon Deputy Chief Whip, if there  is
no consensus, you know the rule is that  the  motion  be  reverted.  If  you
remove the words “the ANC”, everyone seems to be concurring ...

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY  PARTY:  Chairperson,  we  would  love
this House to accept and support the Deputy President. It is very  important
that the Deputy President be supported. So we will move that the words  “the
ANC” be removed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela):  So  the  motion  should  read,  “the
House”?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: It  should  read  “the  House”.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): So, there are no  objections  to  the
motion provided that the words “the ANC”  be  removed  from  it?  The  House
therefore supports the Deputy President?

Agreed to.

    ROAD ACCIDENTS, INJURIES AND DEATHS CAUSED BY RECKLESS AND NEGLIGENT
                                   DRIVING

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:

   That the House -

      1) notes with deep dismay the death of four teenagers in their  matric
         year on their way home from school, when one of two  Mini  Coopers,
         that were racing each other, smashed into them in Mdlalose  Street,
         Protea Glen, Soweto and extinguished their lives;


      2) expresses its heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families and to
         all at school who knew them and interacted with them;
      3) requests the government to  take  the  sternest  measures  possible
         against all who take part in  drag  racing  by  confiscating  their
         vehicles,  revoking  their  driving  licences  and  imposing   jail
         sentences on them;


      4) further requests the government to put measures in place to  ensure
         that all young drivers below the age of  25  are  tested  on  their
         knowledge of the laws that apply to driving and the implications of
         causing an accident where death and injury occur; and


      5) requests insurance companies to look  into  the  implementation  of
         systems to have drivers declare never to participate in any kind of
         racing on pain of their insurance being invalidated.

Thank you.

Agreed to.

                TREATMENT OF HIV PATIENT AT MOHLAKENG CLINIC

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mrs M N MATLADI: House Chair, the ACDP moves without notice:

   That the House -
      1) notes that on 5 March 2010 the Independent Online news portal
         reported that Thabang, a seven-year-old HIV-positive boy, who is
         gravely ill, went to Mohlakeng Clinic in Randfontein expecting to
         receive ARVs, but was turned away with nothing more than protein
         porridge;


      2) further notes that the Gauteng health department has acknowledged
         that Thabang had not been handled according to protocol by staff at
         the Mohlakeng Clinic and was never referred to a physician for
         examination, nor was his blood drawn to determine his CD4 count;
         and


      3) expresses its anger at how Thabang’s case had been handled, which
         reflects gross incompetence, and further appreciates the prompt
         response by the Gauteng department of health in instituting
         remedial action and urgent investigation into the matter.

Agreed to.

                 PARAMEDIC RAPED IN DURBAN DEEP, ROODEPOORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev K R J MESHOE: House Chair, I move a motion without notice:

   That the House -

    1) notes with great concern the reported rape of a paramedic and
       attempted rape of her colleague in Roodepoort’s Durban Deep area
       while they were on duty attending to an injured toddler;


    2) further notes that paramedics are a valuable and indispensable part
       of the health of our nation, who attend to emergencies on our roads
       and communities, many times late at night and sometimes in adverse
       weather conditions;


    3) calls on all community members, particularly those in informal
       settlements, to support, protect and help paramedics in the
       execution of their duties; and


    4) salutes and expresses our sincere appreciation to all paramedics for
       the great work they are doing in our nation.


Agreed to.

              100TH ANNIVERSARY OF FORMATION OF NAZARETH CHURCH

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: House Chair, I  move  a  motion
without notice:
   That the House -


    1) notes that today, Wednesday, 10 March 2010, marks the 100th
       anniversary of the formation of the Nazareth Church or Shembe
       Church;


    2) further notes that right from inception the African independent
       churches played a crucial role in promoting a religious philosophy
       based on sound African value systems and that many of the leaders of
       independent churches have assumed leadership positions in society
       over the years;


    3) remembers that the independent churches enabled leaders like Inkosi
       Isaiah Mdliwamafa Shembe, the founder of the Nazareth Church,
       Nehemiah Tile, Tiyo Soga, A Mgqibisa and others to articulate and
       provide channels for the expression of the deep-felt political
       grievances of the people;


    4) acknowledges that the church became more than just a place of
       religious worship: it signified a political protest movement seeking
       to escape the reality of colonial rule;


    5) believes that the African independent churches have played a leading
       role in the liberation movement and they will continue to play a
       prominent role in the moral regeneration of our society and remain
       an important partner in fostering the spirit of nation-building and
       reconciliation;
    6) calls upon the church, as partners with the government in the Moral
       Regeneration Movement, to continue ensuring that the moral values of
       ubuntu, such as respect for human life and respect for each other,
       are inculcated, especially amongst our youth; and


    7) congratulates the Nazareth Church on its 100th anniversary and
       express the wish that it may continue to grow and lead the nation to
       become morally conscious.


Agreed to.

                  HOSTAGE NICK GREYLING RELEASED IN NIGERIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: House  Chair,  I  move  without
notice:

   That the House -

    1) notes that South African Nick Greyling, a sound engineer for M-Net
       SuperSport who was held hostage in Nigeria, was released on Monday
       evening by his captors;


    2) further notes that Greyling and two Nigerian colleagues - cameraman
       Alexander Effiong and commentator Bowie Attamah - were taken from
       their bus on Monday in the Imo province, near the Oweri Airport
       where Effiong escaped soon after the attack;


    3) recognises that the speedy resolution of their situation was due to
       negotiations with the hostage-takers by the Nigerian authorities;


    4) thanks the Nigerian government for its co-operation and assistance
       in negotiating a peaceful resolution; and


    5) wishes Greyling a safe journey home.


Agreed to.

                              COMMONWEALTH DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: House  Chair,  I  move  without
notice:

   That the House -


      1) notes that Commonwealth Day is celebrated on the second Monday in
         March every year and that, throughout the 61 years of its
         existence, the Commonwealth has provided platforms and fora to
         affirm common values and goals which include the promotion of
         democracy, human rights, good governance, multilateralism and world
         peace;


      2) further notes that the aim of commemorating Commonwealth Day is to
         promote understanding of global issues, international co-operation
         and the work of the Commonwealth to improve the lives of its 1,8
         billion citizens;


      3) recognises that the modern Commonwealth has its origins in the
         former British Empire and today comprises 53 independent member
         states: 32 members are republics, 16 have constitutional monarchies
         which recognise Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II as their head of
         state, and five have national monarchies, namely Brunei Darussalam,
         Lesotho, Malaysia, Swaziland and Tonga; and


      4) encourages South Africa to use the Commonwealth to achieve   the
         goals of a better Africa and a better world.

Agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: I wonder if the hon Deputy Chief Whip of  the  Majority  Party
would stop now. We would like to go home now, please. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): He has every right to  present
if there are other motions.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: House Chairperson, may  I  inform  the
House that I have 100 more motions to move. [Laughter.]

              ESTABLISHMENT OF PARLIAMENTARY INTERFAITH COUNCIL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  House  Chairperson,  I  move
without notice:

   That the House -

      1) notes that Parliament will shortly establish a Parliamentary
         Interfaith Council;


      2) recalls that on 6 November 2009 the Multiparty Chief Whips’ Forum
         agreed to establish the council, which would interact with other
         religious structures outside Parliament on issues of spiritual and
         moral support, and conflict resolution on the African continent;


      3) recognises that the formation of the council would create an
         additional platform for an activist Parliament that would further
         advance, forge and renew relationships amongst different religions
         and would seek to influence and focus discussions on issues
         affecting different religions;


      4) further recognises that the council would be used as a mechanism to
         reach out to the electorate for enhancing nation-building and
         social cohesion and promote peace and co-operation among religious
         formations in South Africa; and


      5) commits itself to intensify its efforts to contribute to nation-
         building and social cohesion.

Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr  K  O  Bapela):  Are  there  any  further  motions
without notice? None.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Just that of congratulating  Mr
Mike Ellis. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Oh, a  motion  to  congratulate  Mike
Ellis? Thank you. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: No objections, sir.

The  HOUSE  CHAIRPERSON  (Mr  K  O  Bapela):  No  objections.   Agreed   to.
[Laughter.]

The House adjourned at 17:41.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 5 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Calling of Joint Sitting


                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT



    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the
    Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
    terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Tuesday, 9 March 2010 at 14:00 to conduct a debate in
    celebration of International Women’s Day.


    M V SISULU, MP                      M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                      CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY             NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Auditor-General on the status of climate change
        initiatives in South Africa [RP 12-2010].

2.    The Minister of Basic Education
    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Education Labour Relations Council for
        2010 – 2013 and one-year Service Delivery Plan for 2010 - 11.

T100305e-insert1

                              COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

1. Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Correctional  Services  on  the
Department of  Correctional  Services  and  the  Judicial  Inspectorate  for
Correctional Services 2008/09 Annual Reports, dated 23 February 2010.

The Portfolio Committee on  Correctional  Services,  having  considered  the
2008/09 annual reports of the Department of Correctional  Services  and  its
entity, the Judicial Inspectorate  for  Correctional  Services,  reports  as
follows:

1.    INTRODUCTION

1.1   In its consideration of  the  annual  reports  of  the  Department  of
      Correctional Services (DCS) and its entity the  Judicial  Inspectorate
      for Correctional  Services  (JICS),  the  Committee  held  stakeholder
      hearings (21 October) and received briefings by the DCS  (28  October)
      and the JICS (4 November).

1.2   The Committee invited comment on the two annual  reports  from  labour
      unions, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and research  and  state
      institutions. The following stakeholders responded to the  Committee’s
      invitation for  comment  on  the  DCS’  Annual  Report:  the  National
      Institute for Crime Prevention  and  the  Reintegration  of  Offenders
      (NICRO), the Civil  Society  Prison  Reform  Initiative  (CSPRI),  the
      Public Service Association (PSA), the Police and Prison  Civil  Rights
      Union (POPCRU) and the South African Human Rights Commission  (SAHRC).
      Only the CSPRI submitted comment on the JICS’ 2008/09 Annual Report.

1.3    The  DCS  and  JICS  officials  who  appeared  before  the  Committee
      included: Ms J Schreiner (Acting National Commissioner), Mr T  Motseki
      (Chief  Deputy  Commissioner:  Corrections),  Ms  N   Mareka   (Deputy
      Commissioner: Financial Management  and  Accounting)  Mr  J  Shilubane
      (Deputy Commissioner: Government Information and Technology  Officer),
      Ms R Tshimomola  (Director:  Management  Accounting),  Mr  S  Tsetsane
      (Chief Deputy Commissioner: Corporate Services), Mr P  Mbambo  (Deputy
      Commissioner:  Executive   Management),   Mr   N   Mketshane   (Deputy
      Commissioner: Personnel Development), Mr M Ngubo (Deputy Commissioner:
      Supply  Chain  Management)  and  Dr  J   Coetzee   (Deputy   Director:
      Operations); Judge DH van Zyl (Inspecting Judge); Mr G  Morris  (JICS:
      Director); Mr M Prusent (JICS: Western Cape Regional  Manager);  Mr  A
      Carelse (JICS: Gauteng  Regional  Manager);  Ms  V  Rubu  (JICS:  Area
      Coordinator) and Mr  U  Raga  (JICS:  Acting  National  Manager  Legal
      Services).

1.4   This report comprises an overview of key aspects  of  the  two  annual
      reports,  concerns  raised  by  stakeholders   and   the   Committee’s
      observations and recommendations.

1.5   In his 2008 State of the  Nation  Address  (SONA)  the  President  had
      identified three focus areas for attention by the DCS in  the  2008/09
      financial year: a reduction in recidivism, victim involvement  in  the
      parole process and the review of the  criminal  justice  system.  This
      report also makes reference to the DCS’ progress in relation to  these
      focal areas.

1.6   The 2008/09 DCS Annual Report was not as detailed as the DCS’  reports
      of the previous two years, often requiring reference to the  strategic
      plan for the same period to determine whether targets have  been  met.
      In addition, it is fraught with inconsistencies and inaccuracies  that
      raise concern about the integrity of the information contained in it.

1.7   Although the DCS  received  a  qualified  audit  report,  the  Auditor
      General of South Africa (AGSA) concluded that in general terms the DCS
      has reached a level of maturity in terms of financial management which
      now requires it to focus on the implementation of  adequate  financial
      reporting systems and the drafting,  approval  and  implementation  of
      policies and procedures.
1.8   In addition  to  its  usual  interactions  with  the  Department,  the
      Committee will use its quarterly administrative and  financial  report
      hearings to track the DCS’ progress as far as  the  implementation  of
      recommendations contained in this report.

2.    PROGRAMME BY PROGRAMME EVALUATION

   1. Programme 1: Administration
The  DCS   reported   a   general   decline   in   fraud,   corruption   and
maladministration in the year under review, and managed  to  reduce  matters
of qualification by 75%. It developed both a performance measurement  system
with clear indicators, and a strategic human resource  management  document.
A  project  office  ensuring  that  key  projects  such  as   the   Offender
Rehabilitation Path (ORP) are aligned  with  strategy  and  well-coordinated
has been established, and most significantly, Cabinet  approved  the  Remand
Detention branch. These  positive  developments  notwithstanding,  the  DCS’
instability at senior  management  level,  budgetary  constraints  and  poor
integration  and  coordination  of  various  branches  have  led   to   many
challenges  that  negatively  affected  service  delivery  as  well  as  the
implementation of the  White  Paper  on  Corrections.  Although  the  report
states that more awareness  has  been  created  around  matters  related  to
ethics, compliance with  legislative  and  policy  requirements  as  far  as
combating corruption remains a  challenge,  with  the  report  providing  no
clarity as to whether the DCS’ investigation of incidents  and  handling  of
litigation cases have shown improvement.

The DCS reported a vacancy rate of 10,5%, 3,5% below  target.  In  addition,
the turnaround time  for  filling  vacancies  increased  to  210  days.  The
failure to meet the 7% target could, in part, be ascribed to the  moratorium
on appointments to non-critical  posts.  Although  critical  vacancies  have
been kept below the 50% for all but  psychologists,  the  number  of  scarce
skill  vacancies  remains  a  matter  of  concern,  given  the   role   such
professionals play in the care, development  and  rehabilitation  programmes
critical to reducing recidivism.

2.2   Programme 2: Security
The safe and humane detention  of  offenders  is  the  DCS’  core  function.
Assaults and escapes have decreased, and security  policies  and  procedures
have been implemented with all management  areas  reporting  on  compliance.
Disturbingly the DCS failed to meet its targeted 3,5  unnatural  deaths  per
10 000 offenders.

In 2007 R100 million per year over a three-year period, had been  set  aside
for the roll-out of biometric access control  equipment,  but  according  to
the Annual Report the DCS  could,  due  to  non-compliance  by  the  service
provider, only install access control systems at one of the  68  centres  it
had targeted in the year under review. No explanation was provided  for  how
this failure to deliver affects the project as a  whole,  or  what  measures
have been put in place to recoup monies already spent.

2.3   Programme 3: Corrections
Although fully implemented at all centres of excellence  (CoEs),  the  roll-
out of the three meals a day  and  structured  day  programmes  varies  from
centre to centre. No clarity is provided on  what  was  causing  the  varied
levels of delivery or when these challenges will be addressed.  Furthermore,
due to the DCS’ failure to identify sites for its implementation, the  video
arraignment project could not be completed.

Due to the increased involvement of service providers the DCS has  succeeded
in reaching 60 543 offenders, through work  programmes,  far  exceeding  the
targeted 15 704. Although  the  108  000  work  opportunities  targeted  was
exceeded by nearly 40 000, the report was unclear as to the types  of  work,
and duration  of  the  offenders  involvement  in  such  activity.  The  DCS
clarified that the types of work  activity  varied,  and  that  the  figures
quoted referred to every opportunity rather than every offender involved  in
a work activity.

Overcrowding remains one of the DCS’ biggest and most immediate  challenges.
Although there is more awareness of  the  need  to  implement  the  relevant
sections of the Criminal Procedure Act, and  while  such  implementation  is
being monitored, implementation remains unacceptably low. It is  hoped  that
the remand detention centres would bring some relief.

2.4   Programme 4: Development
The  DCS  had  hoped  to  involve  22  000  offenders  in  formal  education
programmes, but this target was not reached. Only 15 130 students  enrolled.
This was partly due to the DCS not meeting the  Departments  of  Higher  and
Basic Education’s requirements  for  its  facilities  to  be  registered  as
fulltime schools. Targets as far as participation in sports and  recreation,
as well as skills development programmes were also  not  met.  Shortages  of
funds as well as operational challenges related  to  the  implementation  of
the LOGIS system, and the failure to procure fertiliser,  seeds,  pesticides
and vaccines timeously resulted in food production targets  also  not  being
met. Although the number of offenders involved  in  agricultural  activities
increased from 2 471  to  2  960,  the  number  of  those  participating  in
production workshops had decreased. Though the  report  does  not  state  it
explicitly, the decrease in participation in workshops may  be  ascribed  to
staff shortages.

2.5   Programme 5: Care
While the DCS met all its targets in terms of social  work,  spiritual  care
and HIV and AIDS  programmes,  it  could  not  reach  the  targeted  10  200
psychological care sessions. Only 9 073 psychological  sessions  were  held,
just under 4 000 less than in the previous year. While the successes in  the
above-mentioned targets were ascribed to dedication on the  part  of  staff,
use of external service providers and the appointment of 7  chaplains,  lack
of funds, resignations and completion of community  service  were  cited  as
reasons for the failure to meet the psychological sessions target.

According  to  the  report,  health  care  programmes  targeting  government
priority areas are available and accessible in  all  DCS  management  areas,
and primary health care services are available to all offenders. 50% of  the
DCS management areas implemented comprehensive HIV and AIDS  programmes:  72
746 offenders participated in HIV and AIDS sessions, exceeding  the  19  500
target.

2.6   Programme 6: Social Reintegration
Most targets in this programme were not met. The DCS could for instance  not
succeed  in  reducing  the  number  of  parole  violations  or   absconders.
Diversion in terms of Section 76 of the Criminal  Procedure  Act,  has  also
decreased.

Interactions between the DCS, selected parole  board  chairpersons  and  the
Committee have revealed that victims are very seldom involved in the  parole
process.  The  Annual  Report  indicates  that  a   policy   procedure   and
supervision (community corrections) document  was  submitted  for  approval,
and parole review policy procedures are said to be in place  in  the  6  DCS
regions. 47  362  applications  for  parole  were  considered,  and  22  252
conditional placements approved.

2.7   Programme 7: Facilities
Most of the targets for this programme were  not  met.  While  a  number  of
facilities were upgraded in the 2008/09  financial  year,  the  targeted  94
maintenance  projects  could  not  be  met:  only  58  projects  were  being
maintained, 12 were on tender, and  14  were  in  the  planning  stage.  The
report is silent on the construction of the 5 generation prisons, and  there
is no clarity as to the policy  procedures  that  have  been  submitted  for
approval, or the DCS –  Department  of  Public  Works  (DPW)  service  level
agreement.

3.    JUDICIAL INSPECTORATE FOR CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

In  terms  of  the  Correctional  Services  legislation  the  JICS   is   an
independent office under the control of the Inspecting Judge, and  aimed  at
facilitating the inspection of prisons in order to report on  the  treatment
of prisoners as well as prison conditions. Section 91  of  the  Correctional
Services Act (CSA) of 1998 states that the DCS is responsible for  the  JICS
expenses. Although the 2008/09 Annual Report was  silent  in  terms  of  the
correctional services-related aspects of that year’s SONA,  it  covered  the
JICS’ activities for the reporting period quite extensively.

3.1   Office of the Inspecting Judge
Judge Deon van Zyl was appointed in  November  2008,  after  acting  in  the
position for 6 months. The JICS’ expenditure amounted to R15  037  017,  65,
the same as  the  previous  year.  88%  of  that  expenditure  went  to  the
compensation of employees. As the JICS does not have  its  own  budget,  its
expenditure is not audited.

3.2   State of Correctional Centres
Much of this chapter of the report focuses on prison overcrowding, which  is
not spread evenly across regions, and the impact it  has  on  conditions  in
prison and the treatment of offenders. Though  South  African  prisons  have
been overcrowded since 1965, the rapid increase between 1996 and 2000  could
be attributed to  the  increase  in  awaiting-trial  detainees  (ATDs).  The
report makes clear that while  ATDs  contributed  to  the  overcrowding  the
impact of minimum sentencing for certain  crimes  and  an  increase  in  the
number of “lifers” should not be underestimated.
The large prison population impacts negatively on the roll out of  care  and
development,  as  well  as  rehabilitation  programmes,  all  of  which  are
critical to reducing  recidivism.  Overcrowding  does  not  only  negatively
impact on living conditions, but also on  staff  resulting  in  low  morale,
increased absenteeism and unacceptable work ethic.

3.3   Deaths in Prison
All deaths in prison must be reported to the JICS, and in 2008  1  155  such
reports were received, 66 of which were related  to  unnatural  deaths.  The
JICS is concerned about the definition of unnatural  and  natural  deaths  –
many ‘natural’ deaths may be the result of  officials’  failure  to  provide
care that may have prevented the death.  Between  March  and  April  2009  9
inmates died, allegedly at the hands of officials, yet the report is  silent
on deaths resulting from assaults by officials.

3.4   Prisoner complaints
The JICS appoints Independent Correctional Centre Visitors (ICCV)  to  visit
prisons and to record prisoner complaints. Amendments  to  the  CSA  require
that an ICCV be appointed to each  prison.  By  the  end  of  the  reporting
period had deployed 191 such visitors across the DCS  regions.  These  ICCVs
paid 7  103  visits,  interviewed  344  657  inmates  and  recorded  69  415
complaints.

4.    OVERVIEW OF STAKEHOLDER INPUT
The following concerns were raised by stakeholders and  do  not  necessarily
reflect the Committee’s views.

4.1   Audit Report
4.1.1 Most stakeholders commended the DCS for having, despite  its  numerous
      challenges, managed to reduce its audit qualifications.
4.2   Babies in correctional centres with their incarcerated mothers
4.2.1 NICRO supports that babies should remain with their  mothers  for  the
      shortest possible time  so  as  to  avoid  the  negative  consequences
      ‘incarceration’ would have on their development and welcomed that  the
      CSA now made provision for the ‘proper placement of such children’. It
      is essential that mothers be involved  in  the  placement  process  to
      facilitate  a  smooth  transition  through  adequate  counseling   and
      information.

4.3   Rehabilitation, Reintegration and Recidivism
4.3.1 Concern was raised that although there has been  an  increase  in  the
      number of offenders with sentence plan, the fact that only  10,75%  of
      sentenced offenders had such a plan was a  cause  for  concern,  given
      that such plans are essential in ensuring that offending behaviour  is
      addressed and recidivism curbed.

4.3.2 Civil society organisations were pleased about the  increased  use  of
      community, non  governmental  and  faith-based  organisations  in  the
      provision of correctional programmes. At only 60 543 offenders  taking
      part in such programmes in the year under review, the  figure  remains
      disturbingly low. It is hoped that the DCS would continue  making  use
      of the above-mentioned organizations so as to ensure that the DCS will
      be able to meet its rehabilitation objectives.

4.3.3 There is a need to investigate the factors that cause offenders to re-
      offend, and to promote those factors that motivate  offenders  to  not
      commit crime.  Rehabilitation  and  reintegration  practitioners  have
      noted the impact poor family relationships and the high  incidence  of
      family dysfunction had on rehabilitation efforts. NICRO  proposes  the
      establishment  of  Family  and  Restorative  Justice  Centres  at  all
      correctional centres to not only facilitate better reintegration  into
      families and society, but to also ensure that victims are part of  the
      process.

4.3.4  The  rehabilitation  and  reintegration  of  offenders   is   heavily
      dependent upon a fully resourced inter-disciplinary  team.  While  the
      increased access to social work and spiritual  sessions  is  welcomed,
      the decrease in participation in  psychological  sessions,  due  to  a
      shortage of psychologists is alarming.

4.3.5  Contrary  to  the  National  Commissioner’s  comments   that   budget
      programmes had been re-organised to give effect to  the  White  Paper,
      very little  of  the  current  budget  has  gone  towards  the  Social
      Reintegration budget. Given that in the financial  year  under  review
      saw 22 252 offenders released on parole, the fact that only 4 944 took
      part in reintegration programmes is worrying.

4.3.6 The Annual Report reflects a 32% drop  in  formal  education,  70%  in
      mainstream education and  18%  in  correspondence  training  with  the
      overall involvement in education and training programmes  dropping  by
      12%. Education and skills development programmes should be extended to
      more inmates, as these not only combat idleness but  more  importantly
      increase the chances of inmates securing employment upon  release  and
      reduces the likelihood of re-offence. Educational programme should  be
      aligned  to  the  skills  development  programme   outlined   by   the
      Departments of Basic and Higher Education.

4.4   Civil Society participation
4.4.1 The  undertaking  to  strengthen  collaboration  in  crime  prevention
      initiatives by working closer  with  NGOs,  faith-based  organisations
      (FBOs)  and  community-based  organisations  (CBOs)  and  other  civil
      society organisations was praised and the  development  of  guidelines
      for partnerships with service providers, and amendments providing  for
      the  above-mentioned  organisations  to  register  and  interact  with
      sentenced offenders to facilitate the rehabilitation,  (Section  13(a)
      and (b)) were welcomed. The lack of detail around the registration and
      screening process and the silence on the development of a more  formal
      accreditation process is a matter of concern.  If  such  collaborative
      efforts are to succeed, coordination of efforts  and  initiatives  and
      the pooling and effective use of such efforts and resources  would  be
      vital.

4.5   Health Care
4.5.1 The provision of quality mental health care  in  correctional  centres
      is critical for both inmates and officials. By the  end  of  the  2009
      financial year the psychologist-inmate ratio stood at 1:  7  510.  The
      DCS  must  take  the  necessary  steps  to  address  the  shortage  of
      psychologists  through  incentives  that  would  attract  such  health
      specialists. Such efforts should be accompanied  by  adequate  career-
      pathing so as to ensure that once acquired, the skills are retained.

4.6   Alternative sentencing/Diversion
4.6.1 It was agreed that incarceration should  be  a  last  resort  for  any
      adult  or  child  in  conflict  with  the  law,  and  all  alternative
      sentencing  possibilities  should  be  explored  before   opting   for
      incarceration.

4.7   Human Resource Management
4.7.1 While the Service Level Agreement between the  DCS  and  the  National
      Library for the Blind was welcomed, the DCS must be more specific when
      outlining its achievements and/or challenges as far as officials  with
      disabilities and gender representivity, particularly  what  percentage
      of its workforce, especially at middle or senior management level, are
      people with disabilities.

4.7.2 Given that the DCS’ total personnel expenditure budget comes  to  R7,9
      billion, the single largest share of its budget,  creating  value  for
      money in this area is essential, and the steps towards implementing  a
      performance management system are  encouraged.  The  DCS  however  had
      performance discussion meetings with  only  43%  of  staff,  and  this
      raised  concern:  performance  management  should  be  consistent  and
      regular else it  will  be  perceived  as  arbitrary  and  consequently
      unfair, creating dissatisfaction,  disgruntlement  and  poor  or  non-
      performance.

4.8   Deaths in incarceration
4.8.1 While the decline in the number of deaths in prison  is  welcomed,  it
      was  agreed  that  every  death  in  prison  should  be  regarded   as
      undignified, and that those caused by the failure of Heads of  Centres
      to provide adequate medical care, should be considered unnatural  too,
      and that each death be thoroughly investigated.  It  was  stated  that
      amongst  others  lowering  overcrowding,  training  of  officials   to
      adequately care for mentally-ill offenders, and  identify  threatening
      behaviour, and a more human legal framework governing  medical  parole
      would assist the DCS in further lowering the  incidents  of  death  in
      incarceration.

4.8.2 The “target” for unnatural deaths, noted as  the  ratio,  3.5/10  000,
      reflects the DCS’ apparent disregard and insensitivity when  it  comes
      to deaths in prison. The DCS  should  recognise  that  even  a  single
      unnatural death in incarceration is  unacceptable  and  future  Annual
      Reports should provide an exact total of such deaths and a summary  of
      the reasons, investigations, findings and steps  taken  against  those
      implicated.

4.9   Overcrowding
4.9.1 The DCS’ failure to comply with Section 7 of the  CSA,  providing  for
      inmates  to  be  held  in  cells  adequate  for  detention  and  under
      conditions of human dignity was also highlighted and lamented. It  was
      recommended that in addition  to  judicial  officers  and  prosecutors
      ensuring that bail is appropriate and affordable as  well  as  greater
      use of plea-bargaining procedures, Correctional Supervision and Parole
      Boards  (CSPB)  should  be  more  vigorous  in  ensuring  that   those
      qualifying  to  be  considered  for  parole  are  processed  and  that
      unnecessary delays should not be tolerated.

4.10  Judicial Inspectorate for Correctional Services
4.10.1       The  DCS  appears  to   have   ignored   the   JICS   and   its
      recommendations as far as the care and treatment of offenders,  as  no
      mention of such recommendations is made in the Annual Report. The JICS
      has raised such concerns in its own Annual Reports and does  so  again
      in its current Annual Report, particularly in  relation  to  the  DCS’
      compliance with regard to mandatory reports.

4.11  Secure care and safe custody
4.11.1       The  JICS  recorded  2  884  complaints   of   inmate-on-inmate
      assaults,  2  010  alleged  official-on-inmate  assaults  and  4   223
      allegations of inhumane treatment.
4.11.2      Though the DCS recorded a  total  of  83  assaults  per  10  000
      offenders, and incurred a staggering R988 million in liabilities as  a
      result of “Bodily injury/assault”, virtually no detail is provided  on
      nature of the assaults e.g whether they were  offender-on-offender  or
      official-on-offender. The DCS should provide greater clarity  on  what
      constitutes an assault and such information  should  be  reflected  in
      future reports.
4.11.3      Such statistics imply  that  the  DCS  is  unable  to  guarantee
      inmates’ safety, and disturbingly that often inmates are assaulted  by
      the officials charged with their care.

4.12  Awaiting-Trial/Unsentenced Detainees
4.12.1      Civil society organisations noted the DCS’ mention of  Cabinet’s
      decision that it be responsible  for  enhancing  and  managing  remand
      detention, but lamented the lack of detail regarding the establishment
      of the dedicated and remand detention branch  and  the  tool  used  by
      regions to monitor the implementation of relevant provisions contained
      in the Criminal Procedure Act (Act 51 of 1977).

5.    COMMITTEE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1   Administration
5.1.1  The  Committee  remains  extremely  concerned  about  the  number  of
      disciplinary and corruption cases. The reported decline in  the  level
      of non-compliance with policies and legislation  notwithstanding,  the
      number of such cases is unacceptable. Concerns about long  suspensions
      particularly those beyond 30 days persist and the Committee recommends
      that the  DCS  pay  urgent  attention  to  resolving  cases  speedily,
      preferably before recourse is sought in court.
5.1.2 While some stakeholders have praised the DCS for its  efforts  towards
      greater alignment of its  policies  with  the  Constitution,  and  its
      activities  with  the  vision  contained  in  the   White   Paper   on
      Corrections, the Committee feels that there are still  too  many  gaps
      and non-compliance as far as implementation. The DCS should brief  the
      Committee  on  its  policies  and  account  for  why  those   policies
      notwithstanding, so many violations, not only  in  terms  of  offender
      care, but also in terms of how it  manages  its  personnel  are  still
      being reported by offenders and officials alike.
5.2   Deaths in incarceration
5.2.1 The Committee echoes the outrage at the unsympathetic manner in  which
      the DCS reports on deaths in incarceration. It agrees that  given  the
      DCS’ core function of providing secure care, a single unnatural death,
      whether as a result of inadequate/nonexistent medical care or assault,
      is  unacceptable.  The   DCS   should   report,   in   its   quarterly
      administrative and financial reports to the Committee, on  both  their
      interventions  aimed  at  eradicating  unnatural  deaths,  and   their
      compliance in terms of the legislation  particularly  as  far  as  the
      mandatory reports required by the JICS.

5.3   Facilities
5.3.1 As stated in the Committee’s Report on the  DCS’  2009/10  budget  and
      strategic  plan,  overcrowding  places  enormous  strain  on,  amongst
      others,  prison  infrastructure.  While  some  prisons   are   grossly
      overcrowded,  others  are  under-  or  inappropriately  utilised.  The
      Committee recognises that the current infrastructure is not  conducive
      to  realising  the  DCS’  rehabilitation   and   will   follow-up   on
      interventions aimed at creating appropriate accommodation for juvenile
      offenders, mothers with babies and the new Remand Detention Branch  in
      particular.

5.3.2 Oversight visits to correctional centres, JICS reports and  complaints
      received  from  inmates  and  officials  have  made  clear  that  many
      correctional centres are in need of various  degrees  of  maintenance.
      The DCS has indicated that the fact that the maintenance of government
      owned property resides with the  DPW  created  challenges  as  far  as
      addressing its maintenance needs. The DCS-DPW Service Level  Agreement
      is long overdue, and should be finalised as a matter  of  urgency,  as
      poorly maintained correctional centres, do not only impact on the DCS’
      ability to humanely detain inmates, but also pose a security risk.

5.3.3  Unsentenced  offenders  make  up  a  large  portion  of  the   prison
      population and therefore  contribute  significantly  to  overcrowding.
      Their presence in correctional centres also  poses  a  security  risk,
      because  they  are  unsentenced  and  therefore   have   no   security
      classification. The DCS has identified 10 centres  for  conversion  to
      remand centres, and  the  Committee  eagerly  awaits  reports  on  the
      progress of those conversions.

5.4   Overcrowding
5.4.1 Overcrowding impedes service delivery to offenders, and  makes  humane
      conditions of incarceration nearly impossible. Given that  unsentenced
      offenders, many of whom are  in  prison  simply  because  they  cannot
      afford bail set at as little as R300, are  the  main  contributors  to
      overcrowding, increased cooperation within the JCPS cluster is  vital.
      Awareness must be raised among cluster  members  of  the  far-reaching
      implications, budgetary and otherwise, associated  with  overcrowding,
      and the DCS as the department responsible for  remand  detention,  and
      the department feeling the brunt  of  its  weight  should  drive  that
      process.


5.5   Care, Development and Corrections
5.5.1 Less than 11% of offenders had sentence plans developed in the  period
      under  review.  Given  that  the  care,  development  and  corrections
      programmes an offender is exposed to while incarcerated,  is  informed
      by his or her sentence plan, the Committee is deeply  concerned  about
      the slow progress in this regard. With a recidivism rate of 95%, it is
      critical that  appropriate  sentence  plans  are  developed  for  each
      offender to  ensure  that  their  offending  behaviour  is  adequately
      addressed. The Committee acknowledges that given  the  high  level  of
      overcrowding such programmes, even if adequately funded, would  be  an
      enormous challenge to run. While the Committee notes the DCS’ shortage
      of  skilled  professionals  such  as  teachers,  and   infrastructural
      challenges that do not always make delivery on such services possible,
      it must emphasise, as it did in its Report on the DCS’ 2009/10  Budget
      and Strategic Plan, that there should be greater synergy  between  the
      Department’s strategic objectives, and how it funds its programmes.

5.5.2  The  Committee  welcomes  the  National  Council   for   Correctional
      Services’ review of the medical parole  policy  aimed  at  making  the
      process more  effective,  less  open  to  manipulation,  and  possibly
      inclusive of seriously ill inmates, not only those who are in the last
      stages of a terminal illness. Health care services to sick inmates are
      also often inadequate and more should be done  to  ensure  that  basic
      health care needs are met. The Committee will continue to  engage  the
      relevant stakeholders on both the medical parole, and  general  health
      care service delivery.
5.6   Social Reintegration
5.6.1 The Committee is most concerned that  most  of  the  targets  in  this
      programme have not been met, in particular  that  the  DCS  could  not
      reduce the number  of  parole  violations.  This  could,  in  part  be
      ascribed to  the  fact  that  the  care  and  development  and  social
      reintegration programme was, and remains grossly under-funded. Many ex-
      offenders are rejected by their communities upon  their  release,  and
      struggle to find employment. Corrections is a societal  responsibility
      and all sectors must play their role in ensuring that ex-offenders are
      successfully reintegrated. Much has to be done to  combat  the  stigma
      attached to  having  been  incarcerated  and  to  promote  restorative
      justice. Faith in the  parole  system  is  integral  to  parolees  and
      rehabilitated offenders being accepted by their communities upon their
      release, and the DCS should redouble its efforts in making the  system
      more efficient.

5.6.2 FBOs, NGOs and  CBOs  play  an  important  role  in  the  delivery  of
      rehabilitation and reintegration programmes to offenders. More support
      should be given to the sector, in order to  reach  more  inmates,  but
      such partnerships  should  be  closely  monitored  to  ensure  maximum
      effect.

5.7   Prison labour
5.7.1 The Committee acknowledges the potential security  risk  when  inmates
      are engaged in work activities, but feels strongly that with  adequate
      management, prison labour can assist in  making  the  DCS  more  self-
      sufficient, cutting on some of the costs, particularly in those  areas
      that are currently  being  outsourced.  Prison  farms,  factories  and
      workshops  should  be  utilised  fully.  The  skills  and  work  ethic
      developed through work programmes will also aid the rehabilitation and
      reintegration process.

5.8   Reporting by the JICS
5.8.1  The  Committee  recommends  that  the  JICS’  report  provide  detail
      regarding its performance targets and to what extent  they  have  been
      able to meet them. Without information related to  its  successes  and
      challenges particularly in relation to the processing  and  resolution
      of inmate  complaints,  it  is  difficult  to  accurately  assess  the
      entity’s performance.

6.    APPRECIATION
      The Committee thanks all those who appeared before it for their  input
      and cooperation, and looks forward to fruitful interactions  with  all
      stakeholders as it does its oversight of the Department.


Report to be considered.


                            MONDAY, 8 MARCH 2010
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Protection of Information Bill, 2010, submitted by the Acting
         Minister of State Security.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)     Strategic Corporate Plan of Sentech for 2010 – 2013.


2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     a) Strategic Plan of the Public Administration Leadership and
        Management Academy (Palama) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.

3.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Service Licensing
        Council (ASLC) for 2008-09.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Air
        Services Council (IASC) for 2008-09.


4. The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
        Government Association (SALGA) for 2008-09, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-09 [RP 44-2009].

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Assessment
        of the Public Sector Education and Training Authority’s
        Contribution towards the Development of Skills and Career
        Progression Prospects in the Public Service – August 2009 [RP 264-
        2009].

                            TUESDAY, 9 MARCH 2010
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of State Security

          a) Protection of Information Bill [B 6 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             32999 of 5 March 2010.]

             Introduction and referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
             for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.

             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Calling of Joint Sitting


                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT


    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the
    Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
    terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Tuesday, 16 March 2010 at 14:00 to conduct a debate in
    celebration of Human Rights Day.


    M V SISULU, MP                      M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                      CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY             NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Long-term
        Insurance for 2007 [RP 272-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Short-term
        Insurance for 2007 [RP 202-2009].


    (c)     Government Notice No R.1085 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Correction Notice:  Imposition of
        Provisional Payment (PP/135), in terms of the Customs and Excise
        Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.1086 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1389), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R.1087 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1390), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.1088 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1391), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R.1089 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1392), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R.1090 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/652), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (i)     Government Notice No R.1091 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
        2/323), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).
    (j)     Government Notice No R.1092 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/324), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (k)     Government Notice No R.1093 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/325), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


2.    The Minister of Basic Education

     a) Strategic Plan and Operational Plans of the Department of Basic
        Education for 2010/11 – 2012/13.

                          WEDNESDAY, 10 MARCH 2010
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5 - 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following changes to Committee membership have been
        instituted by the Minority Front:

        Portfolio Committee on Economic Development


        Discharged:    Bhoola, Mr R B


        Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs


        Discharged:    Bhoola, Mr R B


        Portfolio Committee on Social Development
        Appointed:     Bhoola, Mr R B


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Government Notice No R.1048 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1388), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.1049 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
        2/321), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R.1050 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/651), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.1051 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/323), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (e)     Proclamation No 74 published in Government Gazette No 32724
        dated 26 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule 1, in terms of the
        South African Revenue Service Act , 1997 (Act No 34 of 1997).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.1146 published in Government Gazette No
        32785 dated 04 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1393), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).
    (g)     Government Notice No R.1186 published in Government Gazette No
        32806 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 Part 2B
        (No 1/2/151), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
        91 of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R.1187 published in Government Gazette No
        32806 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/326), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (i)     Government Notice No R.1221 published in Government Gazette No
        32825 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1395), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (j)     Government Notice No R.1222 published in Government Gazette No
        32825 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1394), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (k)     Government Notice No R.1232 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1398), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (l)     Government Notice No R.1233 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1396), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (m)     Government Notice No R.1234 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1397), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (n)     Government Notice No R.1235 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/653), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (o)     Government Notice No R.1236 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        6/654), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (p)     Government Notice No R.1237 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/655), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (q)     Government Notice No R.1238 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/327), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (r)     Government Notice No R.1239 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No 5/90),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (s)     Government Notice No R.1240 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/67), in terms
        of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (t)     Government Notice No R.1241 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/328), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (u)     Government Notice No R.32 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1399), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (v)     Government Notice No R.33 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1400), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (w)     Government Notice No R.34 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/656),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (x)     Government Notice No R.35 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/329),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (y)     Government Notice No R.126 published in Government Gazette No
        32966 dated 26 February 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1401), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Petition on situation at Unitra Community Radio, submitted in terms
        of Rule 312 (Dr Z Luyenge)

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
        consideration and report.

    (b)     Letter from Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
        on late submission of regulations:

        (i)      A letter dated 8 March 2010 has been received from the
             Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, explaining
             the reasons for the late tabling of regulations made in terms
             of section 97(1) of the Child Justice Act, 2008 (No 75 of
             2008).

Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development for consideration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Energy on the Membership of
   South Africa to the International Renewable Energy Agency, dated 9 March
   2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Energy, having considered the  request  for
      approval by Parliament of  the  Membership  of  South  Africa  to  the
      International Renewable Energy Agency, referred to it, recommends that
      the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the
      said Agreement.

Report to be considered.

