---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 11 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-03-11
---

                           THURSDAY, 11 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

               NO NOTICES OF MOTION OR MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I’ve been
informed that the Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of
motion or motions without notice today. We will now proceed with the
questions as printed on the Question Paper, starting with the questions to
the Deputy President.

However, before we proceed, I would like to bring it to the attention of
the members that Rule 246(4) of the Council Rules provides that no more
than six questions for oral reply may be put to the Minister in respect of
any one government department on any particular day. I hope this will
assist in explaining to members as to why some of their questions do not
appear on the Question Paper.

I now call the Deputy President to respond to the questions. May I, at the
same time, please ask him to use the podium? [Applause.] I ask you to
please bear with me. There might be times when I’ll give the Deputy
President some extra time over the stipulated time, because he will be
answering quite a number of questions.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

    Discussions with National Stakeholder Advisory Council on Electricity
  regarding contingency plan during 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup and details
               relating to plan as well as statement on matter

1.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      (1)   Whether  his  Office  had  any  discussions  with  the  National
            Stakeholder Advisory Council on Electricity and/or the  National
            Electricity Emergency Response Team regarding a contingency plan
            for high electricity demand during the 2010  Fifa  Soccer  World
            Cup tournament; if not, what is the position in this regard;  if
            so, (a) to what extent does such a plan (i)  affect  electricity
            supply and (ii) manage the demand from  the  townships  and  (b)
            what elements of the plan seek to assist poor households in case
            of electricity cuts;


      (2)   whether he will make a statement on the matter?         CO66E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, hon Ntwanambi and hon members, my
office has not had any discussions with the National Stakeholder Advisory
Council on Electricity and the National Electricity Response Team, Nert,
regarding a contingency plan for high electricity demand during the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament. Certainly, in the case of the advisory
council, this matter has not arisen as the structure is mainly preoccupied
with policy issues.

However, through Nert, government has put in place plans to promote energy
efficiency and manage consumption demand. These include: replacing
incandescent lighting with energy-saving lights, which has been completed
in most host cities’ high-density areas and has reduced demand by at least
700 megawatts; supplying solar water heaters to reduce the electricity load
relating to water heating, as part of a 1 million solar water heating
programme; and an investment of R1,2 billion by government over the past
three years in a programme to rehabilitate the host cities’ electricity
distribution infrastructure.

Furthermore, members should note that all stadiums will run on diesel
generators. The electricity grid will serve as backup. Regulations to
regulate or manage the price of liquefied petroleum gas have been
finalised. These aim to assist households to meet their thermal needs of
space heating and cooking.

We are confident that these instruments, among others, will enable the
country to manage electricity consumption demand during the peak winter
period that coincides with the hosting of the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup.
Eskom has also assured us that there will be no power interruptions during
the World Cup. Coal stocks have been replenished and the summer maintenance
programme is running smoothly. Thank you, Deputy Chairperson.

Mr T HARRIS: Chairperson, given the comprehensive set of measures that the
Deputy President has announced, can he give a guarantee to industry or to
Fifa that there won’t be any blackouts during the 2010 Fifa Soccer World
Cup?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, I think we can definitely give the
guarantee that there will be no blackouts unless, of course, a major
natural disaster occurs in this day and age of climate change. We cannot be
more powerful than nature itself, but all man-made problems have been
attended to sufficiently. Thank you.

  Engagement of Presidency with Commission for the Promotion and Protection
 of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities and matters
                              relating thereto

2.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      (1)   Whether the Presidency has any engagement with the (a)
            Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of
            Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities, (b) Moral
            Regeneration Movement and (c) leaders of any (i) political party
            and (ii)(aa) religious and (bb) cultural groupings regarding
            measures that our country can put in place to promote cultural,
            religious and linguistic tolerance among our people; if so, to
            what extent do such measures plan to engage schools as a
            foundation phase for instilling new sets of values in our
            citizens;


      (2)   whether he considers it necessary for our nation to engage in
            such an initiative; if not, what is the position in this regard;
            if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   to what extent does this link up with the proposed debate on our
            national shared moral values by the President and the mandates
            of the cultural, religious and linguistic communities and the
            Moral Regeneration Movement?           CO67E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, hon Ntwanambi,
government has ongoing engagements with many institutions established to
protect and promote culture, language and the religious rights of all South
Africans. Particular attention is given to aspects of culture, language and
religious rights of population groups who previously could not exercise
their rights due to oppressive laws of discrimination.

Also, government continues to engage nongovernmental organisations that
operate in the same space. We find that, challenges notwithstanding,
efforts of government are greatly enhanced by relentless contributions of
public bodies established to promote equality and equity, as well as those
of nongovernmental actors.

As the hon member might be aware, the Moral Regeneration Movement was
established to lead social mobilisation at national and provincial levels
in favour of promoting social values that enhance healthy families and
cohesive communities. This section 21 entity is funded by the Department of
Arts and Culture and boasts professionals, celebrities, religious leaders
and community activists on its board. The highlight of their work is the
adoption and implementation of the Charter of Positive Values that lays the
basis for family, community and national conversations on what constitutes
positive social values. I wish to encourage all members of this House to
support the proliferation of the Charter of Positive Values. Your
constituencies will benefit greatly from such a document.

This, hon members, is in addition to the schools pledge introduced by the
then Education Minister, Ms Naledi Pandor. The schools pledge encourages
learners to embrace, appreciate and promote social values that protect the
integrity of the state, public property, etc. All these measures are meant
to foster social cohesion, the basis of which begins at schools, and in
families and communities where we live.

We do encourage members of this House and all sectors of society to heed
the call by our President, Jacob Zuma, for all South Africans to openly
debate and mould values that characterise a united, nonracial, nonsexist
and prosperous South Africa. This is not meant to be a panacea for all
social ills prevalent in our communities. It does, however, strengthen a
foundation for a tree whose fruits will nourish our children and future
generations.

Finally, the national dialogue that the President has called for is not
meant to supplant other important initiatives of government, civil society
and constitutional bodies; rather, it is meant to complement and support
them. I thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, in terms of the Rules I think the
person who asked the question has got the privilege to ask the first follow-
up question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, I have
looked around, which I am still doing right now, and Mr Watson is not here.
I’ve done that work but I will announce the final decision after we have
finished what we are doing right now.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I thought Mr Sinclair was rising on a
correct point of order. Nevertheless, let me ask a follow-up question.

Sekela-Mongameli, njengoko usitsho - nanjengoko nombuzo wam ubusitsho -
eyona njongo kukuba ekugqibeleni abantwana bethu bashiyeka noMzantsi Afrika
omnye nomanyeneyo njengoko thina sesibadala kwaye sisondele engcwabeni.
Kodwa ke, ndingathanda ukuqonda ukuba ingaba le ndlela urhulumente enza
ngayo phaya phezulu iyenzeka na apha emaphondweni ethu. Ndibuza lo mbuzo
kuba sisenawo amaphondo acinga ukuba aziziqithi. Ndiyabulela. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Deputy President, as you have mentioned and as my question stated, the
main aim is for our children to be left with a legacy of a united South
Africa because we are old and about to die. However, I would like to know
if there is consistency between the national and provincial governments. I
ask this question because we still have provinces that work in isolation
from others. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, I thank the hon member for the
follow-up question. This issue is really the responsibility of all sections
of the South African population. That is why the call is made to all of us
- whatever we are – at all spheres of government to contribute towards the
definition of positive values for our country. This will ensure that we
leave this country on a very firm foundation that will enable future
generations to live far better lives than we do today.

Therefore, as I have already said, all structures throughout the three
spheres ought to contribute towards this national discourse and ensure that
we emerge and shape the values that would keep our nation together. Such
contributions would guarantee that tomorrow will be far better than today
in order for the country to prosper. Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, arising out of the Deputy President’s
response, I would like to ask whether he would argue that the promotion of
mother-tongue education would assist in these values that he just referred
to. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, my answer to the hon member’s
follow-up question is in the affirmative. In fact, our Constitution and
Bill of Rights guarantee the development of all languages. Also, many
educational experts do confirm that instruction in one’s mother tongue,
particularly at the cognitive stage of the development of the child, is far
more effective than if the child were to struggle with its second language
as a medium of instruction.

So, indeed it does contribute to a better understanding of who we are.
Therefore the instruction of the learner who is at the cognitive stage in
his or her mother tongue would shape that particular learner to become a
better South African.

Mr T HARRIS: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to ask whether the Deputy
President does believe that the President’s conduct can affect the
credibility of the national debate on moral values.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to inform the hon
member that I happen to chair the SA National Aids Council, Sanac, and last
week we were doing work in the province of KwaZulu-Natal. In attendance
were the former President of Mozambique, Mr Joaquim Chissano and the former
President of Botswana, Mr Festus Mogae, who shared with us the wisdom of
their years when a question arose as to whether the message of the
President on World Aids Day is undermined by this or that negative report
about his private life.

In response to that, the two wise leaders said that we - as people who are
religious believers - live in a world where even priests from time to time
are found guilty of this or that indiscretion or mistake; and yet we
continue to listen to the Word and the message. When we deal with matters
of such import, nothing but nothing must distract us from understanding the
core of the message

So, I would say such a debate would not be undermined by anything
attributed to the President. I think it is of such importance that none of
us should be distracted by that. However, we should meaningfully engage in
the debate. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Madam Chair, the Deputy President correctly said that in many
cases people do things that may not morally be the right thing to do but we
forgive them and continue to listen to them. I would like to know whether,
through that statement, the Deputy President is indicating to this House
that he agrees that the President’s behaviour has been such that it hasn’t
been morally acceptable and there needs to be forgiveness.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, I think the President actually
made a public apology and that should allow us to focus on the message.
Thank you.
   Measures put in place by government with regard to proposed subsidy to
  employers to limit casualisation of workers and perpetuation of disparity
   between temporary and full-time workers, prevention of exploitation of
 young people for tax benefits and implementation of subsidy for benefit of
                         young people in rural areas

3.    Mr R J Tau (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (a) What measures is the government putting in place  to  ensure  that
      the proposed subsidy to employers does not expand a renewed  focus  on
      casualisation  of  workers  and  perpetuate  the   disparity   between
      temporary workers and those working full-time, (b) to what extent will
      the  government  ensure  that  young  people  employed  through   this
      programme are not exploited for tax  benefits  and  discarded  without
      prospects for long-term employment and (c) how will  this  subsidy  be
      implemented to ensure that it also benefits young people in the  rural
      areas?
      CO69E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, thank you, hon Tau. The design of
the employment subsidy for unemployed young people has not yet been
completed. Before the design is finalised it will be discussed with all
relevant stakeholders to ensure that there are no undesirable and
unintended consequences of the subsidy.

We will certainly seek to avoid casualisation, a dual labour market, or the
cynical exploitation of youth in the implementation of the subsidy. We are
all too aware of the concentration of unemployment in some of our very poor
rural areas, and we will ensure that the subsidy addresses this issue as
far as it is able to do so.

I wish to encourage all stakeholders, social partners, public
representatives and young people, in particular, to constructively engage
with this proposal so that we emerge with the most meaningful youth
employment programme this country has ever experienced. We owe it to our
young people to offer them opportunities to gain occupational competencies
through skills development and work experience. This is what this wage
subsidy proposal seeks to do. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Deputy Chair, thank you, Deputy
President. Taking note of the fact that rural development is a priority of
this government - and I’m quite happy that the design of the employment
subsidy has not been finalised - what I would like to know from the Deputy
President, as a clear statement, is whether the Deputy President would say
to us that one of the key elements central to the design of the employment
subsidy would be a bias towards rural young women in particular. Thank you.


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chair, that is a detail but, as I said, this
is aimed at ensuring that we address this huge challenge of unemployed
youth, particularly from rural communities where there is grinding poverty,
so to speak. The idea is that we should, as far as possible, afford
opportunities to those who otherwise would not be able to lift themselves
out of this cycle of poverty. Of course, the approach is in addition to
some of the interventions that we employ in addressing poverty, because we
believe that education is the key to addressing issues of unemployment and
poverty.

We want to deal with this challenge at a household level in order to ensure
that we don’t have poverty being transmitted from one generation to another
in the same household. We should be able to address that and I can quite
plainly state that, if there are young women who are in this category in
any rural community, they would no doubt receive the necessary attention.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Sekela-Sihlalo, ndingathanda ukuqonda
kuSekela-Mongameli ukuba ingaba le mpendulo ayinike leNdlu ichaphazela
isebe elinye na okanye onke amasebe karhulumente? Kwaye njengoko sithetha
ngophuhliso lwasemaphandleni, ingaba le nto iza kuwachaphazela ngakumbi na
amaphondo ngoba olu phuhliso silufuna phaya kanye ezilalini. (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to know
from the Deputy President if the response he gave this House affects only
one department or all government departments. Again, as we talk about rural
development, will this have a negative impact on the provinces because we
need this development mostly in rural areas?]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chair, indeed with the approach that we
employ, as I said, the focus is on households and there are areas where
we’ve already piloted this approach whereby we go into each and every
household to get its profile and we believe that once we are able to
identify one or two potential change agents in that household we then
ensure that they receive support from the various departments. If I had
time, I would share with you some of the positive experiences arising out
of this approach.

Most of the difficulties that face our people in rural areas sometimes are
problems that admit to resolution just through the sharing of information
and can be addressed almost immediately. We believe that by co-ordinating
government interventions, it’s possible to assist a household so that the
next generation never finds itself mired in poverty in the same way as the
current generation by simply identifying those with potential to be
assisted to lift that household. If it’s people who have dropped out of
school, we persuade them and get them to go back to school, monitor them
and support them whilst other interventions from the various government
departments are brought to bear as well. Thank you.

Mr T HARRIS: Deputy Chair, if I may ask the Deputy President, the Budget
documentation that announced the way the subsidy is referred to in the
question is accompanied by two other interventions under the section of
interventions in the youth labour market. The first is regulatory reform
covering the probationary period to reduce the cost associated with
determining a young worker’s productive potential and the second one is
minimum wage reform to align productivity in wages for young workers.

I understand the actual wage subsidies being investigated by Treasury, but
which departments are responsible for the investigation and implementation
of those other two interventions and what are the timeframes associated
with their introduction?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: In Cabinet there is a special Inter-Ministerial
Cabinet Committee, IMCC, established to investigate the various aspects of
this intervention and that naturally would include Economic Development,
Labour and it would also include Trade and Industry. That’s the IMCC that
would investigate the various aspects so that by the time we implement we
should have looked at all potential challenges and obstacles towards a
smooth implementation. Thank you.

 Government’s position with regard to statement by Zulu King on 23 February
     2010 regarding circumcision of men as a means of combating HIV/Aids

4.    Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      What is the government’s position on the statement made by the Zulu
      King in his address to the KwaZulu-Natal legislature on 23 February
      2010, that all men be circumcised as a means of combating HIV/Aids?
                                              CO71E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, hon Lees, government welcomes the
statement of His Majesty King Zwelithini which calls for the broadening of
medical male circumcision as one of the measures to combat HIV infection.
We also welcome efforts by the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, Dr Zweli Mkhize,
who - working with his provincial Cabinet - has mobilised traditional
leaders in the province to rally behind His Majesty’s call that young men
should undergo medical male circumcision to complement the ABC message to
prevent new infections. But, hon members will ask: Why this approach?

Strong evidence from clinical trials undertaken in South Africa - at Orange
Farm in Gauteng province - Kenya and Uganda have demonstrated that males
who are circumcised have close to 60% less chance of acquiring HIV during
sexual intercourse. This means that medical male circumcision is partially
protective, and should be promoted as part of a comprehensive package of
preventive activities. Already, the World Health Organisation and the
United Nations programme on HIV/Aids, UNAIDS, are promoting this
intervention based on scientific evidence.

Accordingly, government has decided to include medical male circumcision in
the basket of HIV-prevention interventions. Other measures include HIV
counselling and testing - knowing one’s status helps to influence behaviour
change - sexual and reproductive health education and advocacy for
consistent condom use as well as the management of sexually transmitted
infections. All these initiatives complement our message to young people in
general - abstaining, being faithful and condomising.

Finally, I am pleased to inform this House that the SA National Aids
Council, Sanac, is finalising clinical protocols and auditing health
facilities to assess their readiness to provide medical male circumcisions
as demand is rising, which is already the case in KwaZulu-Natal. However,
this demand is being managed, thanks to the support of nongovernmental
organisations and the Department of Health’s integrated service delivery
model. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Madam Deputy Chairperson, could the Deputy President tell us
whether it is not possible that government’s support for widespread male
circumcision will lead to an increase in the already high death toll
associated with male circumcision.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, my response to the follow-up
question asked by hon Lees is in the negative. This will not increase any
deaths. Last week on Thursday, I went to visit one of the sites in KwaZulu-
Natal, which is a clinic in KwaCaluza in uMgungundlovu, Pietermaritzburg,
where a team of doctors from Malaysia were training health personnel. They
have invented a simple device which makes this a really painless operation.
They insert the device, and it trims exactly where it is supposed to.
[Laughter.] The person who is being circumcised keeps the device inserted
and after three days or so that particular person is completely healed.

I’m also pleased to share with the House that at the same clinic there was
also a delegation from the Eastern Cape sharing experiences and learning
this new method. I must say that the method - I myself observed it - is
totally painless. A person who is circumcised through this method is able
to urinate and go to work, as long as he keeps that little device in for
three days or so. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to say I agree with the
Deputy President. For example, I have a five-year-old boy who went through
that process. It’s harmless. On the second day my boy was up and running.
Therefore, I agree with the Deputy President.

In fact I will agree with any measure that will curb this scourge of HIV.
However - you will agree with me, Deputy President - it will remain the
responsibility of everybody in the House to see to it that this type of
enemy never catches up with himself or herself. Does the Deputy President
agree with that? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, yes, I agree that in fact
prevention and prevention and prevention is the answer. That is why the
message of the SA National Aids Council, Sanac, on World Aids Day was “I am
responsible”. Thank you.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Deputy Deputy Chairperson, could the Deputy President
say whether government has any evidence that all men who died of HIV/Aids
weren’t circumcised? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Chairperson, my response to the hon
member’s follow-up question is in the negative. I don’t think we did any
such research. However, the research that I’m referring to is research
which, as I said earlier, was conducted in Uganda and also here in South
Africa in the Orange Farm community to assess the value of circumcision
towards prevention. Of course, it doesn’t totally eliminate the risk, but
at least it reduces the risk by 60%. That is what the World Health
Organisation and UNAIDS have been able to establish. That is also the
message that the champions are spreading.

It is for this reason that we really thank and appreciate the leadership of
His Majesty King Zwelithini because the Zulu nation has not been
circumcising for a period of 200 years. However, because of the gravity of
this problem that we are dealing with, the Zulu nation, under the
leadership of His Majesty, has decided that they would now do it in order
to assist in the country’s response to this epidemic. Thank you.

Mnu R A LEES: Sekela-Sihlalo, ngiyabonga kakhulu, ngibonge noSekela
Mongameli ukuthi le ndlela ezokwenziwa ngeke ilimaze muntu kodwa ngiyacela
ukuba ngiphinde lokhu ngesiNgisi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Mr R A LEES: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. I would also like to
thank the Deputy President because the measures to be followed are not
going to harm anyone. Can I please repeat this in English?]

Could the Deputy President tell us whether the government has put measures
in place to protect men from being coerced or forced by traditional leaders
or others to be circumcised against their will. This has been reported to
be the case in the past. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, well, this is like all other
aspects of a voluntary process. People do experience deaths; if not in
their families, in their communities. I think there is an understanding and
acceptance that whatever measure is necessary to prevent this epidemic from
spreading any further and taking more lives, they will subject themselves
to that.

I’m not aware that there is coercion on anybody. When I was in KwaCaluza
the queue was very, very long. These were people who had come willingly and
freely without coercion. I didn’t see anyone being escorted there. Thank
you.

      Details regarding Deputy President’s statement that no political
          organisation will be allowed to disrupt school activities

5.    Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether, with reference to his statements that no political
            organisation will be allowed to disrupt school activities, any
            action has been taken to ensure that this does not occur; if
            not, why not; if so, what action;

      (2)   whether any action has been taken against any organisation which
            has disrupted school activities subsequent to this statement; if
            not, why not; if so, (a) what action and (b) what are the
            further relevant details?                    CO83E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson and hon Worth, yes, clause 9 of
the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill that will be tabled this year seeks
to amend the SA Schools Act, Sasa, of 1996 by prohibiting noneducational
activities during school time.

The Bill further supplements the regulation for safety measures at public
schools that create a framework for political office bearers and public
representatives to have a right to visit public schools in the interests of
public accountability. Although these regulations specify that such a visit
may not disrupt the school, the proposed amendment makes matters tighter by
stipulating that the teaching time of learners may only be used for
educational activities.

Political organisations whose members visit schools may, therefore, not
disrupt teaching and learning during regulated hours. I’m not aware of any
action that has been taken against any organisation as yet. The amendments
to the law that I have spoke about will, once passed, empower authorities
to take action against those robbing our youth of their valuable learning
time.

Let me conclude by saying that this is not a matter of law; it’s a
violation of effectiveness. It is a matter of society in general and
stakeholders in particular to value and protect the inalienable right of
learners to access quality education without interruption. We owe this to
our children and future generations. Let us not disappoint them. I thank
you.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Deputy
President for his reply. I am very pleased to see that this clause 9 is
going to come into operation because two political organisations – and I
would like your comment on that, Deputy President – have been active
throughout the country at schools disrupting scholars during the period of
learning. I’m going to mention the organisations; one is the SACP and the
other one is the ANC Youth League under the leadership of one Mr Julius
Malema. It has been reported on in a lot of papers. I would like your
comments on that. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to thank hon Worth.
The message and plea has been very clear since 2009 - that teachers must be
at school, on time and teaching. At the beginning of this year, three
teacher federations issued a joint statement committing themselves to doing
that. We now focus on the learners themselves and the school management
teams to ensure that they should never ever allow anyone to disrupt
learning.

With regard to these organisations you have alluded to, I know that the ANC
Youth League president, for instance, went to a school in Westonaria. I
went to the meeting of the national executive committee, NEC, of the ANC
Youth League. I said to them that no one is allowed to disrupt learning,
and that we will not make any exception to that rule under any
circumstances.

The account they gave me was that, indeed, they also commit that they shall
never disrupt learning. The account they gave for their visit to Westonaria
was that the school was in a totally chaotic state on the day they went
there. The principal of the school apparently reported for work at 10:00.
He only rolled into the schoolyard at 10:00. The teachers pleaded with him
to get the learners to settle down and learn because they were, from the
account, jumping on desks and so on. So I said to them that that must be
the very last time they go and play that kind of role. If there is any need
to motivate any learner, they should do that on a Saturday, not during
school hours.

So there is a commitment to that end. I am not aware of the SACP visiting
any schools to disrupt any learning at any time, but I can speak about the
ANCYL in the specific instance when they visited a school in Westonaria. I
can account for that because I did engage them on it. Thank you.

Mr W F FABER: Madam Deputy Chair, I would like to thank the Deputy
President. I’m so glad to see that at least the Deputy President has teeth
for Mr Malema.

I would like to know if we, as Members of Parliament, when visiting schools
in our constituency work to see if we can help the schools that struggle,
also fall under this. We are not actually disrupting, but are trying to
help. We do visit schools when doing constituency work to hear where we, as
Members of Parliament, specifically the Select Committee on Education and
Recreation, can perhaps help and find out where these schools have
problems. The school principals do appreciate seeing us coming to visit and
to see where we can help and assist them. I would like to know. Thank you,
Mr Deputy President.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, yes, the Act will allow for
political office bearers and public representatives to visit schools. Of
course it will tighten up this matter very clearly - that no disruption of
learning must ever take place. So whatever you are going to deliver, or if
you are being allowed by the school management team to teach for one
session, that’s a horse of a different colour. But if you are going there
just to supervise and so on, there should be no such disruption whatsoever.
That is why we insist that any other intervention must take place outside
of the hours of learning. Thank you.

Mr W F FABER: Madam Deputy Chair, I would like to ask the Deputy President
if he would agree with me that, in the event where certain MPs go to visit
schools and certain teacher unions disallow them entrance to their
organisations, the teacher unions don’t have the authority to disallow them
to visit schools.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, the authority at any school lies
with the school’s management team. That is the body that is properly
authorised to manage the school. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Madam Deputy Chairperson, let me thank the Deputy President
for the intervention at Westonaria. That is great. With regard to the
principal who was delinquent, may I ask if any action has been taken
against him to correct his behaviour or implement whatever corrective
measures are needed.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, the hon member will recall that
this is a school that suffered when that community was resisting fiercely
its transfer into the North West province. Schoolchildren were used in that
regard. Therefore, it’s a school that needs to be mentored, including the
principal.

I do know that the Department of Basic Education sends mentors to assist
those kinds of principals to restore order in the schools because some of
the best performing schools are schools that are well managed, where the
principals keep time and lead by example. Indeed, that was reported to the
Gauteng provincial MEC for education. Thank you.

         Undertaking of lifestyle audit and details relating thereto

6.    Mr D B Feldman (Cope) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether the government will ensure that a lifestyle audit of  all  (a)
      Cabinet members, (b) Deputy Ministers, (c) directors-general  and  (d)
      directors is undertaken in  order  to  assuage  the  disquiet  of  the
      citizens regarding the  unexplained  wealth  of  persons  high  up  in
      government; if not, why not; if so, how is the government planning  to
      drive    this    so    that    public    confidence    is    restored?
                                  CO88E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chairperson, members will have to bear with me
– this is a rather longish reply. I would like to thank hon Feldman for the
question.

As hon members are aware, Ministers and Deputy Ministers are required, in
terms of the code of ethics for Members of Parliament and the Executive
Members Ethics Act and code, to disclose details of their financial
interests, assets and gifts received. Senior public servants from the level
of director upwards are required to do the same in terms of the Public
Service Regulations.

I am sure that you are aware that violations of the parliamentary code are
handled by Parliament and have been dealt with effectively in the past.
Complaints against violations of the executive ethics code can also be
dealt with by the Public Protector.

As I reported in the National Assembly last week, the SA Revenue Service
conducts investigations of people who appear to be living beyond their
means. These investigations start on the basis of information obtained from
various sources, including the Sars anticorruption and fraud hotline, the
income tax returns a taxpayer submits to Sars and reports of suspicious
activity from members of the public.

A lifestyle questionnaire is one method of obtaining information from a
taxpayer and, together with other information sources, assists Sars in
matching the lifestyle trends, income streams and the asset base of a
taxpayer to what has been declared in an income tax return. The accumulated
wealth has to be explained by the taxpayer for tax purposes. Any
unexplained wealth is taxed.

The Compliance and Risk Unit within Sars conducts the risk analysis of
taxpayer information. If there is a mismatch between what the taxpayer has
declared and what Sars has found, the case is referred for an audit.

If it is confirmed that the taxpayer has evaded tax, penalties are levied,
interest is charged and additional tax of up to 200% of the evaded tax is
charged. Depending on the circumstances, the case may then be handed to
Sars’ criminal investigation department which then engages the SA Police
Service and the Specialised Tax Unit for criminal prosecution within the
National Prosecuting Authority.

More than 10 000 – in fact, to be precise, 17 420 – such audits have been
conducted by Sars over the past two years.
The Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act of 2004 also
provides for an investigation into a person who appears to own property
disproportionate to their income. This is in addition to the stringent
Financial Intelligence Centre Act, Fica, requirements that compel
individuals to disclose sources of income when they make large financial
transactions.

In light of the above, Cabinet is not considering lifestyle audits for
Ministers, Deputy Ministers and senior public servants, as there are
already appropriate measures in place.

Deputy Chairperson, hon members of this august House, each and every one of
us has a duty as public representatives to ensure that members of the
public and our constituencies are aware of the regulatory framework
designed to deter corruption. However, and more importantly, it is
necessary that, as public representatives, we inform the public about all
the means available to them as citizens to bring to the attention of the
authorities any information that they might have that will bring to book
anybody involved in corrupt activities of any kind. The more our people
know about these measures and the more we exercise oversight as Parliament,
or the NCOP, the better we will be able to restore public confidence as
mentioned by the hon member. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Madam Deputy Chair, in a lighter vein, I think the Deputy
President referred to Parliament and the NCOP. Well, the NCOP is part of
Parliament.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, I know. Parliament is the NA and the NCOP.

Mr R A LEES: Thank you, sir. We sometimes feel as if we are sidelined. I am
sorry, Madam Deputy Chair, I am out of order. Please rule me out of order.

Hon Deputy President, you are absolutely right about Sars’ mandate on
lifestyle audits. That is absolutely true. Nevertheless, there is a
requirement by law for us in this House and the other House to make certain
declarations.

Now, if those declarations are made untruthfully, is there then no
requirement on either our own political parties or somebody, other than
Sars, to establish the veracity of that information?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Chair, to the best of my knowledge, once
members have made their declarations, one can click on the website to check
that and, if one is in any doubt, yes indeed, the matter should be raised.

In the past, Parliament has dealt with many such cases. Members’ salaries
have been docked. If Parliament is merciful, a member may lose a week’s
earnings for not declaring interests fully.

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Madam Deputy Chair, I would like to ask the Deputy
President whether any political party or any individual, particularly those
advocating a lifestyle audit, has made any indication to the President or
any structures of government about their problems with the existing
mechanisms, such as the asset disclosures for members. The impression must
not be created that there are no mechanisms, as the Deputy President has
clearly outlined them. There are also sanctions that are specified for
nondisclosure.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Chair, with all due respect, I missed
essential parts of the question. Could the member perhaps please speak into
the microphone?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Actually, hon member, I
was about to ask you to please use your microphone; a recording is being
done.

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Madam Deputy Chair, the question was whether there are
any individuals or political parties who have indicated that they have
problems with the current mechanisms.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chair, not that I am aware of. I don’t think
there is any political party or individual that has indicated unhappiness
about existing measures. Of course, the general secretary of Cosatu has
experienced what is called, in biblical language, “epiphanies”. He has made
a discovery of the term “lifestyle audit” and I don’t think he was aware
that this was, in fact, being conducted all along. He has also not told the
general public which body should conduct such lifestyle audits. He seems to
be suggesting that perhaps The Star or Cape Argus newspapers or something
like that should do it. [Laughter.]

We are legislators. We must find measures that are enforceable by law by a
properly authorised agency or body of state. Thank you.

Mr O DE BEER: Deputy Chair, the Deputy President has mentioned that a
member might lose a week’s income for nondisclosure of interest. I want to
know from the Deputy President whether this question of penalties issued
due to nondeclaration of interests is also going to apply to the Head of
State, because the perception outside is that some of us are above the law.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chair, the law applies to all of us, right
from the President down to ordinary citizens. As I have said, if there is
any omission, the Public Protector is properly authorised to investigate
the matter and produce a report and, on the basis of that report, the House
can ...
Of course, remember that the President is not a Member of Parliament; he is
the First Citizen of the country. Thank you.

Mr T HARRIS: Deputy Chair, I would like to ask the Deputy President if the
various admirable measures outlined failed to resolve the situation where a
company owned by the ANC Youth League president has been granted more than
R140 million worth of tenders for government building projects in Limpopo,
despite the fact that the company complied with neither the required tax
nor building regulations. Will any further action be taken by him, in line
with the action that he took against the relevant organisation when they
were disrupting school lessons that he reported on earlier? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chair, the answer is no because there are
properly authorised agencies and bodies that deal with these kinds of
matters. Tenders that are adjudicated upon by municipalities and so on have
to be handled by the relevant agencies and bodies, and if there is
something untoward, it will be handled by them. If we jump in by getting
involved in such matters we may cause a stampede. The only way in which the
President or I can be involved is by referring such matters to the relevant
state organ for investigation and progression. Thank you.

Mr B NESI: Deputy Chair, I wonder whether the Deputy President thinks it
strange that hon Feldman is also concerned about the lifestyle audit of
Ministers and directors-general, when, not so long ago, his own president
was fined and reprimanded by Parliament for not disclosing his directorship
of a company when he was a Minister? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Deputy Chair, I think that is a comment I don’t have
to respond to, as it is not a question. [Applause.]

         DIGRESSION FROM ORIGINAL QUESTIONS APPEARING ON ORDER PAPER

                              (Point of Order)

Mr Z MLENZANA: Hon Deputy Chairperson, it is just that I didn’t want to
disturb the proceedings when the Deputy President of the country was
responding to these questions. I felt that when he was done I would rise
and raise this point of order that perhaps all of us, members and the
Chairperson who is presiding could observe the original questions as raised
on the paper, avoiding digression, because hon members come up with follow-
up questions where you’ll find a situation in which they’re bringing in
questions that are totally new and not part of what was originally on the
paper. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Mlenzana, thanks
for that. I did notice that, but I thought I would talk to all members
after the session. Thank you.

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  Cluster 1

MINISTERS:

    Details relating to charges brought against police members, impact of
 nature of charges on ability of police to fight crime and proposals put in
  place to eliminate legal and policy areas that hinder police’s ability to
                                 fight crime

1.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:

      (1)   (a) How many (i) charges have been brought against police
            members by members of the public during the period 1 January
            2005 up to 28 February 2010, (ii) were resolved and (iii) are
            still outstanding, (b) what amount has been paid by his
            department in civil claims for cases involving police members
            during the same period and (c) what is the nature of charges
            that were brought against police members;


      (2)   whether the nature of charges brought hamper the ability of
            police members in the fight against crime; if not, what is the
            position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether he has put any proposals in place to eliminate any legal
            and policy areas that hinder the police’s ability to fight
            against crime; if not, why not; if so, what proposals?
                                              CO58E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Chairperson, the last time we were
together here in this august House, there was a question about the police
station in Gingindlovu. So, I just got some feedback here about what the
hon member Gamede raised about the shortage of vehicles and so on. It had
been attended to. Thanks for that feedback. [Applause.]

Well, hon Ntwanambi, in December 2009, I instructed that a full audit of
all criminal charges and convictions relating to police officials be
conducted. As the hon member would understand, this audit needs to be
comprehensive and as accurate as possible. I would ask the member to wait
for the completion of this audit after which I will make a full comment on
the issue.

The commission of any act which may also constitute a criminal offence is
considered exclusion under the conditions of employment. As I explained
earlier, I instructed that a full audit be conducted. Whenever legal and
policy impediments in this regard are identified, steps are taken to
rectify shortcomings, for example, the Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development has been requested to consider introducing
legislation in Parliament pertaining to the use of lethal force by a police
official to align legislation in line with the earlier judgment of the
Constitutional Court. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Deputy Chairperson and hon Minister, firstly, I am
very appreciative of the full audit that you’re asking for, but I have a
concern inasmuch as in every case where a police member has been taken or
been suspended for misconduct, that case must go as far as the courts. The
police can only defend those cases in court. Is that the right procedure
from what I understand?

Secondly, could changes be made so that the case does not have to go to
court in order for us to save money in this regard?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Chairperson, each case will be taken
on its own merit. There are purely disciplinary matters that do not
eventually reach the courts, but there are those which are of a criminal
nature that inevitably have to reach the courts. Perhaps what would help us
is to look at each case on its own merits and demerits. Thank you.

     Number of SA Police Service members arrested and jailed for crimes
   committed while on duty and outside their duties, and nature of crimes

2.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:

      (a) What is the total number of the SA Police Service members who were
      (i) arrested and (ii) jailed for crimes they committed while on duty
      and outside their duties during the period 1 January 2005 up to 28
      February 2010 and (b) what is the nature of crimes they committed?
                                  CO59E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Chairperson, the second question is linked
to the first question, which the hon member agreed to wait for when we
started. The third question is the question by hon Makhubela.

Deputy Chairperson, the 1995 judgment in the case of the State v Makwanyane
by Justice Chaskalson has been further clarified by the Constitutional
Court in 2002 in the judgment of Ex parte Minister of Safety and Security
and others in relation to Walters and Another.

The SA Police Service abides by the judgment of the Constitutional Court in
the latter case. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, this is based on the second question. You
can respond to it together with the other questions. Minister, on the
second one, I am sure that you will agree that you can never call a person
who is a criminal in a blue uniform a policeman. That person is not fit to
be in the service. What I am saying is that you as a Minister must conduct
an investigation to find out if some of them have not infiltrated the force
to push their own dirty agendas and call themselves the police. You will
agree with that, Minister. This is the question. Here’s the chairperson
now, sitting next to me.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Chair, yes, I agree.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, you seem to
be jumping around. The Minister had answered the questions that were posed.
Now you have jumped to another one. Yes, you have done that. If you want
any clarity, can you hold on? I will give you the correct answer. No, Mr
Bloem. Can we proceed?

Mr D V BLOEM: I don’t ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): With all due respect,
hon Bloem, please, just for a second, pay heed. I will come back to you.
Minister, have you answered all your questions? Thank you very much.

 Number of prisoners getting ARV treatment in prisons, reasons for prisoners
  that are clinically supposed to be getting ARVs but are not, and steps to
                    expand distribution of ARVs in prison

3.    Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (1)   What is the total number of prisoners who are getting
            antiretroviral, ARV, treatment in prisons across South Africa;


      (2)   whether there are any prisoners that are clinically supposed to
            be getting ARVs but are not; if so, what are the reasons for
            them not getting the ARVs;

      (3)   whether her department will take any steps to expand the
            distribution of ARVs in prisons; if not, why not; if so, what
            steps?                                                  CO60E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS (on behalf of the Minister of
Correctional Services): Deputy Chair, the Minister of Correctional Services
is the former Minister of Home Affairs, so I stand in as her Deputy
whenever she is unavailable. [Laughter.]

Hon Ntwanambi, the total number of inmates on antiretroviral drugs, ARVs,
at the end of the last quarter of 2009, was 7 038, distributed as follows:
KwaZulu-Natal had 2 361; Gauteng had 2 119; Limpopo, Mpumalanga and North
West together had 1 023; the Eastern Cape had 567; Free State and Northern
Cape had 542; and the Western Cape had 426.

There were 1 380 inmates on the ARV-readiness programme at the end of the
last quarter of 2009. These are inmates who are eligible for treatment and
who are undergoing the treatment-readiness programme by meeting with
treatment counsellors for individual information sessions or treatment, by
understanding the importance of adherence to treatment and of attending all
scheduled pretreatment visits.

There is no prescribed period for the frequency of counselling sessions.
This is dependent upon the individual patient’s acceptance of his or her
HIV status, and their readiness and understanding of the implications of
antiretroviral therapy, ART. The minimum is one session per week for two
weeks, to monitor compliance and adherence to Cotrimoxazole treatment.
Inmates are placed on Cotrimoxazole preventive therapy, CPT, to prevent
opportunistic infections such as pneumocystis carinii, pneumonia,
meningitis, skin infections and candidiasis.

They attend information and education sessions on nutrition, positive
living, support groups, discussions about the drugs and possible side
effects as well as the importance of reporting side effects. These sessions
are presented by various professionals, such as professional nurses, social
workers, treating clinicians, dieticians and others.

Inmates then undergo a final treatment-readiness assessment as determined
by the treating health care professionals.

On the third question, the department is taking steps to expand the
distribution of ARVs in correctional centres, in line with the presidential
mandate announced on 1 December 2009.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Harris, what is it?

Mr T HARRIS: Deputy Chairperson, it’s a request for clarity: I would like
to confirm whether Ministers are allowed to delegate their responsibility
to answer questions to any other Minister in the Cabinet?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Read your Rules, hon
member.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS (on behalf of the Minister of
Correctional Services): Deputy Chairperson, if I may proceed?

In conclusion, the department is in the process of conducting an assessment
to determine the readiness of health facilities to expand the distribution
of ART in line with the national Department of Health’s guidelines.

Readiness is determined in terms of the availability of suitable structures
and equipment; the availability of professional nurses with a primary
health care qualification and with a dispensing certificate; the
availability of pharmacists to procure and distribute the ARVs; the
availability of dieticians to conduct nutritional assessments and recommend
appropriate supplementation; the availability of ARV drugs in accordance
with the new drug regimens of the Department of Health guidelines; and the
training of all health professionals on the new treatment guidelines and
the HIV and Aids counselling and testing policy.

It is anticipated that the assessment process will be conducted by the end
of March 2010. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chair, I would like to ask if the circumcision facility
will also be made available to male prisoners.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS (on behalf of the Minister of
Correctional Services): Deputy Chairperson, this is a new matter that has
been raised. As we have indicated, the department will comply with the
guidelines set up by the Department of Health. If the Department of Health
introduces that guideline, the Department of Correctional Services will
comply.

    Instilling values of constitutionality, patriotism, loyalty, dignity,
    professionalism, accountability, acceptable code of conduct and unit
   cohesion in members of SA National Defence Force, and details regarding
                         written curriculum followed

5.    Mr M W Makhubela (Cope) asked the Minister of Defence and Military
    Veterans:

    (1)    Whether, with reference to her strategic business plan for the
            period 2009 to 2011, her department began to infuse persons in
            the forces with values of constitutionality, patriotism,
            loyalty, dignity, professionalism, accountability, acceptable
            code of conduct and unit cohesion so that the SA National
            Defence Force could become a stalwart in the defence of our
            constitutional democracy; if not, why not; if so, (a) how was
            this done, (b) who was leading the initiative and (c) how
            successful has the initiative been thus far;

    (2)    whether there was any written curriculum being followed; if not,
            what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the
            relevant details?                                  CO54E

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Chair, thank you very
much for adjusting the temperature to deal with people like me.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): We’re sorry about that.
We are always freezing in this room.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Thank you. Deputy
Chairperson, in answer to the question, I’d like to state that the values
of constitutionality, patriotism, loyalty, dignity, professionalism and
accountability are instilled in all members of the SA National Defence
Force from the day that they enrol in the service.

That which differentiates a soldier from any other service are these
values. What is central to the whole ethos of the Defence Force is embodied
in the oath taken by each member and reinforced at each and every official
function. And for the benefit of the House, I just want to read some of the
elements of the oath, which we are very proud of. It says:


  I pledge to serve and defend my country and its people in accordance with
  the Constitution and the law and with honour, dignity, courage and
  integrity.


  I serve in the SANDF with loyalty and pride, as a citizen and a
  volunteer.


  I will treat all people fairly and respect their rights and dignity at
  all times, regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, religion, culture,
  language or sexual orientation.


  I will not abuse my authority, position or public funds for personal
  gain, political motive or any other reason.


I think these are very commendable elements in our code of conduct, and I
would suggest that perhaps some of the Ministers here could enforce the
same code of conduct for their services.

However, I read the oath in part response to the question that was asked by
the hon member. Through the basic training, education is instilled and
enforced through the command and control of the Defence Force.
Specifically, there is a military responsibility for the Chief of the
Defence Force, in terms of the Defence Act, to ensure that the training of
members ensures that at all times they act in accordance with the
Constitution and the law.

The strategic plan for 2009-11 builds on these basic foundations and
emphasises the role of continuous education in the Defence Force to ensure
that at all times our soldiers are seized with these values to carry out
their role with distinction and pride.

Very specifically, in response to part (1)(a) of the question, the
requisite training is done through basic military training, which is done
over a period of six months for every member of the Defence Force at the
point at which they enter the Defence Force.

The answer to part (1)(b) of the question is the following. The leader of
the initiative, as prescribed by the law, is the Chief of the SA National
Defence Force and he is overseen by the Minister through the secretariat.
Part (1)(c) of the question asks how successful the initiative has been.
Well, last year’s incident on the grounds of the Union Buildings will
indicate that continuous training is necessary in ensuring that, at all
times, a soldier is a disciplined, dignified stalwart in defence of our
democracy. We are prioritising this in our current strategy, supported by
all the relevant mechanisms of redress.

In reply to part (2) of the question: yes, we have a written curriculum
that is available to the member to investigate and peruse. Thank you.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Deputy Chairperson, I welcome the response that the
Minister gave. I would like the Minister to take the House into her
confidence with respect to the morale and wellbeing of the forces after the
unfortunate scene on the grounds of the Union Buildings.

Secondly - and provided this is not a new question - I would like to ask to
what extent the matter has been resolved with respect to the research that
was done by the commission. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: The hon member would like me
to take the House into my confidence, and I will endeavour to do so to the
extent that it is possible without breaching current procedures which are
before the courts right now.

The morale of the soldiers, I believe, is probably as good as we can have
it in the Defence Force. When we got into the Defence Force, as this new
administration, we were aware of a simmering unhappiness especially over
the conditions of service and the salaries of soldiers. This I committed
myself to attending to when I addressed the National Assembly on the
occasion of the presentation of my Budget Vote to the National Assembly,
and I committed myself to attending to the matter of the Defence Force.

I also committed to the Defence Force that we would create a different
environment for the Defence Force that was conducive to the maximum
utilisation of personnel and ensuring that we have the kind of discipline
that we require of the Defence Force.

We have subsequently established a defence military commission. The
commission has concluded its first phase, which is to recommend to us what
we can do about the conditions of service in the Defence Force. In the
first week of December they handed their recommendations to us, which were
given to the President as Commander in Chief. We have since accepted the
recommendations and increased the salaries of the soldiers, in some cases
almost threefold. By the time our soldiers went on their Christmas holiday,
they were probably happier than most Members of Parliament.

We are extremely grateful that the commission could do this, because it
made it possible for us to redress a problem that probably had been
simmering for years in the Defence Force.

With regard to what has happened to those members who showed the ultimate
ill discipline, we have taken the necessary disciplinary steps and the
matter is before the courts. Thank you.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Thank you, Chair. On a lighter note, Minister, it has been
mentioned in the newspapers that most of the soldiers and the police are
overweight. I would like to know if there is any programme in progress. How
will you address that? Thank you, Minister.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I note that this is a new question, but
the Minister will guide us as to whether she is prepared to answer that
question.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Between the Minister of
Defence and Military Veterans and the Minister of Police I think we are
very good representatives of what we believe in. [Laughter.] Do you want me
to say any more? [Laughter.] Thank you.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Thank you, Chairperson and Minister. After this question
was answered so fully I was so happy. But I wanted the Minister to mention
who asked the question because that was not mentioned. [Laughter.] Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Okay. Thank you very much. I take it
that that is a side comment.
Mr K A SINCLAIR: Thank you, Chairperson. It seems that there is a change in
guard also in this House now.

I just want to ask the Minister, in terms of the code of conduct and the
values she referred to, if she believes that there is still a sense of
purpose for unions in the army.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Minister, obviously that is a new
question, but I will check with you first, Minister, whether you are
prepared to take the question. If not, that’s fine.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Chairperson, if you will
allow me, I want to get back to Mr Makhubela of Cope in Limpopo and give
him my sincerest apologies. I did overlook this matter, and I thank him for
the question. It gave me the possibility to explain the code of conduct of
the Defence Force. It allowed me to say all those good things about the
Defence Force. My sincerest gratitude goes to you, hon member.

On the matter of the unions, I think that I would like the opportunity to
come back to this House on that matter, specifically because it is not a
follow-up question on the issues that we have dealt with right now. I have
expressed myself publicly on the matter, but I would like the opportunity,
with your permission, to come back to respond to that in full. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Chair, I am not quite satisfied with this meeting
at all, because I don’t think that the Minister of Police answered
Questions 4, 8, 9 and 12. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is that a follow-up question?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: No, I am asking where we are going, because I thought
we were ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): We are dealing with ... We are
currently ... Can I bring you up to speed?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Are we doing the questions in numerical order?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): We have just dealt with Question 5
asked by the hon Makhubela to the Minister of Defence and Military
Veterans. And now I was taking the last follow-up question to the Minister.
If there is none, then let’s go to the next question on the Question Paper,
which is Question 6, asked by the hon Makhubela to the Minister of Justice
and Constitutional Development.

 Details regarding establishment of accessible and affordable court system,
                        and details relating thereto

6.    Mr M W Makhubela (Cope) asked the Minister of Justice and
      Constitutional Development:


      Whether his department succeeded in establishing an accessible and
      affordable court system that will allow ordinary people who have been
      removed from the major urban areas to access justice quickly and
      easily; if not, when will a court system that will deliver a faster
      and easier resolution of cases be established; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                            CO55E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson,
I would like to thank the hon Makhubela for posing a question which is
going to allow me to give quite a lengthy reply on the work done by the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development. I wish to advise the
hon member that the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
has made considerable progress in establishing an accessible and affordable
court system that allows ordinary people, who have been removed from the
major urban areas, to access justice quickly and easily.

The current court system is based on the 366 magisterial districts which
are largely based on the pre-1994 court system in terms of which better
resourced and well-equipped courts were established in cities and affluent
areas. Rural areas and former black townships were served by underresourced
and poorly equipped branch courts. The following are the programmes
undertaken by the department to address this legacy of the apartheid court
system: Firstly, we want the rationalisation and redemarcation of the
magisterial districts to be consistent with our current constitutional
dispensation. This programme seeks to rationalise and align magisterial
districts to be consistent with the provincial and municipal dispensation.

The outcome of this exercise is to ensure that there is at least one
magistrate’s court for every municipality. For bigger municipalities, two
or more seats of the magistrate’s court will be established. Every
magistrate’s court and every seat of a magistrate in each of the 287
municipal areas will be adequately resourced and capacitated to meet the
needs of communities.

Preliminary consultations within the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security
cluster have taken place and recommendations have been drafted, which will
be published soon for public comments. Thereafter, the Minister will
proclaim the new rationalised areas of jurisdiction of the magistrates’
courts. As part of this programme, the department continues to build new
courts in municipalities and rural villages that had none previously. The
department will also upgrade the existing infrastructure in some of these
areas.

Courts that have been recently completed in rural areas include Ekangala
Magistrate’s Court, while the construction of new courts in Ntuzuma and
Katlehong is under way.

Secondly, we want to upgrade current branch courts to full service courts.
Branch courts were mainly designed to provide criminal trials only and for
civil and family law services, the communities had to travel long distances
to main courts in remote cities and towns.

To address this anomaly, the department has embarked on a programme to
upgrade branch courts to turn them into full service courts to provide all
services, including civil and family law services to local communities.

There are 15 branch courts which were converted into proper courts in
August 2009. In the interests of time, I am not going to read all of them,
but the details are there in the written response. Similarly, the nine
branch courts which will be converted in the 2010-12 financial years are
listed in the written reply.

Thirdly, the conversion of the 15 branch courts in rural areas and former
black townships during August 2009, and the planned conversion of nine
branch courts during the 2010-11 financial year remains the most important
milestone in our quest to enhance access to justice in rural villages and
townships. The effect thereof is phenomenal. The population served by these
courts is estimated at six million cumulatively.

Before 11 August 2009, these six million people had to commute to the main
courts in remote cities and towns at huge costs, because prior to the
conversion of these branch courts, only limited criminal trials were
rendered at those courts. The infrastructure of these courts has been
upgraded and human resource capacity increased to capacitate these courts
to render full services including civil cases, maintenance, domestic
violence, etc. The capacity of these courts has also been increased to
include small claims courts and the services of the Master.

Fourthly, the department has also introduced the Traditional Courts Bill
which is currently before Parliament. This Bill emanated from the policy
framework on the traditional justice system under the Constitution,
developed by the department. The Traditional Courts Bill aims to bring
about a single statute regulating the role and functions of traditional
leaders in the administration of justice. The main objective of this Bill
as set out in clause 2 is to, firstly, affirm the values of the traditional
justice system. [Time expired.] Thank you very much; and I thank the hon
Makhubela as well.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, the Deputy Minister talks about the upgrading of
courts. I hope I am not sidetracking and going onto another question
totally. I would like to ask the Deputy Minister if there are security
measures in place at the upgrading of these courts, because that has been a
major problem?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson,
it is indeed a separate question. I can just say in general terms that we
do recognise the importance of security at all of our courts. The
department does have a range of security measures in place to ensure the
safety of the facilities as well as the magistrates, the prosecutors and
members of the public who make use of those courts. In addition, we do
supply security, when needed, to presiding officers. Certainly, all of
those services would be applicable to the courts that I have referred to in
my initial answer.

If the member wishes to receive more detail, then a specific question could
be posed so as to enable us to reply in the same detailed manner as to the
original question.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chair, I hope you will bear with me. My other question is
on the other pages which still have to be read by the Deputy Minister. Can
you give him a chance to finish?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau) Is it a supplementary question or is it
another question?

Mr S D MONTSITSI: The supplementary question is covered in the pages that
the Deputy Minister has not yet read. [Laughter.] Can you just give him a
chance to finish?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Just put the supplementary question.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: It hinges on the programme that the Minister has embarked
on with regard to a rural outlay for ordinary people to access justice –
the establishment of those courts. I think the Deputy Minister was just
getting to the answer.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): What is a supplementary question?

Mr S D MONTSITSI: A supplementary question is the question that explains
further what the Deputy Minister has imparted. I am requesting the Deputy
Minister to explain the extent to which the department is unfolding
delivery in the rural areas for ordinary people to access justice.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I understand
what the member means. What the member is asking about is the use of
indigenous languages in court as a means to enhance access. In that regard,
the department has furthermore embarked on a pilot project with the use of
indigenous languages at a number of courts. This has been progressively
expanded to other courts in various provinces. The number of courts where
indigenous languages are used has increased to 31 in all nine provinces,
catering for nine indigenous languages.

Lastly, I wish to inform the hon member that the criminal justice system
review is part and parcel of the task set by the present government to
establish a transformed, integrated, modernised, properly resourced and
well-managed justice system. This criminal justice system review will
therefore also assist to provide a court system that will deliver faster
and easier resolution of cases, countrywide, including in rural areas. A
number of protocols or guidelines that will improve the performance of
courts have received attention in terms of the criminal justice system
review.

Also, the case backlog reduction project, aimed at reducing the backlog in
cases in regional courts, is continuing. Currently, 46 additional backlog
regional courts are in place in areas where there are high backlog numbers,
including backlogs from rural areas. In total, 18 271 cases were finalised
and removed from court rolls between November 2006 and the end of December
2009.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, on a point of order: I want to propose that the
Deputy Minister table his response because I can see that it is a Bible. We
are going to sit here until eight o’clock. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I think you are out of order. There was
a supplementary question. All I asked the Deputy Minister was to check
whether he understood the supplementary question. He said that he
understands the supplementary question. I have given him the opportunity to
respond to that question. If his time expires, I will indicate to him that
his time has expired on responding to the supplementary question. In terms
of procedure, he does have the right to do that. You are out of order.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: The backlog
reduction interventions in regional courts have succeeded in bringing down
the total backlog percentage from 43% in 2006 to 29% at the end of December
2009.

Let me conclude by saying that one of the very important areas - areas I
would appeal to all members present to assist us with - is the expansion of
small claims courts. Small claims courts are mechanisms that are very
effective in making possible cheap and fast accessible justice to people.
We have established 28 small claims courts in rural areas in the past two
years. We would appeal to you to approach, in your constituencies, legal
practitioners and to ask them to volunteer to serve as commissioners in
these small claims courts. I thank you.

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, my question is on the issue of safety and access
to justice. Deputy Minister, in the Western Cape, particularly, people are
killed on the premises of the court. In November last year in Atlantis, a
person was gunned down. In the Mitchells Plain court, history speaks for
itself.

On the issue of access, we understand that people must have access to
justice, but the safety of innocent people in society can’t be compromised.
In a court in Langebaan in the multipurpose centre, court procedures are
held without any security backup for the public. Close contact is being
made.

If it is a new question and the Deputy Minister is not prepared to answer
it now, I will understand.

In a court in Vredenburg, people who came with witnesses had to stand
outside in the rain in long queues. The services rendered there are
unacceptable. That is why you find situations where people are not prepared
to come and bear witness because of the kind of services which are rendered
at that court in Vredenburg. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson,
I just want to reiterate that we will be glad to come back to this House to
deal comprehensively with the issue of security at our courts. It is a
matter that we take very seriously and on which there is a range of
measures in place. If the members want details, we can come back and
provide that.

We should not confuse the question of access to justice which deals,
firstly, with the location of courts; secondly, with the accessibility of
the procedure in those courts; thirdly, with the accessibility of language;
and fourthly, also with the very important issue of financial accessibility
of our courts. The issue that the member raises of physical entrance –
coming in and out of courts – is something else. When we talk about access
to justice we don’t mean doors should be open for any criminal to come in
with whatever firearms. That is something else which we can engage on.

The hon member cited the example of the Vredenburg Magistrate’s Court and I
am aware of that situation. I paid a visit to that court at the end of last
year. The issue of the lack of shade and shelter for those who are waiting
for their matters to be heard or to testify is something that we took note
of. We raised it with the regional head of the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development who is attending to that matter, either by
rechanneling funds within the department or by approaching members of the
community and the business community to help put up a shelter. Thank you.

   Consequences of establishment of constitutional state on use of lethal
                                    force

7.    Mr M W Makhubela (Cope) asked the Minister of Police:

      Whether the consequences of the establishment of a constitutional
      state placed a greater restriction on the use of lethal force as noted
      by the former Chief Justice P Chaskalson in his judgment in certain
      cases (details furnished); if not, what is the position in this
      regard; if so, how was this conclusion reached?
                             CO56E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson, we will respond again on the matter in
the question put by the hon Makhubela. As we said earlier, the 1995
judgment in the case of Makwanyane by former Chief Justice Chaskalson has
been further clarified by the Constitutional Court in 2002 in the judgment
on the case of the Minister of Safety and Security and Others v Walters and
Another. The SA Police abide by the judgment of the Constitutional Court in
the latter case. As I said, Chairperson, I have acknowledged Commissioner
Makhubela, the hon Makhubela. [Laughter.]

  Number of police members disciplined and charged with negligent driving,
    number of vehicles written off by department as a result, and details
             regarding policeman who shot himself in Khayelitsha

8.    Mr T M H Mofokeng (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:

      (1)   (a) How many police members were (i) disciplined and (ii)
            charged with negligent driving after they were involved in car
            accidents between 1 January 2005 and 28 February 2010 and (b)
            what is the total number of police vehicles that were written
            off by his department as a result of the accidents;

      (2)   whether a policeman who shot himself in Khayelitsha (details
            furnished) had any previous record(s) of sanctions; if so, what
            are the relevant details?         CO62E
The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Mofokeng, the department is only in possession
of verified information as from 1 April 2008 to 31 January 2010, extracted
from the departmental systems in response to this question.

A total of 230 members of the SA Police Service, the SAPS, were disciplined
after they were charged for reckless and negligent driving following their
involvement in car accidents; and 293 members were charged. A total of
10 420 vehicles were written off as a result of accidents between 1 January
2005 and 28 February 2010.

The policeman who shot himself in Khayelitsha, as referred to in the
question, had no previous records and/or sanctions against him. In the year
2009, he was, on two occasions, involved in car accidents which resulted in
his appearance before the station collision committee. As a precautionary
measure, his authority to drive state vehicles was suspended for a period
of three months during which he was redeployed to perform community service
centre duties.

On Monday, 15 February 2010, whilst chasing a suspect vehicle, he was
involved in an accident with a state vehicle where he collided with another
state vehicle. On Friday, 19 February 2010, whilst driving a state vehicle,
he collided with a private vehicle after which he, unfortunately, shot
himself. It is worth mentioning that the member referred to was the only
constable deployed as a sector commander and excelled in the performance of
his duties.
Perhaps, on the issue of the 10 420 vehicles that we spoke about, there are
many possible reasons advanced to this effect: firstly, depending on where
the vehicles are located; it is a generally known fact that police vehicles
travel a huge number of kilometres, annually - they are expected to patrol
communities, transport people to court, attend to complaints, and, in some
cases, to change their shifts. As the kilometres build up, it is possible
that the maintenance and roadworthy condition of the vehicle deteriorates.

Secondly, if one disaggregates the number it translates to about 2 000
vehicles which are being written off yearly as a result of accidents, this
means that a relatively high number of vehicles are being written off. This
figure should be disaggregated to understand the exact causes. Below are
some of the possible reasons for accidents and vehicles being written off:
firstly, vehicle damaged while pursuing criminals in car chases - this is
plausible; secondly, vehicles damaged in pursuits through rough terrain,
particularly in rural or mountainous areas - this is also plausible;
thirdly, vehicles damaged through poor maintenance management - this is
also traceable on records that show how long the average police vehicle
spends in the SAPS maintenance garage. Thank you.

Mr T HARRIS: Chair, in his response, the hon Minister says that he believes
that poor maintenance of police vehicles may be leading to their
malfunctioning. If that is the case, what measures will he take to prevent
that from occurring?
The MINISTER OF POLICE: I will follow it up with the head of the
department, Gen Cele, to ensure that these things are attended to. We have
noted it as the member has posed them; therefore, the general will have to
do what is expected of him. Thank you.

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, with regard to the number of accidents and the
police vehicles which are written off, is there any insurance covering
these vehicles?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Well, there is insurance for both employed members
driving and the tools of the trade. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chair, I would like to ask the Minister – maybe he’s got the
facts available – how many vehicles have been written off? If 2 000
vehicles are written off per year, I hate to think how many police vehicles
have been involved in accidents; few are written off, and some are severely
damaged. Does the Minister have any figures for that? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson, I still have to go back home and
check. Home refers to the Headquarters of the ... [Inaudible.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: Chairperson, I was following the last question the Minister
answered regarding insurance for the police vehicles and the people who are
involved in accidents. I didn’t hear him mentioning what happens if a
member of the public is involved in such an accident. Is there any cover
for a member of the public? If they are not covered, what is the reason?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson, this is a new one. We will check, as I
said before. It’s a new thing altogether.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Yes, it’s a new question, because the
member wants statistics which I don’t think the Minister is ready to
divulge.

                Details regarding visible policing programme

9.    Mr T M H Mofokeng (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:

      (1)   Whether his department has extended the visible policing
            programme to townships and informal settlements across the
            country; if not, why not; if so,

      (2)   whether the programme uses similar initiatives such as patrol in
            cars, on foot, horseback, motorcycle or bicycle as in some urban
            areas; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (3)   whether he will consider extending such initiatives in the areas
            that have been identified as “crime hot spots” in the townships;
            if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO63E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon House Chair, to hon Mofokeng, the answer to the
first part of the question is yes; the visible policing programme entails
all operational policing activities at police stations. The visible
policing programme is also implemented at police stations via community
policing initiatives such as sector policing, where the police and
community work in partnership.

The answer to the second part of the question is yes. The visible policing
programme entails police patrol vehicles, foot patrols, horseback patrols,
motorcycles and bicycles.

The answer to the third part of the question is yes. The visible policing
programme is already implemented in hot spot areas. I thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Minister, regarding the unit that arrested Mr Jackson
Mthembu, the spokesperson of the ANC, this morning, does it form part and
parcel of the police squad, because it is called “the gold squad”? Is it a
private security company or not? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Bloem, before you conclude, that is
a totally new question and, moreover, it is something that you claim
happened this morning. I don’t think that the Minister will be ready to
respond to that question. So, we disregard that question as it is out of
order.

Are there any other supplementary questions? No, you are out of order, hon
members, because I have ruled that that question is out of order.

    Number of applications for work permits and details relating thereto

10.   Mrs R N Rasmeni (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:
      During the period 1 January 2005 up to 28 February 2010, (a) what is
      the total number of applications for work permits that were (i)
      received and (ii) declined by her department, (b) what is the total
      number of work permits that were granted and (c) what is the nature of
      persons who were (i) granted and (ii) declined work permits?
                                  CO64E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, I am getting paid for only one
job. I hope I will not annoy the hon Bloem with a long response. The total
number of applications for work permits received in the period 1 January
2005 to 31 January 2010 was 98 093.

The statistical information for the month of February 2010 cannot be
provided yet, as it is still being processed. A total number of 10 532
applications for work permits were declined in the period 1 January 2005 to
31 January 2010. A total number of 87 561 work permits were granted in the
period 1 January 2005 to 31 January 2010.

The nature of persons who were granted work permits includes the following
and forms an integral part of the number of work permits granted: foreign
nationals who possess skills and/or knowledge which is not readily
available in the Republic of South Africa; exceptionally skilled foreign
nationals; foreign nationals who possess qualifications and experience, of
which there is an acute shortage in the Republic of South Africa; and
foreign nationals who established their own businesses within the Republic
of South Africa.

The nature of persons whose applications for work permits were declined
includes those with incomplete documentation as prescribed by the
Immigration Act, Act 13 of 2002 and the regulations incorporated in terms
thereof, submitted with the applications. It also includes the applicants
not complying with the prescribed requirements as set out in the
immigration regulations. It included those whose information was not made
known in their application, which might be to the detriment of the Republic
of South Africa, as well as those whose applications included negative
information in respect of their applications, when reviewed. Thank you.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Sekela-Sihlalo, ndingathanda ukuqonda
kuSekela-Mphathiswa ukuba ingaba urhulumente uqinisekisa njani ukuba la
maphepha aza naba bantu bavela kwamanye amazwe ngawenene kwaye naba bantu
bangabanini awo la maphepha kunye neziqinisekiso ezo. Oku ndikutsho kuba
aba bantu bavela kwamanye amazwe bayayenza into yokuza namaphepha
anganyanisekanga. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to know how
the government ensures that these documents the foreigners bring are
genuine and that the people who are presenting them are the rightful owners
of these documents and certificates. I’m asking this because the foreigners
bring and present fraudulent documents.]

USEKELA NGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA : Mhlonishwa, Sotswebhu oMkhulu, abantu
abafaka izicelo zokuthi bazosebenza la eNingizimu Afrika uma befaka izicelo
zokuvunyelwa ngokwalolu hlelo lwamakhono angavamile naswelekile, siyaye
sizicubungule izicelo zabo nemibhalo abasinikeza yona, ukusukela ezweni
lapha umuntu efaka isicelo khona ukuze kuzofinyelela kule nkampani
emqashayo azoyisebenzela.

Uma siluqala lolu hlelo sasisebenza nezinkampani ezinhlanu ezinkulu,
okuyizona ezaziletha le mininingwane kithi, ukuze sikwazi ukuyicubungula.
Saluhlola lolu hlelo ukuthi luzosebenza ngendlela efanelekile yini. Emva
kwalokho sabe sesilenyusa inani lalezi zinkampani.

Sinesiqiniseko njengamanje ukuthi uhlelo esilusebenzisayo lusebenza
ngendlela efanelekile. Kodwa kuzothi ngokuqala kwenyanga kaMeyi kuwo lo
nyaka esikuwo bese sisebenzisa olunye uhlelo - lapho sizobe sisebenzisa
izinkampani ezizimele ukuselekelela ukucubungula izicelo nemibhalo efakwa
abantu abafisa ukusebenza nokuzovula amabhizinisi kuleli lizwe. Loku
esizokubiza nge-Visa outsourcing, okuzokwelekelela emazweni lawa amakhulu
njengo-India, oChina noNigeria sikwazi ukusheshisa ukucubungula imibhalo
yezicelo zabantu abafisa ukuza ezweni lethu.

Lolu hlelo luzoqala ukusebenza kuwo lawa mazwe amathathu esengiwabalile,
bese kuthi uma silubona ukuthi lusebenza kahle, silwenyusele nakwamanye
amazwe. Lokho kuzoselekelela ukuthi sisheshise ukunikeza abantu
abafanelekile ama-Visa okuthi bakwazi ukuzosebenza eNingizimu Afrika,
njengoba kunesikhalo esikhulu sokuthi uMnyango wethu uyaye ikakhulukazi
ubabambezele osomabhizinisi, nalabo abanamakhono aswelekile ezweni lethu
uma befaka izicelo zokuthi beze ezweni lethu. Lolu hlelo luzosilekelela
kakhulu, luyindlela esithuthukisa ngayo izinqubo esizisebenzisayo
eMnyangweni. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Chief Whip, when people who send
applications to work in South Africa apply for permits through this
programme of exceptional and scarce skills, we normally scrutinise their
applications and the documents they submit from the country of origin to
the company that they are going to work for.

When we started this programme we were working with five big companies,
which provided us with this information so that we could scrutinise it. We
tested this programme to see if it was going to work properly. After that
we increased the number of companies.

We are now certain that the programme we are using is working properly.
However, at the beginning of May this year, we will be using another
programme. We will be using private companies to assist us in checking the
applications and the documents that are submitted by the people who wish to
work here or have their businesses in this country. This will be called
visa outsourcing, which will assist in respect of big countries like India,
China and Nigeria so that we will be able to speed up the process of
checking the applications and documents of those who wish to work in our
country.

This programme will be utilised in the aforementioned countries, and then
if we see that it is working properly, we will take it to other countries
too. This programme will assist us in expediting the process of granting
visas to people who qualify for them. There is a complaint that our
department hinders especially businesspeople and those with scarce skills
when they apply for permits to come to our country. This programme will
assist us a lot; it is our mechanism of developing the policies that we are
using in the department. I thank you.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chair, I just can’t understand why we outsource work while
we have such a high unemployment rate. Why don’t we train South Africans,
instead of outsourcing the work to another country? There are sector
education and training authorities, Setas, and other institutions where we
can train our workforce. Why do we then outsource work?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, let me say the same thing now
in English: Basically the request is that I should translate what I said.
When somebody applies for a visa to work in South Africa, you can’t apply
for that visa when you are already in South Africa. When you are here in
South Africa, how will you explain your presence in the Republic of South
Africa? You must explain the reason why you want to come to South Africa.

In big countries like Nigeria, China, Brazil and India, businesspeople and
people with scarce and exceptional skills complain that the Department of
Home Affairs takes too long to process their applications. The people who
know who this person is are in that country, not in South Africa.
Therefore, we must build capacity in that country so that we are able to
expedite that person’s application right in their country of origin.

The first reason why we decided to engage in this programme of outsourcing
the processing of the applications for visas is that it will help us to
expedite the processing of the applications. Secondly, all countries with
which we compare ourselves are engaged in similar programmes with maximum
benefits. It will help our programmes to attract foreign nationals to
invest in our country or to work in South Africa under the exceptional and
scarce skills programme.

This programme will process the applications but the final decision of
adjudicating on the person’s application will still be done by the
officials of the Department of Home Affairs. It wastes time when the
official who adjudicates must start from checking whether the person is a
businessperson as claimed, has a criminal record or has the qualifications
he claims to have. All of those are required as prerequisites before your
application is adjudicated. That is what this programme will do.

We are doing it because in big countries it does not help us to centralise
these services and do them ourselves. What it ends up doing is frustrating
our businesspeople, trade and investment and the companies that are
recruiting scarce and exceptional skills. Government ends up being blamed
for something that we could have done better like other countries we
compare ourselves to. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, how will this project that the Deputy
Minister refers to improve the turnaround time and the cost of the project
and how long will it run? What work permits will be issued to the 40 000
sex workers that are coming to the 2010 Fifa World Cup? How is that going
to be handled? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: I did not know that the hon member
already knows that there will be 40 000 prostitutes coming for the 2010
Fifa World Cup. I don’t know whether she participated in recruiting them.
With regard to this programme that we are talking about, I have just
explained in detail, in both isiZulu and English, how it is going to assist
in improving services. I could try in Afrikaans.

My Afrikaans is swak, maar ek kan probeer. [My Afrikaans is very poor, but
I can try.]

With my Standard 10 Afrikaans, I may end up insulting someone.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I have an emergency. I have been
presented with an urgent request. The Deputy President wants to see the
Deputy Minister of International Relations and Co-operation. There is a
question that he must respond to. I want to establish whether the member
who asked the question, which is hon Lees, will be comfortable with the
response being tabled.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, the difficulty I have with that is that with oral
questions there are follow-up questions, and a tabled response does not
have follow-up questions. I would request that, if there is this urgency,
the nature of which I am not aware of, that question be dealt with now,
rather than later.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, on a point of order: I don’t think my
question was answered. I thought I was insulted because I quoted a figure
of 40 000 which was mentioned on the Sunday Times or The Star front page
and I was then accused of helping to canvass them. I think that is an
absolute insult. I also think that I asked for a turnaround time, in other
words, where a document takes six months or eight months, it will be
brought down to two months. I asked for the costs and was also not given a
proper answer.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): The problem with follow-up questions
that are based on newspaper articles is that you don’t know whether they
are factual or just sensational reporting. The rule of questions is quite
clear that, if you asked a question based on a newspaper article, you must
attach that article. There must be a verification process.

If you put that as a follow-up question without proper facts being put - it
could have been just an article for purposes of sensation – it would be
quite unfair to expect the Minister to respond to something that he might
not even have read. He might not read the Sunday Times. He might have his
own Sunday newspaper that he prefers to the Sunday Times. That is why I did
not want to put the Minister in an uncomfortable position by responding to
that.

Do you agree that the Minister responded to the issues as raised, even
during the follow-up? That does not stop you, if you are still
uncomfortable, from making a follow-up but not at this particular moment.
We want to proceed on this matter.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary to
allege that an hon member is a pimp?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Who said that?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: The hon Deputy Minister alleged that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): That is not what I heard.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Can you then make a ruling on that, please?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): The ruling on that matter is that, as
far as I have listened to the Deputy Minister, I did not hear him saying
that the hon member is a pimp. That question is out of order.

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEBHUNGA: Sekela-Sihlalo, Ndingathanda ukubuza uSekela-
Mphathiswa – ziyeke wena ezi zibheke ecaleni izinto – ukuba ingaba ikho na
intsebenziswano phakathi kwesebe lakhe nelikaMnu. Cwele malunga nalo mba
walo mbuzo wethu. Ndibuza kuba abantu abaninzi bangena ngobuqhophololo
ngezi ncwadi zibiweyo baze benze okungekuko oku bathi bakuzele apha
eMzantsi Afrika. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to ask the
hon Deputy Minister – never mind the irrelevant stuff – whether there is
any co-operation between his department and that of Mr Cwele about the
issue in question. I’m asking because many people gain entry into the
country fraudulently using stolen identity documents and they do not do
what they said they had come for in South Africa.]

USEKELA NGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA: Siyasebenzisana nayo yonke iMinyango
efanelekile ukuthi sibheke amadokodo futhi sicubungule amadokodo abantu
abafaka izicelo zokuzosebenza noma ukuzokwenza amabhizinisi la eNingizimu
Afrika.

Iningi labantu abangena ngokungemthetho ezweni ngabantu abangangeni
ngendlela efanelekile. Sinayo imishini, nezindlela zokucubungula amadokodo
abantu abafaka izicelo zama-Visa zokuza eNingizimu Afrika. Abantu abangena
ngokunge mthetho yilabo abeqa imingcele noma abafumbathisa abanye uma
bezongena ezweni. Kodwa kulabo abazokwenza amabhizinisi noma abanamakhono
angavamile, ababaningi abantu esike sabathola abangena ngalolo hlelo.
Siyaye sibacubungule besese mazweni abo ukuze kuthi befika lapha sibe
sesazi ukuthi siwenze wonke umsebenzi ofanelekile.

Sisebenzisana nezinkampani ngoba akuthina esibabuyisayo kepha basuke
bebuyiswa yilezi zinkampani ezifunela bantu imisebenzi zisinikeze uhlu
lwabantu ababafunayo nokuthi banaziphi izinhlobo zemfundo namadokodo. Bese
thina sicubungula ngaleyo ndlela esenza ngayo ukuze umuntu ekwazi ukuza
eNingizimu Afrika. Uma kungukuthi mhlawumbe umuntu ehluleka ukuphumelela
ekwenzeni msulwa ngamaphoyisa siyaye ke simnqabele loyo muntu. Njengoba
ngisho ababaningi abantu kulolu luhla lwabantu abangena ngalolu hlobo
esesibathole ukuthi banezinkinga ezingaleyo ndlela. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: We are working with all the relevant
departments when we check and verify the documents of the people who apply
for permits to work in South Africa or to run businesses here.

Most of the people who come here illegally are people who do not follow the
proper channels in respect of gaining access to this country. We have
machines and mechanisms in place to check the visa applications of people
who want to come to South Africa. Illegal immigrants are those people who
cross the borders or who bribe others to gain access to this country, but
amongst those who come to set up businesses or who have scarce skills, we
have not found many people who gain entry in that manner. We do the
checking while they are still in their countries, so that when they arrive
here we already know that all the necessary work has been done.

We are working with the companies because it is not us who send them away
but the recruitment companies that we provide with the list of candidates,
the information on their educational credentials and the documents. Then we
do checking of our own so that a person can be authorised to come to South
Africa. If, for example, a person fails a security clearance check, we do
not allow that person entry. As I have said earlier, not many people who
come here through this programme have been found to have problems of that
nature.]

   Details regarding government’s position on North Korea’s refusal to co-
   operate with United Nations and international community with regard to
           discontinuation of North Korea’s nuclear arms programme

19.   Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Minister of International Relations and Co-
      operation:

      (1)   What is the government’s position on North Korea’s refusal to co-
            operate with the United Nations and the international community
            with regard to the discontinuation of its nuclear arms
            programme;
      (2)   whether South Africa has (a) taken any diplomatic steps and/or
            (b) held any discussions with North Korea to discontinue its
            nuclear arms programme; if not, why not; if so, (i) what steps
            and (ii) what are the further relevant details?
                                   CO79E

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Chairperson,
there are two questions, but I’ll treat them as one. The position of
government is that South Africa recognises the legitimate right of all
states, including the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the DPRK, to
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes only.

Furthermore, South Africa believes that it is a prerequisite for peace and
security in the region that the DPRK, as a confidence-building measure,
verifiably prove to the international community that it has permanently and
fully dismantled any nuclear weapons.

Since the announcement by the DPRK in February 2005 that it has developed a
nuclear weapon deterrent capability, South Africa has consistently called
on the DPRK to verifiably dismantle any nuclear weapons; to return to the
nuclear nonproliferation treaty without delay; to place all its facilities
under the comprehensive International Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA,
verification; and to contribute, through strengthened confidence-building
measures, to global nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation.
With regard to question number two, the answer is yes. In bilateral
meetings between the South African and the DPRK governments, South Africa
has consistently recreated its support for the military denuclearisation of
the Korean Peninsula; the six-party talks; and the nonproliferation of
nuclear weapons and its condemnation of the nuclear test by the DPRK.

In the statement at the recent meeting of the IAEA Board of Governors that
was held in Vienna from 1 to 5 March 2010, South Africa expressed regret at
the lack of progress on the IAEA verification mandate in the DPRK, and
urged the DPRK to comply with the legally binding requirements of the
United Nations Security Council, UNSC, as outlined in its resolution 1874
adopted by the UN Security Council on 12 December 2009. Similar statements
were made previously in IAEA board meetings.

Furthermore, I wish to inform hon members that, in accordance with the UN
Security Council decisions, we recently confiscated military items from the
DPRK in transit through South Africa, and have reported the matter to the
UN Security Council. Thank you.

    Details regarding reparations paid to victims of apartheid atrocities
            following Truth and Reconciliation Commission process

11.   Ms D Z Rantho (ANC) asked the Minister of Justice and
      Constitutional Development:
      Whether all victims of apartheid atrocities were paid reparations
      following the Truth and Reconciliation Commission process; if not, why
      not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO65E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson,
as a brief background, I would like to inform the hon member that the
Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act created a political and
moral climate for grounds of democracy and the fostering of the culture of
human rights. It provided for the establishment of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, TRC, for the specific purpose of promoting
national unity and reconciliation in a spirit of understanding that goes
beyond the conflicts and divisions of the past.

In order to achieve this goal, the commission was mandated to, amongst
other things, conduct investigations into gross human rights violations;
facilitate and initiate the gathering of information and the receiving of
evidence to establish the identity of victims, their fate or whereabouts
and the harm suffered by them and grant amnesty for acts, attempted acts,
missions and the offences associated with political activities.

One of the key functions of the TRC was to make recommendations to the
President. These recommendations were to include, amongst others,
reparations to victims. The Act defines reparation as including any form of
compensation, ex gratia payment, restitution, rehabilitation or
recognition. Victims are also defined in the Act and include certain
relatives or dependants of victims. I would like to inform the hon member
that the following number of victims were paid following the truth and
reconciliation process.

Firstly, in terms of urgent interim reparations, individual reparations of
up to R5 705 were paid to 16 654 victims. In total, an amount of
approximately R50 million has been paid to victims as interim reparations,
as at 31 January 2009.

Secondly, in respect of final reparations, in other words, once-off
individual grants of R30 000, an amount of R476 million was paid, as of 31
January 2009. The total number of persons who applied for reparations as
approved by the TRC is 16 837. The total number of beneficiaries paid to
date is 15 956. The total number of beneficiaries yet to be paid is 881.
The reasons why these 881 beneficiaries could not be paid are as follows:
Firstly, the beneficiaries have passed on, and attempts are being made to
establish the rightful next of kin, in terms of the regulations directing
the payment of reparations, and that explains 219 of those 881.

Thirdly, 662 beneficiaries could not be traced, and I would like to inform
the hon member that, as at 30 April 2004, 2 320 beneficiaries could not be
paid, as they could not be located. From that time, 30 April 2004, until
now, the department has traced and paid 1 439 beneficiaries. Therefore, as
at 11 March 2010, 881 beneficiaries must still be paid.

In an effort to expedite the process, the department has taken the
following steps: Firstly, the Department of Home Affairs, the Department of
Health, the Department of Social Development and the Independent Electoral
Commission have been provided with a list of the outstanding beneficiaries
to assist in tracing them.

Secondly, the service of a professional tracing agency was secured in
August 2009 to assist in tracing the remaining beneficiaries. The tracing
agency has already established the possible addresses of 201 beneficiaries
and the President’s Fund office is currently contacting these beneficiaries
and confirming their identities. Thank you.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, there are those who were excluded by the
pardon process that the former President opened on the basis that the
Presidency did not want to interfere with the process of the TRC. So, all
those whom the TRC did not give pardon to were excluded in the second
process of pardon. Hence, I wish to ask the Deputy Minister whether there
is a possibility of making presentations on behalf of those who have been
excluded in the process, because we do have members of the nonstatutory
forces who are Members of Parliament who were excluded by the TRC and were
not given pardon. I would like to know whether the Ministry will be
amenable to receiving applications from those members, because, to this
day, they are not cleared and the state law agencies can easily pounce on
them in future if they do not receive the necessary pardon. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, on a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Mr Bloem, what is your point of order?

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I don’t think that this question is relevant; he
is talking about pardoning and reparations.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Bloem, please sit down. Unless the
hon Bloem wants to tell us that he’s got serious ambitions of being a
Deputy Minister, the Deputy Minister is here to respond to the questions.
If the Deputy Minister feels that the question is irrelevant or he doesn’t
have the facts, he will tell us that as a Deputy Minister he is prepared to
come back to the House to respond to this particular question and not the
hon Bloem. Over and above that, I have also been given the responsibility
to determine whether the matter is relevant or not.

Mr D V BLOEM: I’ve refused to be a Minister, not a Deputy Minister.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Can you please sit down, hon Bloem.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson,
the follow-up question by hon Montsitsi is definitely far from irrelevant.
In fact, it is a very relevant question, but it is also a very complex and
involved question.

I think members would be aware that the TRC completed its work, that there
were a number of people who had not applied for amnesty, that former
President Mbeki put in place a process to deal with those matters and that
that process has yet to be completed and that aspects of that process have
been taken to the Constitutional Court, which has given judgment recently.

In view of the multifaceted and the quite complex nature of the question, I
think it would be much better served by a question of its own that would
allow us to deal with the matter comprehensively. Thank you.

 Assistance given by SA Police Service to mining industry in the Free State
             to stop illegal mining and details relating thereto

12.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister of Police:

      Whether the SA Police Service is actively assisting the mining
      industry in the Free State to stop illegal mining; if not, why not; if
      so, (a) what is the policy of the SAPS in this regard, (b) what is the
      nature of the assistance provided, (c) what procedures are being
      followed in dealing with the many illegal immigrants involved and (d)
      what are the further relevant details?
                             CO72E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Chairperson, the answer to the question asked
by the hon Worth is yes. The SAPS is involved in a joint effort with the
mining industry and other role-players in the Free State to combat illegal
mining in that part of our country through well-planned and co-ordinated
police operations.

A permanent task team was established on 1 June 2009 to combat illegal
mining. It consists of members of the force, particularly the Hawks. In
addition, the assistance of other role-players, such as the prosecuting
authority and the Department of Home Affairs, is sourced as and when
required. Illegal mining is also addressed through court-directed
investigations.

Illegal immigrants are dealt with in close co-operation with the Department
of Home Affairs. They are the responsible line function department,
according to normal procedures laid down in immigration legislation.

Monthly meetings are held with stakeholders in order to co-ordinate
actions. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, you will remember that the
Deputy Chair, during her opening remarks, made reference to Rule 246(4).
So, we will jump Questions 13, 14, 15 and 16 and proceed to Question 17 by
the hon Van Lingen to the hon Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development.

 Measures taken to address levels of communication and co-operation between
    SA Police Service and prosecutors in rural areas, and appointment of
                  sheriffs in each rural local municipality

17.   Mrs E C van Lingen (DA) asked the Minister of Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      (1)   Whether his department has taken any measures to address the
            levels of communication and co-operation between the SA Police
            Service and prosecutors in rural areas; if not, why not; if so,
            (a) what measures and (b) what are the further relevant details;

      (2)   whether any sheriffs are appointed in each rural local
            municipality; if not (a) why not and (b) what action is being
            taken to address this matter?                      CO77E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson,
as part of the initiatives of the criminal justice system review, a
protocol in respect of the management of the investigation and proper
screening of cases countrywide is poised to be concluded.

This protocol, already operational in several provinces, facilitates the
restructuring of the investigation and court processes in order to ensure
that courts are focused on trials, rather than administrative matters, such
as postponements.

It creates integrated SAPS, NPA, provincial management structures and local
detective, prosecutor and screening mechanisms, the latter at each seat of
the regional courts in the country. The local screening mechanisms are
responsible for the investigation and management of all cases enrolled in
the courts that are not trial-ready. They issue instructions for further
investigation, follow up on progress and ensure that dockets are properly
managed right through to the finalisation of the investigation.

At a provincial level, the responsibility for the management of
investigations and the screening of cases is assigned to a suitably
experienced investigating officer designated by the SAPS, just below the
rank of provincial commissioner - if the Minister were here I would ask him
whether that should be a lieutenant general - and a suitably experienced
prosecutor designated by the NPA, just below the rank of Deputy Director of
Public Prosecutions.

Together these persons are responsible for the management of investigations
and the screening of cases. They are also responsible for the establishment
of local screening mechanisms, as well as the supervising, overseeing,
directing and guiding of these processes.

The local screening mechanisms consist of a detective, court case officer
or officers designated by the SAPS and a screening prosecutor or
prosecutors designated by the NPA. The local screening mechanism is
responsible for the management of the investigation of all cases enrolled
in the courts that are not trial-ready, and should, where possible, manage
the decision dockets requiring further investigation.

A closer interaction between the SAPS and the NPA is fostered, with a
particular focus on the more serious cases which are to be heard in the
regional courts. This protocol applies across the entire country, including
rural areas.

Secondly, and this is quite a different aspect of the question, in terms of
section 2 of the Sheriffs Act, a sheriff needs to be appointed for every
court. Consequently, all rural municipalities form part of a magisterial
district covering that particular area. However, the department has
experienced challenges in attracting suitable persons for the appointment
of sheriffs in the small rural areas due to the economic nonviability of
these areas.

People are discouraged by the low volume of the court processes and the
vast distances to be travelled from the local court to serve court
processes. Of the 366 magisterial districts covering the entire
geographical area of the Republic serviced by sheriffs, 30% are regarded as
economically nonviable and process less than 500 court processes and
generate less than R150 000 gross income per annum. The economically
nonviable offices are located mainly in the poor rural areas of the Eastern
Cape, Limpopo and Northern Cape provinces.

Several interventions were taken to address the problems to ensure that
communities in these areas have equal access to justice. The past
interventions included the possible combination of a number of small areas
into two or more areas to increase the size of the service area for which a
sheriff is appointed. This is with a view to make them more economically
viable for the incumbents.

This intervention has had its own downside as one sheriff still has to
service a vast area and is often not accessible to a community living in
some of the combined areas. As part of the several initiatives being
undertaken by the department to transform the sheriffs’ profession,
legislative amendments to the Sheriffs Act have been proposed to provide
for the appointment of state officers as sheriffs in small rural villages
which are incapable of attracting suitable candidates for appointment as
sheriffs.

The proposed amendments have been included in the Judicial Matters
Amendment Bill of 2010, which was published on 15 February 2010 for public
comment. Pending the enactment of this legislation, ad hoc arrangements
have been put in place in terms of which the clerk of the court will
appoint a neighbouring sheriff to serve court processes in the villages
where a sheriff has not been appointed. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, I don’t know if they
mentioned in my question the origin or the municipality that I am referring
to. However, I am specifically talking about the Baviaans municipality in
question (1) and (2) where too many cases, in spite of the screening
process, are dropping off the table between the police, the magistrates and
the prosecutors. We find that the magistrate is blaming somebody else. They
are all shifting the blame instead of, as the hon Deputy Minister said,
them working on an outcome basis and trying very hard to get through the
poor case preparation.

However, when we were in the Sekhukhune District Municipality in Limpopo we
came across the very same problem with regard to stock theft, where people
said they go and lay charges because their animals are stolen. And some
offences happen over the weekend, the police come and arrest people, and
somehow there would be no charges laid against the criminals. The next day
the same criminals are roaming the streets again.

So, in Afrikaans sou ons sê, die pap val op die grond. [In Afrikaans we
would say, we have dropped the ball.]

We need to address this because the people are really desperate and they
actually want to take the law into their own hands. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson,
hon member, there were no specific details attached to the question, so it
would be difficult for me to comment specifically on the situation in the
Baviaans Local Municipality. What I will undertake to do is to look at the
specifics of that situation and to come back to the member on that.

If I can just say to the hon member and all members of this House that it
is questions of this nature that we appreciate very much, because they
provide the kind of oversight that is necessary for us to make sure that
the policies and the mechanisms that we devise at a national level are
indeed being implemented as we would want on the ground level. So, thank
you very much for that information.

Secondly, on the matter relating to stock theft in Sekhukhune, again I
would have to come back to the member on the details, but I can say that
the Ministry of Police and I were both present on Monday at the AgriSA
conference on rural crime. The issue of stock theft was discussed
extensively.

We had present with us the person in the office of the National Director of
Public Prosecutions who is the liaison person dealing with stock theft. We
were able to interact extensively and very positively with AgriSA on
refining those measures which are already in place to combat stock theft
and other forms of rural crime. Thank you.

 Details regarding policy of department on officials who have been declared
          medically unfit being employed by other security services

18.   Mrs E C van Lingen (DA) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      Whether her department has a policy on officials who have been
      declared medically unfit being employed by other security services; if
      not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                              CO78E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS (on behalf of the Minister of
Correctional Services): Chairperson, the officials who have been declared
medically unfit are handled in terms of the Policy and Procedure on
Incapacity Leave and Ill-Health Retirement for Public Service employees,
commonly known as Pilir. In compliance with this policy, the department has
appointed a health risk manager who makes recommendations to the delegated
authority within the department for decision-making in such cases.

Once a person is on ill-health retirement or any form of termination of
service, the department has no control over that person. The policy is also
applicable while the official is still employed by the department. Once the
official is medically boarded, the policies of the Department of
Correctional Services, DCS, no longer have legal jurisdiction over such an
employee. DCS, therefore, has no record of retired officials who are
employed by other security services. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I’m actually quite astounded because if a
person is declared medically unfit, does it not mean that that person gets
a pension when he is retired? Do you understand my question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): It’s for the Minister; let’s first
check whether the Deputy Minister understands.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Mr Chairperson, the reason I’m asking this question is
because I’m sitting with a case like this in Kouga Local Municipality where
the mayor has appointed three of those officials. One of them happens to be
his brother-in-law and not one of the positions are actually on the
organograms. The Minister says they have no further jurisdiction over them,
but I thought that when a person is medically boarded, he or she is off on
pension? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS (on behalf of the Minister of
Correctional Services): I will provide two answers to this. On the one
hand, the primary consideration, of course, is whether or not the said
person is doing the same job for which he or she was boarded. If that’s the
case, this should be reported and the Department of Correctional Services
will investigate.

On the other hand, I think that when hon members or any hon member is aware
of instances like these, he or she should report the matter so that it can
be investigated. Should hon members do that, the relevant department can
take a decision on the matter, whether it has jurisdiction over it or
whether it should be referred to the Public Service Commission. The
question is general and one can’t deal with conjecture. If there was a
specific issue which the question related to, then that issue should have
been raised in the question so that we provide a response that deals with
that particular issue. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Maybe the last comment by the Deputy
Minister must, in actual fact, be a comment that is relevant to all of us
in the House because the tendency is that the question, as put, is general,
but the person has got further details. When one makes a follow-up then one
brings that detail up. At that point it becomes difficult for the executive
to then respond to those specific matters. I would really suggest and
appeal to members that, in future, they should rather provide the executive
with more information in order for them to respond to the kind of specifics
we want them to respond to.

Hon members, Question 20 is also affected by Rule 246(4). Therefore we will
then go to the last question because Question 22 is also affected. The last
question would be the question by the hon Sinclair to the Minister of State
Security. Let me take this opportunity to thank the Ministers who have
responded to questions. They may leave the House if they so wish. We
appreciate your presence. Thank very much.

     Allegations in media report regarding a certain person’s access to
   documents of department and repudiation of statements by Minister, and
                          details relating thereto

21.   Mr K A Sinclair (Cope) asked the Minister of State Security:

      (1)   Whether a certain person (details furnished) had access to
            documents of his department as alleged in a media report
            (details furnished); if not, what is the position in this
            regard; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether he will repudiate the statements; if not, what is the
            position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                               CO81E

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY: Chairperson, on the hon Sinclair’s question
on whether a certain person, whose details were furnished, had access to
documents of my department, as alleged in the media reports, and if not,
what the position is in this regard; if so, what the relevant details are,
the reply is as follows: The said person, Mr Julius Malema, did not have
access to documents of my department’s State Security Agency. It is not our
policy or practice to give information to unauthorised persons.

On the second question, whether I will repudiate the statements, and if
not, what the position is in this regard; if so, what the relevant details
are, the reply is as follows: Mr Malema did not at any stage allege to have
obtained documents from the State Security Agency, as stated by the hon
member in the question. He, instead, referred to a document that he got
from what he called “intelligence officers”. We have issued a media
statement in this regard. In addition, the State Security Agency will apply
its counterintelligence mandate in view of the seriousness of the
allegation. I thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you very much,
Minister. I asked if there was a follow-up question.
Mr K A SINCLAIR: Yes, thank you for the opportunity. I was just thinking,
Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Oh, okay.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, would the hon Minister then agree that
the person referred to, Mr Julius Malema, misled the nation with regard to
the allegations that he made in the press?

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY: Deputy Chairperson, as I have said, I would
not agree with that. I will not agree with that statement, because, as I
have said, at no stage did Mr Julius Malema ever say that he got any secret
document or classified document from the State Security Agency police
structures. Instead, Deputy Chairperson, it was the political parties who
put the allegation in the newspaper. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I will say it again:
Thanks very much, Ministers, for making yourselves available. We hope you
will do the same next time. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I then give the
information as to what Mr Watson had actually raised. Hon members, I would
like to make a ruling on the point of order raised by hon Watson about a
statement alleged to have been made by hon Ntwanambi during a plenary on
Wednesday, 10 March 2010.

However, before I make a ruling, I would like to remind members that the
motion was objected to by hon E C van Lingen, and I have accepted the
objection of the hon member.

The objection of hon Watson was mainly on the wording of the motion, namely
whether it is parliamentary for a member to accuse the premier of a
province, who is also a leader of a delegation from the Western Cape, of
ethnic cleansing. I indicated that I would study the Hansard records and
make a ruling.

After perusal of the Hansard records, I did not come across a statement
where reference was made to the effect that the hon premier is responsible
for ethnic cleansing. However, I came across a statement that reads as
follows:


   Acknowledges that this sacrilegious act is a modified form of ethnic
   cleansing that is driven by the DA’s racist tendencies and is intended to
   cause destruction and instability in these areas.

Therefore, my earlier ruling still stands: that the motion without notice
moved by hon Ntwanambi and objected to by hon Van Lingen, remains as a
notice of motion. I will then say that that concludes the ruling and the
business of the day. [Applause.]

The Council adjourned at 17:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) between the Southern African
        Customs Union (SACU) and the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR),
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Preferential Trade Agreement
        (PTA) between the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and the
        Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR).


