---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-05-12
---

WEDNESDAY, 12 MAY 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col .

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr A C STEYN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA:

  That the House-


  (1) debates the ruling by the Constitutional Court that the Communal Land
       Rights Act is unconstitutional; and


    2) comes up with possible courses of action that this House could take
       to enable land under the governance of traditional authorities to be
       owned by individual community members.
Mr P VAN DALEN: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA:

  That the House-


  (1) debates the special pricing agreements between Eskom and BHP Billiton
       and other clients; and


    2) comes up with suggestions to ensure accountability and a fair
       pricing strategy for all Eskom clients.


Mrs M A A NJOBE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move, on behalf of Cope:

  That the House-

    1) debates the controversial statement made by the Director-General of
       the Department of Labour, Mr Jimmy Manyi, who again demonstrated his
       bias against women and other persons who are not select cadres
       within the ruling elite with his criticism of the newly elected
       president of Business Unity SA, Ms Futhi Mtoba; and

    2) notes that Cope, on behalf of all women in South Africa, rejects his
       statement with the contempt it deserves.

Mr P D MBHELE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move, on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the impact of the strike action in the transport
   sector in the weeks leading up to the 2010 Soccer World Cup on the
   international image of South Africa as a reliable trading partner and on
   the movement of goods, which have negative consequences for the economy
   and job creation in businesses affected by this strike.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move, on behalf of the
IFP:

   That the House debates the place of the Constitution in the post-
   apartheid and developmental state, and when it is necessary to amend the
   Constitution.

Mrs P C DUNCAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA:

  That the House-

      1) debates the administrative and financial failures of the now
         dissolved National Youth Commission, following the disclaimer of
         opinion in the latest published Auditor-General’s financial report
         on the National Youth Commission, to ensure that the newly
         established National Youth Development Agency complies with good
         governance standards; and


      2) comes up with appropriate recommendations.

                        2010 UNITED KINGDOM ELECTIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House-

    1) notes that on 6 May 2010, the citizens of the United Kingdom went to
       the polls to elect a new government and that, although the
       Conservative Party received the most votes, no party achieved an
       outright majority in order to form a government;


    2) further notes that the Conservative Party and Liberal Democrats,
       after negotiations, have agreed to establish a governing coalition
       that will help to ensure stability of government;


    3) acknowledges that Gordon Brown yesterday resigned as both Prime
       Minister of Britain and Leader of the Labour Party;
    4) further acknowledges that David Cameron, after consulting HRH Queen
       Elizabeth II, became Britain’s 13th Prime Minister, ending 13 years
       of governance by the Labour Party and making Cameron the youngest
       member of Parliament to be appointed to this prestigious position in
       200 years;


    5) congratulates Prime Minister Cameron, Deputy Prime Minister Clegg
       and Chancellor George Osborne on their appointments; and


    6) wishes the newly formed government a successful tenure, committed to
       the benefit of the people of Britain.


Agreed to.

             ESTABLISHMENT OF PARLIAMENTARY INTER-FAITH COUNCIL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon President and Deputy
President, I move without notice:

   That the House—

   (1)      notes that on 10 March 2010, the National Assembly passed a
         resolution to the effect that Parliament would shortly establish a
         Parliamentary Inter-Faith Council;
   (2)      further notes that the matter has since been canvassed with all
         political parties; and


   (3)      subject to the concurrence of the National Council of Provinces
         –


         (a)      agrees to establish the Parliamentary Inter-Faith Council
               which will consist of nine National Assembly members, as
               follows: ANC - 5; DA - 1; COPE - 1; IFP - 1 and other parties-
                1; and five National Council of Provinces members, as
               follows: ANC - 3; DA - 1 and other parties - 1; and


         (b)      mandates the Parliamentary Inter-Faith Council to perform
               those functions that are stipulated in the resolution of 10
               March 2010.

Agreed to.

                          CRASH OF LIBYAN JETLINER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House—
     1) notes with deep regret that this morning a Libyan jetliner carrying
        93 passengers and 11 crew members from O R Tambo International
        Airport to the Libyan capital crashed near the end of the nine-hour
        flight, approaching Tripoli airport runway;


     2) further notes that amongst the passengers on the Afriqiyah Airways
        flight were South Africans, Libyans and Britons; and


     3) conveys its heartfelt condolences to the families of the passengers
        who lost their lives so tragically.


Agreed to.

 CONGRATULATIONS TO TIM CLARKE ON WINNING PLAYERS CHAMPIONSHIP TOURNAMENT IN
                                FLORIDA, USA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House-

      1) notes that on Sunday, 10 May 2010, Mr Tim Clarke won the Players
         Championship Tournament hosted at Ponte Verde Beach, Florida, USA;


      2) further notes that this tournament is the 5th most prominent
         championship within the context of the esteemed PGA Tour and was Mr
         Clarke’s first victory in eight years of competition on the PGA
         Tour;


      3) recognises the excellence of this achievement and Mr Clarke’s
         unwavering determination to excel within his chosen sporting field;


      4) further recognises that Mr Clarke’s accomplishment is a victory for
         all South African sportsmen and women who strive to constantly
         excel in their chosen sports; and


      5) congratulates Mr Clarke on an outstanding performance and for
         making his country and its people proud.


Agreed to.

        BLUE BULLS SECURE HOME SEMIFINAL IN SUPER 14 RUGBY TOURNAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House-


     1) notes that with one round of matches to go in the Super 14 the
        Bulls have secured a home semifinal;


     2) further notes that the Bulls Management Team has elected to utilise
        the 41 000-seater Orlando Stadium in Soweto as an alternative venue
        for their home semifinal in light of the fact that this team is
        unable to make use of their home ground of Loftus Versfeld, which
        stadium will be utilised during the Soccer World Cup and
        preparations for this purpose have not yet been finalised;


     3) recognises that this game will be the highest profile rugby game
        ever to have been played in Soweto and will provide the opportunity
        for thousands of rugby supporters from Soweto to support the Bulls;


     4) congratulates the Bulls Management Team for this inspired decision
        to take the semifinal to Soweto, and in doing so to ensure that the
        game is played in Gauteng in front of a supportive crowd;


     5) urges rugby supporters from all communities to attend the game at
        Orlando Stadium; and


     6) wishes the Bulls, and all other South African Super 14 teams, good
        luck in the final rounds of the competition.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: As a Sowetan, I also agree to the motion. [Laughter.]

 PASSING AWAY OF PENSIONER WHILST WAITING IN QUEUE AT SOCIAL SECURITY AGENCY
                               IN EAST LONDON
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, on behalf
of the UDM, I move without notice:

   That the House—

     1) notes with dismay the passing away of a 73-year-old pensioner on 28
        April 2010, whilst waiting in a queue at the Social Security Agency
        in East London;


      2) extends its condolences to the family of this unfortunate woman;

     3) expresses its disapproval of the circumstances that led to the
        passing away of the elderly woman who was, according to witnesses,
        visibly weak since her arrival;

     4) notes with shock reports that staff at the agency could not call
        for emergency care because the only available telephone was locked
        in an absent supervisor’s office; and

     5) calls upon the Government to swiftly investigate the matter and
        devise means to prevent this type of incidents.

Agreed to.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 1 — The Presidency:

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker Mr Max Sisulu, hon Deputy
President Mr Kgalema Motlanthe, Madam Deputy Speaker Ms Nomaindiya
Mfeketho, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members of this House,
hon premiers, heads of Chapter 9 institutions and of the SABC Board, the
International Marketing Council, the Advisory Council on National Orders,
the Safa President, the 2010 Fifa World Cup Local Organising Committee,
fellow South Africans ...

... mam’ uNomfundo Magadla ophuma eMbhashe kumasipala waseDutywa onathi
namhlanje apha ePalamente ... [Kwaqhwatywa.] [... Mrs Nomfundo Magadla from
Mbhashe Municipality, in Dutywa, who is with us here in Parliament today
... [Applause.]]

   We, the people of South Africa,
   Recognise the injustices of our past;
   Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
   Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
   Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
   diversity.

This is what our Constitution says.

We draw inspiration from the preamble to the Constitution of the Republic
today, as we present the Budget Vote of the Presidency and also mark the
first anniversary of this fourth democratic administration.

In the Convention for a Democratic South Africa we defeated apartheid. When
we cast our ballots on 27 April 1994, we buried racism and officially chose
a path of unity and reconciliation.
By adopting our progressive Constitution in 1996, we confirmed that our
country would never go back to the era of instability, mistrust and
oppression of one by another.
Sixteen years later, we live in peace and harmony in our country. No amount
of anger, frustration or fear should ever make us forget the fundamental
principles enshrined in our Constitution. We will never deviate from these
principles and the values for which we sacrificed so much.

Let me borrow from the wisdom of the former ANC President-General, Inkosi
Albert Luthuli, who eloquently articulates what we mean when we say this
country belongs to all of us. He said at a meeting of the Congress of
Democrats in Johannesburg in 1958:

   There is a growing number of people who are coming to accept the fact
   that in South Africa we are a multiracial community - whether we like it
   or not. I am not prepared to concern myself with such questions as:
   “Where have you come from?”, “Do you come from the North?” or “Did you
   come from Europe?” It is not important. What is important for our
   situation is that we are all here. That, we cannot change. We are all
   here, and no one desires to change it or should desire to change it.

The acceptance of common citizenship and equal claim to this country is our
nation’s greatest achievement. This should spur us on at all times to work
for the common good of our country. It should remind us that we are
actually a nation that has achieved a lot, against great odds, through
working together across race and political divides. That is indeed the
message that you are given today as we present our Vote.

Hon Speaker, during my inauguration on 9 May last year, we said that we
would not rest as long as there were people who had no water, children with
no access to education, women who were abused, workers who struggled to
feed their families, and people who died from preventable diseases.

We also said that there would be no place for complacency, cynicism,
excuses or laziness as we went about improving service delivery. We are
pleased that, in this first year in office, we have achieved most of the
goals that we set for ourselves. [Applause.]

Gradually, we are succeeding in changing the attitude and style of
government and transforming the way government relates to citizens. We can
already feel the sense of urgency in all government spheres.

Allow me, hon Speaker, to briefly update the House on the work done to date
on our key priorities. I will thereafter look ahead at some of the matters
that we want to attend to this year, especially relating to the supervision
and leadership of government.

There is visible progress in our identified priorities, such as health,
poverty eradication, job creation, quality education, rural development and
the fight against crime and corruption. More resources and energy have been
channelled towards the prevention and treatment of preventable diseases and
the revitalisation of the public health care system. We have launched
massive campaigns on HIV, TB and measles. The roll-out of new HIV treatment
and prevention measures, as well as the massive testing campaign that is
under way, will make a difference in the fight against the disease. We
applaud the wonderful work of the SA National Aids Council in fighting the
epidemic, under the leadership of the hon Deputy President. [Applause.]

The revitalisation of the country’s education system is also progressing
well. The Department of Basic Education and the Department of Higher
Education and Training have directed attention towards improving
performance in schools and the training of a skilled workforce.

We have allocated a total of R3,2 billion in infrastructure funds to
universities over the next two financial years. [Applause.] This will help
us to increase the production of graduates in the critical areas of
engineering, life and physical sciences, teacher education and health
sciences.

In addition, work towards the establishment of universities in Mpumalanga
and the Northern Cape will continue this financial year in order to further
expand access to higher education. [Applause.] We are doing this in
recognition of the fact that nearly 70% of all South Africans are under the
age of 35. We have to invest in our youth, in our future.

The widening of the social security net to cover needy children up to the
age of 18 forms an integral part of government’s contribution to the fight
against poverty. It is yet another investment in our generation and the
youth.

Hon Speaker, our investment in infrastructure beyond the World Cup also
goes to our future water and energy security. We are building bulk water
pipelines and dams, power stations and electricity distribution
infrastructure.

We are also working on several major projects in renewable energy, such as
wind power and concentrated solar power. We launched a solar energy project
in Winterveldt, in Pretoria, recently. [Applause.] This will be rolled out
nationally. All this work demonstrates that we are investing in a
prosperous and sustainable future.

As you are aware, hon members, this Administration came to office during a
global economic recession, as a result of which we shed close to a million
jobs. All indications are that we are recovering from the recession, our
economy is growing and investors are showing confidence in our country.

Government responded swiftly to the recession and a lot has been achieved
under the auspices of the Framework for South Africa’s Response to the
International Economic Crisis. We have engaged in a number of activities to
respond to communities in distress and to assist vulnerable workers and
troubled enterprises and sectors of the economy.

Government has also worked with the CCMA to strengthen efforts to avoid
retrenchments. To protect the poor and jobless from inflated food prices,
government directed the competition authorities to speed up their
investigations into price fixing and cartels in the food-supply chain. As a
result, a number of implicated companies have been prosecuted.

Distinguished guests, as you are aware, government launched Industrial
Policy Action Plan 2 in February 2010. This is a concrete plan to
significantly expand South African industrial capacity. At its core are
efforts to grow industrial sectors to retain existing jobs and to create
new, decent jobs.

Other measures that enable job creation include stepping up the
implementation of the Expanded Public Works Programme, investing in further
education and skills development, and encouraging small business
development and entrepreneurship.

Hon members, distinguished guests, we welcome the joint statement by
manufacturers and the three trade union federations - the Congress of SA
Trade Unions; the Federation of Unions of SA and the National Council of
Trade Unions - on industrial economic policy interventions needed to create
decent jobs, which was signed two days ago.

We applaud the proactiveness of labour and business in working to take
forward this joint mission of creating decent work.

Hon Speaker, distinguished guests, I have outlined the work undertaken in
the past year. We now know what works and what needs to be corrected, and
what needs to be strengthened.

Working together as various spheres of government, we are changing the way
government works in order to deliver services faster and better. That will
be the defining feature of this administration: doing things differently,
faster and in a more effective and caring manner, which puts citizens
first.

You will recall, hon members, that in the Medium-Term Strategic Framework
released last year we stated the need for a review of state-owned
enterprises, SOEs, as part of the economic transformation agenda. We have
to ensure that while they remain financially viable, the SOEs, development
finance institutions as well as companies in which the state has a
significant shareholding, respond to a clearly defined public mandate, and
help us to build a developmental state.

I have appointed a Presidential SOE Review Committee to undertake this
important work. It is my pleasure to announce the members, who are as
follows: the chairperson is Ms Mangwashi Victoria Phiyega, and the members
of the committee are: Mr Glen Mashishi, Mr Mafika Mkhwanazi, Mr Deon
Crafford, Adv Swazi Tshabalala, Ms Dawn Morole, Mr Pramod Mohanlal, Ms Gugu
Ngcobo, Prof Mbulelo Mzamane, Dr Takalani Madima, Mr Lumkile Mondi, and
Ms Nombulelo Mkhumane.

We wish them well as they undertake this important task over a one-year
period.

Hon Speaker, we also want to move faster on transforming broad-based black
economic empowerment to ensure that we broaden the benefits. The new Broad-
Based Black Economic Empowerment Advisory Committee, which is chaired by
the President, is currently investigating a number of critical issues.
These include, among other things, ownership and deals in the marketplace,
the alleged abuse of black empowerment through fronting, and the promotion
of instruments that will advance BEE. These are, amongst other things,
preferential procurement legislation, industry charters and the
verification agencies.

You will recall that in the state of the nation address in February we
announced that we were adopting a new outcomes approach to governance. We
have now finalised and signed performance agreements with all Ministers
based on the agreed outcomes.

The Ministers will now work with provincial and local government to develop
detailed delivery agreements for each outcome by the end of July this year.
[Applause.] Minister Chabane will outline how the process will work.

Hon Speaker, on 30 April we announced the names of members of the National
Planning Commission. Yesterday, we had a fruitful inaugural meeting with
the commissioners in Pretoria. We expect this team of experts to advise
government on various critical long-term strategies. I look forward to
constant interaction with the NPC. Minister Manuel will elaborate further
on this important part of our work.

Hon Speaker, distinguished guests, improving service delivery and
interaction with our people will be another defining feature of this
administration. The sporadic spread of protests in municipalities across
the country overlook genuine efforts by government to provide basic
services.

We will not condone the violence that sometimes accompanies these protests,
and have directed the police to deal with protesters in accordance with the
law.

However, government at all levels needs to investigate and act on
grievances. We are working to correct the systemic problems as well as
attitudes in the public service which, at times, make government slow in
responding to the people.

We say that working together we will do more to make our country succeed.
In this regard, we will continue to keep in touch with the masses of our
people in all parts of the country. We are able to assess delivery directly
by visiting communities. We have visited informal settlements such as
Madelakufa in Kempton Park, Siyathemba Balfour in Mpumalanga and the
Hermanstadt settlement in Pretoria. We have visited rural villages such as
Libode in the Transkei and Giyani in Limpopo. The Deputy President has also
conducted visits to the Eastern Cape and other areas to assess progress in
implementing the antipoverty programme and also to check effectiveness in
schools. These visits ensure that we do not rely only on reports from
officials. [Applause.]

Hon Speaker, yesterday I flew SA Airways from Johannesburg to Cape Town.
The time spent on the plane was valuable. I interacted with passengers who
shared their thoughts about the country and what we can do better,
together, as government and citizens.
When we say we are doing things differently, we have to take the public
service along with us. That is why we have been meeting with various
categories of senior public servants since last year.

On 23 April we met with directors-general and their deputies from national
and provincial departments. We discussed with them our vision of changing
the way government works. That will help us take the senior public service
with us in this new direction.

Hon members, we said last year that we look forward to a constructive
relationship with political parties represented in Parliament. We said it
should sometimes be possible to find issues that are in the national
interest that we can agree on.
Recent occurrences indicate that this is indeed possible. We were
encouraged by the visit of a parliamentary delegation to the Presidential
Hotline centre recently. We welcome the constructive comments, the support
and innovative ideas on how to expand capacity.

The responsibility for the Presidential Hotline in departments will now be
escalated to the level of directors-general. Minister Chabane will discuss
the hotline project further in his speech.

Hon Speaker, let me also take this opportunity to sincerely thank the
leaders of political parties for availing themselves for consultations and
discussions with us during the past year. The interactions have been most
helpful and help to strengthen our multiparty democracy. In fact, in those
consultations, I gained valuable things from the leaders, who made
constructive comments and criticisms and also pointed out areas that we
might not be thinking of. Those interactions were very valuable.

The attendance of the leaders at national celebrations was discussed at the
last forum we held. We thank the parties for availing themselves for
Freedom Day celebrations. You made it a truly national celebration for all
South Africans. Indeed, the messages that were given by the parties were
important, very much national in character and helped the people to see
that democracy works, for that is what it means. Ke a leboga. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

Hon Speaker, hon members, we are committed to building a better Africa and
a better world. This is informed both by our desire to contribute to the
betterment of humanity, and the pursuit of our national development
priorities. Our foreign policy is guided by domestic imperatives. This is
evident in our bilateral and multilateral engagements.

Our involvement in negotiations towards a more equitable trade regime, for
example, is premised on the understanding that reducing trade barriers for
the developing world will contribute to economic growth and job creation in
South Africa.

We have placed strong emphasis on deepening economic diplomacy in our
relations with other countries. You would have noticed that all our state
visits, both incoming and outgoing, are strong in terms of business
participation. Such visits are important for the advancement of our
economic agenda. Our commitment to the African Agenda remains on course. We
will focus on the Southern African Development Community, SADC, on regional
integration, on peace, on security, on stability and on the economic
development of the continent.

We will continue to strengthen South-South co-operation, both politically
and economically, through platforms such as the India-Brazil-South Africa
Forum, the IBSA, and the China-Africa forum.

A new world order is taking shape, and it is important that South Africa
makes a useful contribution to this process. In this regard, our country
participates very actively in the G20. While the United Nations remains at
the centre of any system of global governance, the value of groupings like
the G20 was evident in the co-ordination of responses to the recent
financial crisis. The G20 cannot replace the UN, but it is an important
forum within which to mobilise support for the strengthening of
multilateral institutions and for improving global governance.

Accordingly, within the G20, we have argued that international financial
institutions must be reformed to better reflect the voice and interests of
developing countries.

Hon members, from 1 April 2010, South Africa became a member of the African
Union Peace and Security Council for a two-year period. [Applause.] This
provides us with an opportunity to deepen our contribution to the
advancement of peace, security and stability on the continent.

Over the course of the past year, we have been involved in efforts to
resolve political challenges in Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwean negotiating
process is well under way and some achievements have been registered. The
parties have also agreed to put in place various commissions that will help
to move the country and the negotiating process forward. These include the
establishment of a Human Rights Commission, an Electoral Commission, as
well as a Media Commission. The commissioners have already been sworn in.
The commissioners enjoy the respect of all Zimbabweans across the political
spectrum. The three parties are still consulting about the appointment of
the Zimbabwe Anticorruption Commission.

There is also agreement in principle on the appointment of provincial
governors. The parties have agreed on the model and formula of how these
provincial governors will be appointed. It was agreed that MDC-M will
receive one provincial governor, while MDC-T and Zanu-PF will share the
remaining nine governorships. Whoever gets four governors between the two
will be given an additional minister of state.

The parties have established a team that comes from all parties that will
appeal to the international community to call for the withdrawal of
sanctions. It was agreed that MDC-M would receive one ... [Interjections.]
No, not one country. Not one country. [Laughter.]

All parties have also agreed to the establishment of the National Economic
Council, and this decision awaits implementation. With the acquittal of
Mr Roy Bennett, one issue that was an obstacle has been removed. The
different parties are supposed to submit names of potential members to the
relevant ministry.

Negotiations on other critical outstanding issues are still continuing, and
various proposals on how to unblock the impasse are still being considered
by various parties. There is hope and optimism that a solution will be
found as we continue to engage with all the relevant stakeholders. I will
present a report to the chairperson of the troika and SADC, soon.

This is the African Union’s Year of Peace, which culminates on Peace Day,
21 September 2010. This is an opportunity for Africa to demonstrate a
collective commitment to peace on our continent. Working together, we will
make our country and our continent succeed and prosper.

Hon Speaker, I spoke earlier about the need for us to celebrate our
Constitution and its provisions, especially the declaration that this
country belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity.

We have not had an opportunity in the past 16 years to formalise our
discussions on how we can bring about a common understanding of our
national identity. Due to the lack of a common perspective, we constantly
reach crisis points on a number of issues. Constant contentious points
include transformation in the workplace, sports, songs and symbols, the
language policy and certain cultural practices. The national dialogue to
unpack these and other issues will be launched on 29 July 2010 and
preparations are under way. [Applause.]

Hon members, this year, the greatest show on earth is the 2010 Fifa Soccer
World Cup. We all have fond memories of the moment when Fifa President Sepp
Blatter announced that our country would be the venue for this prestigious
tournament.

Our country will never be the same again, thanks to the World Cup.
[Applause.] The physical landscape is changing for the better. The
tournament will leave a lasting legacy for future generations.

We reiterate that preparations for the 2010 Fifa World Cup are on track.
Various government departments that have made guarantees to Fifa have
delivered on their mandates within the deadlines.

What is important is that our work goes on beyond the final whistle.
Investment in additional resources for the police, disaster management,
health and the immigration system will have a lasting impact on the
delivery of services to the people.

Also important is the vibrant national mood and the positive response of
the world. Domestically, the World Cup is generating high levels of
patriotism and national pride. Our colourful flag is more visible at this
time than ever before. [Applause.]

The international mood is also encouraging. The Government Communication
and Information System has been tracking international public opinion of
South Africa and the World Cup since 2007. We have done this because our
objective is to use the World Cup to market South Africa and to improve
international perceptions.

Tracking has taken place in 29 countries across seven regions. Findings
reveal that the successful hosting of the 2009 Fifa Confederations Cup
played a significant role in changing people’s minds, especially people
outside Africa. More people believe that South Africa will host an exciting
and memorable event. [Applause.]

Internationally, over 65% recall information on the World Cup as positive.
Among South African respondents this increases to 85%. This gives us the
best opportunity to demonstrate our ability and thereby strengthen our
global competitiveness. We have an opportunity to promote foreign
investment, tourism and trade.

We have to ensure effective policing during the World Cup. As you would be
aware, in addition to routine security plans and budgets, we also have an
additional R1,3 billion reserve for World Cup safety and security.
[Applause.] We have a comprehensive security plan, which includes
addressing terror threats, hooliganism and general crime.

World Cup fever is gaining momentum in our country, from Bafana sports
shirts to flags and dancing in the streets. South Africa will never be the
same again! [Applause.]

Working together we will excel and deliver a memorable tournament, just as
we did with many other huge international events, such as the Rugby World
Cup, cricket and large international conferences.

We must showcase our South African-ness and fly the flag, that colourful
flag, with pride. We are happy that thousands of our people are already
doing so. Let us show true South African hospitality and be courteous,
helpful and very welcoming to our guests. Let us also rally behind Bafana
Bafana and indeed all African teams. I want to repeat that Bafana Bafana is
going to surprise people. [Applause.]

We have said continually that this is an African World Cup. Consequently, I
have invited all heads of state on the continent to join us for the opening
and closing matches. [Applause.] I know that this creates problems for
those who deal with protocol and security, but this is an absolutely
pleasant problem. It is not a bad problem when visitors are here and they
have no place to sleep; it is a wonderful thing. We are loved by the world.
[Laughter.] Let us make African teams and African soccer fans feel welcome
and supported on African soil. [Applause.]

I was very happy yesterday when SAA staff briefed me on how flexible they
are making SAA during the four-week period, even shifting time if the
matches are delayed, etc, and adding more capacity. That is a pleasant
problem, Minister. [Laughter.]

Hon members, allow me to express the nation’s gratitude to our two former
Presidents for their sterling contribution to the World Cup project -
Isithwalandwe President Nelson Mandela and former President Thabo Mbeki.
[Applause.]

We also register our appreciation to our hon Deputy President, who leads
the Interministerial Committee on the Fifa World Cup, which has executed
its tasks efficiently and effectively. [Applause.]

As a nation, we must also acknowledge the hard-working 2010 Local
Organising Committee, Irvin Khoza and Danny Jordaan. We also take our hats
off to all individuals who toil every day to make the World Cup tournament
a success. We salute in particular the construction workers who have built
our remarkable stadiums and other infrastructure. [Applause.] They have
really made us look good in the eyes of the world.

Hon Speaker, let me take this opportunity to extend our condolences to the
families of those who died aboard the Afriqiyah Airways flight from
Johannesburg, which crashed near Tripoli, Libya, this morning. Our thoughts
are with those who lost loved ones in this tragedy.

Somlomo ohloniphekileyo, sivakalisa uvelwano lwethu kwizihlobo zabantu
abangama-23 abasweleke kwingozi yebhasi, eyenzeke kule veki iphelileyo
ivela eNgcobo eMpuma Koloni, isiza eKapa. Silila nani mawethu. [Hon
Speaker, we convey our condolences to the friends and relatives of the
people who died in the bus accident last week who were on their way from
Ngcobo, in the Eastern Cape, to Cape Town.]

Ngifisa futhi ukudlulisa ukuzwelana kwethu nemindeni yabantu abalimale
ngesikhathi isitimela ababehamba ngaso siqhunyelwa izintambo zikagesi
ngaseThekwini. Sibafisela ukwelulama okuphuthumayo.
Hawu bakwethu, engathi inkosi ingasinceda zinciphe izingozi emgwaqeni.
Bashayeli nani shayelani ngokucophelela. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[I wish to convey words of sympathy to the families of the people who were
injured when the electric cables of the train they were travelling in
exploded near Durban. We wish them a speedy recovery.

Fellow people, May God help us in reducing the number of road accidents.
Even you drivers, you should drive with caution.]

Hon Speaker, before concluding, let me thank our hon Deputy President, the
Ministers in the Presidency, the directors-general, advisers, management
and all staff in the Presidency for their hard work and support.

Let me borrow from Inkosi Albert Luthuli’s wise words, from 1958. He said:

   I cannot believe that all of us who are here will fail South Africa
   because we are cowards and apathetic. I believe we all will do our best -
   whatever the difficulties are - for the realisation of this glorious
   democratic South Africa we dream of.

Working together we will make our country succeed and prosper.
It is indeed my pleasure to commend the Budget Vote of the Presidency to
the House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Seboledi, Mopresidente le Motlatša Mopresidente, ke a le
dumediša. Ke re Thobela! [Hon Speaker, hon President and hon Deputy
President, I greet you all.]

I rise to declare that the ANC is irrevocably and unashamedly married to
the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. [Applause.] Not only are
we determined to uphold it, but we are also indeed ready to defend it with
our very own lives if need be.

We make bold these assertions sustained by the indomitable fighting spirit
of Makana, so eloquently captured in the words of Nelson Mandela at the
Rivonia Trial, during the time when our leadership was faced with the real
prospect of the hangman’s noose.

In our language we call this spirit the spirit of no surrender - the same
spirit that sustained Vuyisile Mini, as he faced the hangman’s noose; the
very spirit that sustained Solomon Mahlangu as he faced the gallows.

We make bold to say we can defend the Constitution with our lives,
sustained again by the spirit, by the knowledge that we speak also on
behalf of those who fell on the battlefield, pursuing the quest of the
realisation of this Constitution.

We shall defend this Constitution because it is the product of our own
struggle. It embodies the lofty ideas of Pixley ka Isaka Seme in 1912 when
he called for the unity of black people in our country. It reflects, in
many ways, the spirit of our Freedom Charter of 1955, which declared that:
“South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white.”

In case we forget, this was the time when white supremacy was reigning
supreme. It could not have been easy for our forebears, some of whom are
amongst us here today, to recognise the rights of the oppressors at the
same time that they themselves were at the receiving end of the iron heel
of the same white supremacy. We were bold then as the oppressed, as we are
bold now as a free people to assert the citizenship of all South Africans.

Our belief in the humanity of us all remains unassailable because it is not
discriminatory, and it is not time or circumstance bound. It is for this
reason that our time-tested belief in our collective humanity has
illuminated our passage through the valley of death, and it shall continue
to carry us onwards as a necessary burden on its timeless winds of wisdom
to the end of time.
This is made possible by the rare and priceless gift bequeathed to us by
the noble spirit of ubuntu, which asserts: Motho ke motho ka batho ba
bangwe. [A person is a person because of other people.]

We claim our own humanity by recognising the humanity of others. This is a
true and lasting hallmark of our people, and indeed is the intrinsic nature
of our great movement for those who know it as well as the uninitiated.

Those who today accuse the black majority and white democrats, as
represented by our movement, of being a threat to the Constitution,
deliberately choose to overlook the history of this country. They are the
ones who are, in fact, posing a serious threat to the Constitution by
opportunistically and hysterically waving the flag of fear and uncertainty
amongst the population, not only here, but also abroad.

In this regard, it is disingenuous and unpatriotic to attempt to build any
party’s political fortunes aboard a wagon propelled on wheels of falsehood
and on the road to a nonexistent but promised utopia, a state which exists
only in the minds of its prophets and their disciples.

Speaking for ourselves, we have defied the odds with remarkable resilience
by consistently refusing to be defined by the centuries-old dehumanisation
of black people. Whenever we have had the occasion to look into the mirror
of time, we have always come out proud of being ourselves, proud of our
value systems. We have survived the ideological onslaughts of successive
white regimes which sought to convince us that we were children of a lesser
God, and, therefore, poor imitations of real human beings. We have also
witnessed oppressors suffering under the weight of the chains they sought
to shackle their victims with.

To oppress others can be a thankless and, indeed, energy-sapping full-time
job, my friends. It would be foolish in the extreme, therefore, for us to
swop the free mantle of the liberator for the debilitating straitjacket of
the oppressor. Therefore, reproducing ourselves in the image of the
oppressor has never been an attractive option at all. [Applause.] We are
not about to change now, and change the Constitution because we are ruling.
This Constitution is safe with us. It is safe with the ANC. [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Yeah!

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: It is safe with the people of South Africa.

HON MEMBERS: Yeah!

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: It is safe with our President who, more than any amongst
us has had to humble himself before its might on many occasions.
[Applause.] For the Constitution to be alive, the people must give it a
breath of life, just as happened the day a human was created in the
Creator’s own image. [Interjections.]

We must embrace it, promote it and defend it in the same way it seeks to do
for us. In this regard, we cannot afford to be selective and embrace only
sections which might appear to favour our own sectional interests, such
interests being material or ideological. It is, therefore, our collective
responsibility to enhance and not to diminish the legitimacy of this
Constitution as it is the real, and perhaps only true foundation of our
democratic state.

Though we may take it for granted, this Constitution has given us the peace
rarely experienced on the continent and indeed elsewhere the world over.
This has been possible because it recognises and restores the humanity of
us all, as well as promotes a society based on human solidarity. The peace
we enjoy affords us the opportunity to correct our genuine and sometimes
silly mistakes. This would not be possible in a society consumed by
warfare.

In order to transform our justice system, the Constitution has, amongst
other things, established the Judicial Service Commission. In this regard,
the commission has discharged its duties with enterprising diligence and
great fortitude, sometimes in the face of vicious attacks from powerful
quarters resisting change. There have been occasions on which some have
sought to impose their own preferences and wills on the Judicial Service
Commission. In this regard, sustained assaults have been mounted both in
the courts and also in the domain of public opinion.

The judiciary itself has not been spared by these forces who are convinced
that it is their God-given right that its decisions must always be in their
favour or in accordance with their world view. Our judiciary must uphold
the values of our rainbow nation, not the exclusive values of an
unrepentant minority.

This point cannot be overemphasised: that, as a nation, we must rally to
the defence of the institutions underpinning our nation’s democracy,
including the Presidency of this country, which deserves more respect than
we have given it until now. [Applause.]

These institutions are young and they are still vulnerable, and we must
therefore protect them. This is crucial because were they to collapse, we
would have neither winners nor losers in this country. We would then have
an unmitigated freefall into the state of nature where there are no rules
and anarchy prevails. In this state, it is not unusual to find a dog eating
another dog. There won’t be smart debates out there, as we shall all be
fighting for survival in the state of nature.

The sad truth is that, were we to arrive at that point, we would have
destroyed not only our future, but the future of the innocent: our children
and our children’s children to the fourth generation. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, hon President, and hon Deputy
President, as so many newspaper headlines have already said over the past
couple of days, the honeymoon is over. Rebekah Kendal wrote on 4 May 2010,
“Phew. What a year. Yip, it’s been almost a year since Jacob Zuma was sworn
in as President of the country in a bash that cost the South African
taxpayer a whopping R75 million. Since then, things have pretty much
followed the formula of the inauguration: Expensive.”

In your last state of the nation address, you undertook to outline the
missing details in the budget and ministerial debates. Frankly, not having
a portfolio committee to consider your budget, which incidentally is
growing at an alarming rate, leaves me none the wiser because the
forthcoming detail you spoke about never materialised. In fact, the fact
that the Presidency didn’t even present a strategic plan for the past
financial year, notwithstanding some fundamental changes, amongst them the
commissioning of two new Ministries in the Presidency and the Presidential
Hotline that continues to “tilt at every conceivable windmill” with very
limited impact, makes one wonder whether there is indeed a strategy or a
framework. The recent resignation or redeployment of some of the senior
presidential staffers suggests that this is not a happy place, nor a well
co-ordinated and organised place.

Dit op sigself vereis dat daar meer eerder as minder toesig moet geskied
ten einde te verseker dat die Presidensie se begroting van R727 miljoen,
wat tot R815 miljoen in 2012-13 sal toeneem – voor enige onvermydelike
hertoedelings – effektief, doeltreffend en ekonomies bestee word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[That, by itself, necessitates that there is more rather than less
oversight in order to ensure that the Presidency’s budget of R727 million,
that will increase to R815 million in 2012-13 - before any unavoidable
reallotments – is effectively, efficiently and economically spent.]

The apparent support from the Speaker, the House Chairpersons and the
multiparty Chief Whips Forum for a body to oversee the Presidency is
welcomed by the DA. Apart from the fact that this Parliament cannot allow
any budgets to go unaccounted for, it perforce needs to ensure that the
transversal responsibilities of the Presidency are appropriately
implemented and fulfilled across the board without exception. Only
authentic oversight by this Parliament can ensure that this happens.

Mr President, I can’t help thinking that many of the challenges that rest
on your weary shoulders could have been averted or addressed through
decisive leadership, the kind of leadership that is clearly set out in an
ANC discussion document titled “Through the Eye of the Needle”. It is
extremely naïve ... [Interjections.]
... ewe, ndiyifundile. [Kwahlekwa.] [... yes, I have read it.  [Laughter.]]

It is extremely naïve to think that your Cabinet will decide for
government, when Cabinet itself is so divided and dichotomous on so many
critical issues, especially the macroeconomic policy of our country.
Michael Spicer of Business Leadership SA describes this situation well when
he says, “It leads to contestation and policy paralysis and an attempt to
be all things to all people.”

Mr President, you cannot be all things to all people, as you will either
let them all down or else they will let you down. I wonder, for example,
what the last straw was that broke your silence and prompted you to act, at
last, against Julius Malema. [Interjections.]

Was it the fact that he spoke the unspeakable about supporting Mugabe and
Zanu-PF or, more sinisterly put, the fact that he said what the ANC
silently wishes should happen in Zimbabwe? Your lack of decisive leadership
regarding the unacceptable behaviour of the ANC Youth League, and its
leadership in particular, has allowed the South African political discourse
to descend into the gutter.

It is now time for you to take control and do what is necessary to prevent
the further unravelling of our national thread. The hosting of the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, hon President.
Ubuntu ... [Laughter.] Ubuntu, as so eloquently put by the speaker before
me, sets us apart from other non-African countries.

Ubuntu buhamba kunye nembeko, ikakhulu imbeko yokukhahlela abantu abadala
okanye abantu abakhulu. Kuxhomekeke kuthi ukukhusela ubuntu. Ubukrwada
asinto yamkelekileyo. [Ubuntu goes with respect, more especially respect of
greeting the elderly. The protection of ubuntu depends on us. Rudeness is
not accepted.]

You also need to understand that your nondisclosure of financial interests,
as required by the Executive Members’ Ethics Act, has been a lamentable
transgression, especially considered against your claim that your
administration would seek to combat corruption. Your explanations for this
non-compliance can at best be described as a red herring and at worst
simply disingenuous.

In this regard, Mr Malema trumpeted just more than a year ago that voters
should never trust politicians that can’t account for their wealth.
[Interjections.] Well, he has done really well for someone who ostensibly
holds no business interests or directorships and has an unbelievable amount
of disposable income to spend on bling and birthdays for someone who is a
salary earner in the ANC structures. What is more, it is now he who can’t
or won’t explain his very apparent opulence.

Regarding the other departmental budgets, Mr President, allow me to say
that it is with regret that you weren’t here to observe the performance of
some of your Ministers, their deputies, committee chairs and ANC committee
members. Minister Shiceka derided me in his own very inimitable fashion for
attending the budget debates to ensure that, in his words, “my members
spoke the language of their master”. All the more is the pity you didn’t do
the same to assess what these people were saying, Mr President.

Minister Shiceka misinformed the public about expenditure on the 2010 World
Cup stadia. He blamed the DA for the R4 billion price tag of the Cape Town
stadium and compared this with the cost of the Orlando Stadium. First of
all, he forgets that it was President Mbeki who negotiated with Sepp
Blatter in 2005 that Green Point was the place to build the stadium. He
ignored the appeals of the people of Cape Town to build it in Athlone or
Newlands. And, if the hon Rasool was here today, he would tell you that he
was instructed by Essop Pahad that that is the wish of the President, so
hence the R4 billion price tag.

What he should have done further, was that he should not have misled the
people and compared Orlando Stadium with Green Point Stadium. What he
should have done was compare apples with apples. He should have compared it
with the R3,2 billion price tag of the Soweto Stadium, and not the Orlando
Stadium. [Interjections.]

Furthermore, the hon Shiceka said, “Do not politicise local government.”
Hello! Who politicised local government? He said, "Where are the problems
of political leadership? Are they in other municipalities or in the Western
Cape? They are here." Well, a quick audit revealed that there are currently
23 out of 275 municipalities, 8,4%, under administration, all in ANC-
controlled provinces ... [Interjections.] ... with ANC cadres deployed as
administrators, and all the failed councillors and mayors continue to
receive their salaries with little or no impact from the curatorship
interventions. [Interjections.] It is ANC municipalities that have two
mayors. It is ANC municipalities that don’t meet for a year because of
intrapolitical party politics in the ANC.

In contrast, Mr President, in the Western Cape 23 out of 30 municipalities
received unqualified audits; 29 of the 30 municipalities spent 100% of
their municipal infrastructure grant; and 96% of that grant has been spent
by the City of Cape Town, unparalleled expenditure of the municipal
infrastructure grant. [Applause.] No wonder he says don’t politicise local
government, because it is political dynamite.

Wanneer mnr Shiceka sê dat die DA-beheerde Wes-Kaap en Stad Kaapstad “’n
eiland van uitmuntendheid omring deur ’n see van probleme is”, kan ek nie
anders as om met hom saam te stem nie, want hy erken die doeltreffendheid
van DA beheer en die mislukking van die naburige ANC-beheerde provinsies en
munisipaliteite.

Mnr die President, en ek haal aan uit die Presidensie se
begrotingsdokument: “Die doel van die Presidensie is om te lei, te bestuur
en die strategiese sakelys van die regering te ontwikkel, daaroor toesig te
hou om sodoende die verwesenliking daarvan deur die Staat in sy geheel te
verseker.” U moes teen hierdie tyd reeds verseker het dat die makro-
ekonomiese en rigtinggewende beleid afgehandel is en dat die
Beplanningskommissie hom moet toespits op die beplanning van die langtermyn
- ekonomiese strategieë en rigting van die land. Dit behoort gekoppel te
word aan prestasie-verwante ooreenkomste wat aanvaar moet word deur al die
Ministers en al 28 adjunkte, wat, met die uitsondering van ’n paar, hulle
alleen weet wat hulle eintlik doen.

Wat die skep van werkgeleenthede betref, is u ver van u verkiesingsbelofte
om 500 000 werkgeleenthede te skep. Tussen April 2009 en April 2010 het
Suid-Afrika ’n netto verlies van meer as ’n miljoen werkgeleenthede gehad.
Tog wag ons steeds vir ’n strategiese plan oor hoe ordentlike
werkgeleenthede, veral vir die jeug, geskep gaan word. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[When Mr Shiceka says that the DA-controlled Western Cape and the City of
Cape Town “is an island of excellence surrounded by a sea of problems”, I
have no other option but to agree with him, because he recognises the
efficacy of DA management and the failure of the neighbouring ANC-
controlled provinces and municipalities.

Mr President, and I am quoting from the Presidency’s budget document: “The
aim of the Presidency is to lead, manage and develop the strategic agenda
of government and oversee and ensure its realisation by government as a
whole.” By this time you should already have ensured that the macro-
economic and directional policy is completed and that the Planning
Commission is focussing on developing long - term economic policy
strategies and the course of the country. It should be linked to
performance-related agreements that must be accepted by all the Ministers
and all 28 deputies, who, with the exception of a few, only they know what
they are actually doing.

Regarding the creation of job opportunities, you are far from your election
promise of creating 500 000 job opportunities. Between April 2009 and April
2010 South Africa had a net loss of more than a million job opportunities.
Hitherto, we are still waiting for a strategic plan on how decent job
opportunities, especially for the youth, are going to be created.]

For example, what has become of Minister Gordhan’s call for a wage subsidy
and a two-tier labour dispensation for first-time young job-seekers? Has
Cosatu’s objection pushed this onto the back burner forever? I know that
all of this seems like a tall order for one year in office, but you have
effectively been the Deputy President for six years and the President of
the ANC since 2007, and it is you, hon President, that constantly refers to
the ANC as a collective. This means that you didn’t become President in a
vacuum. The ANC has been in government for 16 years, and allow me to remind
you that success has many fathers and failure is an orphan.

If the Ministerial Monitoring and Evaluation System is not underpinned with
punitive action for nonperformers, as per Minister Chabane’s explanation,
failure will become your constant companion, because this is not the
behaviour of an administration pursuing excellence. It is the sign of an
administration paying lip service to accountability but, underneath the
rhetoric, is really concerned with the entrenchment of its own power
through deployment on the basis of political patronage.

Mr President, with regards to this failure to perform and provide, is it
not yet time for you as President of South Africa and the former Chair of
the Southern African Development Community, SADC, to give the citizens of
this country, and this Parliament, a full and detailed report on what is
actually going on in Zimbabwe and the status of the Global Political
Agreement? This is especially important as it appears as if prime minister
Tsvangirai has succumbed to Stockholm Syndrome and the mesmerisation of the
octogenarian wizard.

Further, you need to clarify what kind of real investment protection the
toothless Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement offers
South African investors that conduct business activities in Zimbabwe,
especially against the stated objectives of the draft Bill on
indigenisation of foreign-owned businesses in Zimbabwe.

Locally, much has been made of your and Minister Shiceka’s call to prevent
political party office bearers from holding public administrative office
and that if such an appointment is made, that the relevant councillors will
be held to account. All I can say is: Ha, ha!

Give this House but one example of such accountability, and I’ll retract
this derision. I am confident that there is no such example, though, as the
examples that do exist highlight instances of startling embarrassment and
costly litigation across the country.

Accountability is something that is not yet synonymous with the ANC at all,
as even here in Parliament, despite the Deputy President’s intervention as
the Leader of Government Business to get the Ministers to answer the
questions, the questions remain unanswered. This is not only arrogant
disdain of the opposition – and some Ministers refuse to go to special
oversight committees - it is, more worryingly, a disdain for Parliament and
the Constitution.

It is important to say to you, hon President, in this House, taking note of
what the hon Ramatlhodi said, that if and when you, and anyone in
government, seek to transgress or undermine the Constitution, the DA will
do what it deems necessary to prevent this both in Parliament and the
courts of law with our own money, no matter how irritating and inconvenient
you and your Cabinet find this. This is not only the role of an effective
opposition; it is the role and responsibility of a collective opposition to
prevent an abrogation of our much-vaunted Constitution.

The same applies to your profligate Ministers whose penchant for excessive
and wasteful expenditure has taken the DA’s Wasteful Expenditure Monitor
beyond the R1 billion mark. Mr President, this past year, unfortunately,
can never be honestly described as a year of “faster, better, smarter”
governance. This debate might not be taken too seriously by you and your
Cabinet, but ignore it at your peril, as the 2011 local government
elections are looming. [Interjections.] Sizakubona! [We’ll see.] [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M S SHILOWA: House Chairperson, Cope will not support the budget, for
reasons that will become clearer during my input. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

Mr M S SHILOWA: In a month’s time, football fans from across the globe will
descend on our shores in their multitudes. They will come to witness the
first ever historic Fifa World Cup tournament held on African soil. If ever
there was a time for South Africans to come together in solidarity and
embrace Bafana Bafana, this is the time. Here is a gift-wrapped opportunity
to forge national unity and cohesion.

While the vuvuzelas cannot score goals, seeing all of South Africa blowing
on them will lift our football stars to great heights of achievement in
their opening encounter with Mexico, as well as ensure that we reach the
second round. Once they clear this hurdle, I have no doubt that, instead of
aiming at the treetops, they will begin to aim for the stars. This is a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that we must seize with both hands.

That the infrastructure is ready is a matter of great pride. We now need to
focus sharply on logistical issues: integrated public transport; security;
fan parks; and accommodation, to name but a few. For ordinary men and
women, there will be an opportunity to derive economic benefit to the
extent that is possible. For government, the imperative is to make certain
that in the action of both business and government, we do not kill the
goose that lays the golden egg. Tourists must be protected; they must not
be overcharged, so that, by word of mouth, they can spread the appeal of
South Africa all over the world.

As we prepare for this world spectacle, we should not lose sight of the
bleak reality that confronts our people. Four in ten of those who could be
employed are jobless. What this means in terms of suffering is
unimaginable. While men are also badly affected in this regard, women and
the youth are hardest hit.

We agree, as you indicated, that social grants are very important in
helping to ameliorate the situation of the poor. However, we believe that
it is important to move beyond simple issues of social grants. While South
Africans welcome those social grants, what they need more is secure and
sustainable jobs.

People want to emerge out of the poverty in which they are mired. Many have
no water, sanitation and shelter. To add to their misery, they are also
frequent victims of violent crime. This is where government should be
targeting its spending. This has to be government’s priority. However,
government expenses are ballooning because of executive expenditure on
luxury sedans, five-star hotel accommodation, the increase in the size of
presidential spousal office ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

Mr M S SHILOWA: ... and the expensive state ... [Interjections.] I beg your
pardon!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, order, please!

Mr M S SHILOWA: Please, don’t talk about Gauteng and the premiership. I
think I can put many of you to shame. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Shilowa, order, please! Order,
hon members!

Hon members, can I appeal to you that you give an opportunity to the
President to listen to the speakers, because at the end of the day the
President has to respond. Can we respect that? Hon George, I didn’t ask for
your assistance. [Laughter.} You may continue, hon member.

Mr M S SHILOWA: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. For the record, to
those hon members who have been saying something about me, Gauteng and the
premiership: Even as you speak today, when Gauteng writes about its
successes over the past 15 years, nine and a half of those years include me
at the helm. This is history you cannot erase. [Applause.]

I was saying that this is where government should be targeting its
spending. This has to be government’s priority. However, as I was saying,
government expenses are ballooning because of executive expenditure on
luxury sedans, five-star hotel accommodation, the increase in the size of
the presidential spousal office, and the expensive state visit to the
United Kingdom.

I-Table Bay kanye nalelihhotela elila, lapho kuhlala khona uNyanda ... [The
Table Bay Hotel and another hotel here, where Mr Nyanda resides ...]

... is a five-star hotel. [Interjections.]

Bendingahlali khona okokoko, yena uhlala apho okokoko enendlu phaya. Mna
bendihlala ekhaya. [I didn’t stay there all the time; he stays there all
the time and has a house there. I was staying at home.]

The continued appointment of a plethora of advisers is a clear indication
that making an improvement in the lives of our people, especially the poor,
is not the area of focus for government. While we welcome the many
announcements by Ministers on plans that will ultimately lead to
sustainable jobs, the sad reality is that even more jobs are being lost
daily, as we speak. This is happening despite the President’s assurance
during the state of the nation address that we had turned the corner. Bling
is prospering, while unemployment is ravaging the lives of the people.

As infrastructure projects and buildings get completed, many more people
will soon join the ranks of the unemployed. You are no doubt aware that
more than a million jobs have been lost under your watch, sir.

A few weeks ago, I visited the village of Muyexe. What I saw there was
shocking. Having been conditioned by ministerial assurances in this House
that improvements were taking place, I could see that despite the spin,
there was very little taking place that could be termed rural development.
If this is what a pilot project looks like, I shudder to think what the
real project will look like. If it is assumed that I visited the wrong
Muyexe area, I would be happy to accompany ... ... Nkul Nkwinti na Baloyi,
hi ya vona. [... hon Nkwinti and Baloyi to go and have a look.]

Better still, when next ... ... Nkul Chabane va ya ka Xikundu, ndzi nga
tsakela ku va heleketa hi ya vona. [... hon Chabane goes to Xikundu, I will
be happy to accompany him to go and have a look.]

I am aware that the government went to Mthatha a few months ago. We are
aware of the undertakings that were made to its citizens. The sad reality
is that by the time the programmes promised are undertaken, even the
existing roads, which were more potholes than roads, would have turned to
gravel. This is a terrible letdown for a province which diligently gave
their vote to the ruling party.

It is now a matter of historical record that the President, as was pointed
out, failed to declare his assets in time, and only did so after an outcry
from the public. The Cabinet asked the South African public to move on as
this was now water under the bridge. The truth, though, is that a new
benchmark for Ministers has now been set. They too can take their time,
knowing that they can get away with the proverbial murder. No wonder some
of them continue to do business with state institutions even as they hold
public office.

Cha, ningaya kobheka, angizange ngibe nebhizinisi ngisakuhulumeni.
[Ubuwelewele.] [No, you can go and check, I’ve never had a business while I
was still employed by the government. [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr M S SHILOWA: It’s a matter of historical record. I am very proud of my
record. I never, like some of the Ministers here, asked for a tender when I
was in government. Go and check; it’s a matter of historical record. Shame
on you! [Applause.]
The Cabinet asked the South African public to move on as if this was now
water under the bridge. The President’s commitment to rooting out
corruption will always ring hollow, unless he deals with these issues.

We are told that all Ministers have now signed performance agreements with
the President, but that these will not be made public. Why make the
announcement in public if the public has no way of monitoring and
evaluating them. [Applause.] If the public does not know what the
agreements are, how are they supposed to judge whether or not these
Ministers are acting in terms of the agreements they have with the
President?

We welcome, though, Mr President, the new-found impetus to fight the
scourge of HIV and Aids, including your leadership on being tested.  This
is an important step as it helps people who are HIV-positive to ensure that
they do not infect others or contract a different strain by continuing as
if nothing had taken place. There is, however, an even bigger onus on those
of us who test negative. They have to take steps to ensure that they remain
negative through remaining faithful to their partners and condomising.
They, too, have a duty to stop engaging in risky sexual behaviour.

Important as the roll-out of antiretrovirals is, without the procurement of
essential drugs at cheaper rates, the programme may soon become
unaffordable. So, we agree with the Minister that everything must be done
to ensure that drugs are found at cheaper rates.

We also welcome the establishment of the National Planning Commission,
which is now in place, more so since it is staffed by men and women who we
believe will be able to not only focus on what the ANC manifesto says, but
also on what the vision of South Africa should be over the next five, 10 to
15 years. That we welcome, sir, and hope we will be able to work with them.

We also welcome, as you yourself have said, your openness in working with
the opposition, more so the engagement that we have had with political
leaders, including the point that we must find a way to build national
cohesion. One way of building national cohesion is by ensuring that when we
celebrate national days, that these are seen truly as national days in the
way in which you have been trying to do.

Nation-building remains a challenge, though. All of us need to watch our
tongues. We must be mindful of what we say. We must ensure that we do not,
in the process, fan racial hatred. This is not a call for papering over the
fact that there are still high levels of inequality in income distribution
and ownership of the economy, as well as the means of production, but
rather a call to raise this issue with the aim of ensuring implementation
of corrective policies while building our nation.
I was alarmed that the ANC felt that the kind of language Mr Malema used on
a British journalist was correct, and that what they felt was the biggest
insult was what they thought he had said about the President. I thought
that what he said about the President, what he said when he was in
Zimbabwe, and what he said about a British journalist were wrong and should
have been dealt with and dealt with effectively. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Speaker, hon Chairperson, Your Excellency the
President, Your Excellency Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon Deputy
Ministers and hon members, of course there are many facets to the
Presidency. Today, I wish to focus on its powers and functions in the
international arena. Last week, the President and I, together with some of
the hon Ministers, were at the World Economic Forum in Dar es Salaam in
Tanzania. As many commentators have already observed, nothing of substance
came out of that meeting, which reiterated the importance of Africa
pursuing an agenda on which there has been consensus for a decade but on
which there has still not been a concrete implementation plan.
 
The President’s predecessor, His Excellency Mr Thabo Mbeki, carved a role
for himself in history by being one of the many promoters of Nepad and the
African Union. In fact, the perception is that he is one of the founding
fathers of the African Union, if not the father. So I urge our President to
keep up the momentum and maintain the leadership role that both Africa and
the world have come to expect South Africa to play. We need to take
immediate action to give substance to the often-declared commitments and
agenda items for Africa, voiced in international forums.

At the opening of the King Shaka International Airport in Durban last
weekend, His Excellency the President stated, amongst other things, that we
must change the way the government works and that we must change the way
the country works. I have expressed these sentiments myself for the past 20
years. So, as I endorse these sentiments today, I wish to add that we must
also change the way Africa works to make this country work better, just as
we must change the way this country works to make Africa work better.

I call for the time of empty declarations to end. I wish to make some very
concrete suggestions, which highlight the relevance of the international
dimension of the issues with which this Parliament is now seized. I urge
the President to promote the immediate establishment of the free
circulation of goods and capital within sub-Saharan Africa, and the related
abolition of all internal duties, customs and checkpoints, in the same way
the many diverse countries of Europe did and as the World Economic Forum
has often suggested.

This initiative will open a completely different dimension for the debates
we are having on our Industrial Policy Action Plan, which suffers under the
difficulty of promoting industrial bases for a country like ours with less
than 10 million consumers for a broad range of goods. The predictable and
imminent creation of a continental marketplace will enable each country to
specialise in the manufacturing of one or more products, thereby promoting
continental trade as the basis for greater South-South transcontinental
trade.
 
To a great extent, the Industrial Policy Action Plan is now predicated on
the notion of protecting our industry by means of tariffs and subsidies. I
am, rather, proposing that tariffs and subsidies be used within the
parameters of a continental custom union to protect the continental
internal market from unbearable external competition during its infancy.
Well, the question may be asked: Is this too large a leap, too fast and too
early? I say no, it is the bare minimum, way too late and way too slow.

I urge the President to champion the redress of Africa’s lack of adequate
and integrated infrastructure. It is a terrible indictment having to read
in books, like the one recently published by our Professor R W Johnson,
that throughout Africa, including our own country, infrastructure levels
and adequacy have declined since liberation was achieved.

As the President has stated, we are all very proud of what we have achieved
in preparation for the 2010 Fifa World Cup, including these beautiful
scarves. Our roads are in a parlous state, with potholes enough to give our
frogs a bath on rainy days. [Laughter.] What is worse is that those
potholes have caused the deaths of innocent citizens. I would appeal to my
homeboy, the Minister of Transport, not to take this as a personal attack
on him because he inherited the situation. [Laughter.]

It is a demeaning but nonetheless inspiring fact that when European
countries came together to partition Africa into African states amongst
themselves in the Treaty of Berlin in 1885, they also set up a process of
co-ordinated infrastructure development inclusive of harbours, highways,
railways, factories, airports and electricity plants. Amidst hiccups and
difficulties, this process lasted until the outbreak of World War II.
 
So, I urge the President to launch an initiative in terms of which African
countries can now come together as equal and free nations to resume the co-
ordinated and integrated development of infrastructure within the
continent. In order for this not to become another talk-shop in which the
problems are reiterated without the power to forge and impose solutions to
them, it is necessary that real powers be vested in such an institution,
along the lines of a European Commission.

This institution should receive funding and should plan the development of
Africa not only in respect of building the required 19th and 20th century
hard infrastructure, but also in respect of the soft infrastructure of the
21st century, ranging from the reticulation of broadband Internet to
satellite communications.

It is disheartening to me, Your Excellency, that in spite of being the
economic powerhouse of Africa, our country is today well behind even former
socialist states like Tanzania and Mozambique as an attractive destination
for investment. While it is encouraging that the President rejected the
idea, for instance, of the mining industry being nationalised, I think he
actually confused many people, both here and abroad, when in the same
breath, he pronounced that the debate on the nationalisation of the mining
industry within the ruling party should be accepted as an ongoing debate.

I shrink when Your Excellency suggests that something such as
nationalisation can still be a subject for debate, when it has ruined so
many countries. As a patriot, I resent my President saying anything that
can be misinterpreted as him speaking out of both sides of his mouth. It
is, however, not my resentment that is important, but that this kind of
talk frightens away would-be investors.

I also urge that the President call for the creation of an institution
which can represent a united African position in World Trade Organisation
negotiations in order to achieve a common front on agricultural issues. We
must exercise maximum moral and political pressure on the developed world
to stop their subsidies of their farmers, so that Africa may finally become
what it is supposed to be: the breadbasket of the world. This would address
the critical unemployment situation in our country and in other African
countries. Of all the debates that took place at the World Economic Forum
on Africa, to me the one on agriculture was the most relevant for us in
Africa.

The final aspect of this internationalist agenda, which I urge our
President to consider, is that of unleashing the developmental and
constructive capacity of our South African companies within the rest of the
continent. As Americans and Europeans have done with their own companies,
we should provide financial assistance for infrastructural development to
other African countries, on condition that their work be conducted by South
African companies, which will build a stronger and larger industrial base
for us, effectively transferring subsidies to our industries while giving
concrete assistance to the development of the rest of Africa in terms of
schools, hospitals and even broadband Internet.
 
It is essential that, as part of this initiative, we call for the adoption
of uniform legislation, making it a crime within our own country if one of
our companies engages in corruption in a foreign country. Both Europe and
the United States have such legislation on their Statute Books.

Mr President, I believe that this agenda would address a huge number of
problems at home and abroad, and would show that under the present
incumbent, yourself, sir, our Presidency has maintained, if not increased,
its international leadership within Africa and the world.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Prince Buthelezi, your time
has expired.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: I know that the issue is not whether this agenda will
be realised or not, but when. My challenge to the President is that he be
the one that makes it happen and for this to happen within my lifetime.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant Lungu elihloniphekile, Sokwalisa
isikhathi sakho sesiphelile. [Ihlombe.] [Hon member, Sowkalisa, your time
has expired. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, hon President of the Republic Mr
Jacob Zuma, hon members, premiers, distinguished guests, Safa President
Kirsten Nematandani, CEO of the Local Organising Committee Dr Danny
Jordaan, molweni! [good day!]

I am honoured to share this platform with the President of the Republic and
the rest of the Members of the House, including my colleagues in the
Presidency, on the occasion of the presentation of the Presidencys Budget
Vote.

In 19 days from today, South Africa will mark the centenary of the Union of
South Africa, which came into being in 1910. As you all know, this was the
creation of the South African state as we know it today and the legalised
exclusion of the majority of our people from the main body politic. The
then four provinces came together to form the Union of South Africa. For
this they each received a crown: Pretoria, in the Transvaal, became the
administrative capital. The Orange Free State was crowned with the seat of
the Judiciary in Bloemfontein, whilst the Cape got Parliament, and Natal
was crowned with the headquarters of the railway. [Laughter.]

In 1994, nine provinces were conceived out of negotiations and consensus
mainly to forge a nonsexist, nonracial and democratic Republic that belongs
to all who live in it, united in diversity as stated in the motto of our
coat of arms expressed in /Xam, a language of the Khoisan people.

This fact of history, having influenced the political trajectory of this
country for over 100 years, is our common heritage, and therefore must be
observed and discussed in this Parliament, at centres of learning,
churches, in the “platteland” [rural area], mass media, train stations, in
the branches of all political parties, and so on.

As Milan Kundera said, “the struggle of memory is a struggle against
forgetting”. In the same vein, we must also remember the fact that this
year marks 150 years since the arrival of Indian indentured labourers to
our shores. In this regard, I urge all of us to celebrate their
contribution to our culture, commerce and many other aspects of the
sociopolitical life of this country. [Applause.]

That today we speak of building an inclusive society is a direct response
to the conditions precipitated by the South Africa Act 100 years ago. The
rights and responsibilities that emanate from our Constitution have made us
appreciate much more what unites us as a nation rather than what divided us
in the past.

As we strive to fulfil a common vision for the creation of a prosperous
South Africa, we do so guided by the strategic objectives of improving the
education system, eradicating poverty, creating decent work and speeding up
inclusive economic growth. A value framework in which we mobilise the
nation towards this vision is based on the pursuit of social equity,
justice and fairness, and is results driven. Of course, this value
framework is at the heart of our mandate to address the legacy of
discrimination and dispossession.

Our government’s programme of action requires from all of us that we work
together through an integrated approach to address marginalisation and
underdevelopment. Our core business is to restore hope and dignity in the
lives of all South Africans by delivering effective, consistent and
reliable services to the people.

It is incumbent upon all of us, as public representatives, to be at the
service of the people. President Jacob Zuma has challenged us not only to
understand what the needs of the people are, but also to be an
administration that knows where people live, what their concerns are and to
involve them in our efforts to improve their living conditions. This will
enable us to create a better life for all and to promote nation-building
and social cohesion through partnerships aimed at achieving a more caring
society. These principles are a milestone in the long journey we have
travelled since the establishment of the Union of South Africa on 31 May
1910.

Before I get into the specific details of the work of the Office of the
Deputy President, that is, over and above delivering deputy speeches ...
[Laughter.] ... allow me to add weight to a fundamental point raised by the
President when he addressed the nation on Freedom Day and again here today.
This concerns the seminal question: What are we about as a nation,
especially as we celebrate 16 years of freedom this year?

I believe our immediate obligation is to honour the mandate given to us by
the people of this country. We should do this by, among other things,
always upholding the Constitution, respecting one another, protecting our
national symbols and celebrating our national days as one people, bound
together by a common history and a shared destiny. As a basis for nation-
building, the common ownership of our history includes acknowledging that,
irrespective of where on the political spectrum people were prior to 1994,
they all belong to this country, and therefore have a responsibility to
build a prosperous South Africa. I wish to reiterate that the aspirations
of our people must never be undermined by any interest group based on the
subjectivity of race, religion, class, gender or ideology.

This democracy we enjoy today came at a price, including the death of
thousands who relinquished their right to participate in order for us to
live in a free country. [Applause.] As living delegates of the departed, we
must remain steadfast in our endeavour to improve the socioeconomic
conditions of our people. In fact, the five national priorities informing
the programme of action of this administration give practical expression to
these principles through the following: improving education; improving
healthcare; creating decent work; fighting crime and corruption; and rural
development and land reform.

You have consistently stated that working together with social partners,
the state can better facilitate a common programme towards the achievement
of these priorities through considered planning, performance monitoring and
evaluation, better co-ordination and intensified oversight. My colleagues,
Ministers Collins Chabane and Trevor Manuel, will elaborate on these.

The function of government and the Presidency, in particular, is clearly
articulated as building a democratic developmental state through defined
interventions. In this regard, allow me to recount some of the progress we
have made as well as the challenges encountered in the first year of this
administration.

As hon members will recall, when we presented our Budget Vote in June 2009,
we committed ourselves to deepen our co-ordination and oversight efforts to
ensure the successful hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup, which is now only
days away. We committed ourselves to speed up all infrastructure aspects of
the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We gave an undertaking to help host cities arrest
budget overruns. We undertook to help unblock bottlenecks undermining
stadium completion in cities like Mbombela. We also mentioned the
significance of profiling legacy projects.

I am pleased to inform this House that we have gone beyond making good on
our commitments. The stadiums are ready. Electricity and telecommunications
networks are in place. Expanded airports are open for business. Immigration
systems are ready for the inflow of foreign visitors. Systems to detect and
treat visitors with contagious infections like H1N1 are operational.
Highways, byways, ulterior and access roads are ready and some nearing
completion. Disaster management, border control, crowd control, crime
prevention, air, marine and intelligence security services are mobilised.
Operational plans for fan parks and public viewing areas are in place.
Almost every team has confirmed a base camp. We were also successful in
assisting the Northern Cape province, as the only nonhosting province, to
secure funds to upgrade their facilities. We are pleased that these
facilities have been selected by Uruguay as their base camp. [Applause.]

As Chairperson of the 2010 Interministerial Committee, I wish to
acknowledge the efforts of the Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs and Finance departments who have worked tirelessly to address host
city co-ordination and budget overrun challenges. May I also recognise the
efforts of all Ministers, Deputy Ministers and senior managers who have
ensured that we meet our guarantees on time. Even in the limited period
remaining, we are still hopeful that the share of small enterprises will
rise, as would our confidence in our national team, Bafana Bafana. We hope
to provide them with boots that are able to score goals, even if you face
the opposite direction. [Applause.]

Of the economic and social legacy projects I have visited in Soweto,
Rustenburg, eThekwini, Mbombela and even in the small town of Gansbaai in
the southern Cape, all confirm that this 2010 Fifa World Cup will have long
lasting spin-offs for our communities. We can deny the excitement of South
Africans who are already celebrating this extravaganza through dance, song,
arts, apparel and various other artefacts on display at street corners,
shops and everywhere else in our communities only if we disbelieve the
evidence shown to our eyes and ears. I am happy that Ministers Stofile and
Xingwana will soon give diski dance tutorials to all Members of Parliament.
[Applause.]

On this occasion last year, we committed ourselves to a number of efforts
to improve our performance in the management of HIV and Aids. This included
strengthening a partnership between government, business, organised labour
and civil society. Since then, great efforts have been expended to
strengthen the South African National Aids Council, Sanac, the multi-
sectoral structure responsible for policy advice, co-ordination and
management of our national response to HIV, Aids and TB. Sanac now has a
permanent secretariat with full-time capacity. [Applause.]

On our commitment to conduct a mid-term review on progress made in
achieving the targets of our 2007 to 2011 HIV and Aids National Strategic
Plan, NSP, I am pleased to inform this House that the results of this
review will be released next week. This review provides an independent
assessment of how the country has performed at the local, provincial and
national levels across the four NSP key priority areas.

Furthermore, as a statement of our commitment, the Minister of Finance
announced an additional R5,4 billion to improve the effectiveness of our
treatment programmes. Already, the public health system provides
antiretroviral treatment to a globally unprecedented one million people. I
am convinced that through these financial commitments we will double this
number over the next three years. This will go a long way towards enabling
the country to meet the NSP target of providing treatment, care and support
to 80% of those in need.

To meet the challenge of supporting nongovernmental organisations and of
improving the response capacity of the Department of Health, South Africa
successfully applied for funding from Round 9 of the Global Fund for Aids,
TB and malaria. The signing ceremony for this funding, amounting to
approximately $100 million over five years, will take place later this
week. The second target of the NSP is to halve the rate of new infections,
and it is here that Sanac will concentrate the bulk of its efforts.

The national HIV counselling and testing campaign, launched by the
President last month, has since been replicated in most provinces by the
Premiers, MECs, mayors and social partners. It is through this kind of
partnership, commitment and leadership in action that we can stem the tide
of new infections. Through this campaign, government is also assessing the
strength of the public health infrastructure, which is crucial as we move
towards the National Health Insurance.

I wish to pause for a moment to thank President Jacob Zuma, Premiers and
all leaders of Sanac sectors for the leadership and support they have given
to the South African National Aids Council. [Applause.] I also wish to
acknowledge the support we have received from the Champions for an HIV-free
Generation, led by former Presidents Kenneth Kaunda, Joaquim Chissano and
Festus Mogae, Justice Edwin Cameron and other eminent personalities from
our continent. These leaders have twice visited our country to witness the
strides we are making and to lend words of encouragement. Furthermore, we
are inspired by their support and avail ourselves to share best practices
with our bothers and sisters on the continent.

A special tribute also goes to all traditional leaders in South Africa who
are working with their communities to build an HIV-free generation. We are
encouraged by His Majesty King Zwelithini’s partnership with the government
of KwaZulu-Natal to roll out the biggest medical male circumcision project
in our history.

Hon members, just to share with you, this campaign utilises a plastic
device which simplifies the procedure. [Laughter.] It’s a simple procedure.
You fit this into the plastic gadget or device and two clicking sounds
happen and this plastic device knows exactly where to prune and you keep it
on for three days and you are able to attend school, work and you are able
to urinate. And after three days you report back to the clinic and you are
healed and you are fine. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, the message to society as a
whole must, however, remain clear: While circumcision significantly reduces
the chances of infection, by 50 to 60%, it does not completely protect
males from infection or infecting others. The circumcision drive does not
replace the core messages of abstaining, being faithful and condomising.

The Moral Regeneration Movement is a campaign driven by a section 21 entity
that has successfully mobilised civic organisations, NGOs, faith-based
organisations and activists. Whilst undergoing a review by the Arts and
Culture Department, the Moral Regeneration Movement continues to implement
the Charter of Positive Values and a range of other community-based
campaigns aimed at promoting solidarity, respect for public property and,
more importantly, the strengthening of the family as a basic unit of
production of social values.

What we must recognise, is that moral regeneration and social cohesion
campaigns in general stand or fall on the shoulders of all members of
society. Such an understanding is the reason behind the slogan, that
working together with all social partners we can do more.

Another initiative that we co-ordinate is the National Stakeholder Advisory
Council on Energy. This is a product of collaboration with social partners
within the country, especially co-ordinated at Nedlac. The council is
supported by an Interministerial Committee, chaired by the Public
Enterprises Minister, as well as a technical response team led by senior
managers from the Departments of Energy, Public Enterprises, Economic
Development and The Presidency. It was established in order to deal with
the electricity supply challenges. Its input has contributed towards the
stabilisation of the electricity situation in the country. The Department
of Energy is developing a long-term integrated resource plan. Items under
consideration include: protecting the poor from higher electricity prices;
ensuring that there is sufficient generation capacity to meet demand; entry
of independent power producers; and the implementation of demand - side
management and energy efficiency measures.

We are a government that invites inputs and advice from the broadest cross-
section of the South African population. We draw on the skills, knowledge
and talents available in the country, and thus this council is one of the
bodies that help government sharpen its interventions.

Poverty eradication is uppermost on government’s programme for promoting
social justice. We note that the extent of poverty in this country is still
profoundly felt in the rural areas and informal settlements in all
provinces. Our government is committed to pushing back the frontiers of
poverty in order to attain the Millennium Development Goal of halving
poverty by 2014.

It is encouraging to recognise that, working with social partners at
Nedlac, we are progressing towards finalising an antipoverty strategy that
should guide our comprehensive response to this stubborn problem. We have
agreed with labour, business and civil groups that the strategy should be
ready for adoption at the July Cabinet Lekgotla this year. To this extent,
there is already general agreement on the pillars of the antipoverty
strategy built upon the five government priorities.

Moreover, we are encouraged that all Nedlac sectors agree that education
and skills development are the most effective tools in the arsenal of
poverty reduction. We affirm, too, that accelerating access to basic social
services is a vital short-term poverty alleviation measure with medium to
long-term effects.

Such are the objectives of the War on Poverty Campaign that has benefitted
communities in Jacobsdal, Lubala, Ga-Kgatla, uMsinga, Taung, Kagiso and
Sikwahlane. The War on Poverty Campaign sought, among other things, to
build a repository of information on the immediate needs of poor households
living in the most deprived wards of our country. This enabled national,
provincial and local government departments to intervene in a focused and
co-ordinated manner. Using this approach, access to basic services has
improved. More so, households were assisted to identify change agents.
These are individuals with the greatest potential to lift each household
out of poverty.

In the course of the campaign, we also noted a number of limitations. These
include the slow pace at which we respond to complaints and challenges, co-
ordination of interventions, poor administration and absence of leadership.
In some instances people still do not know where to access services. Hence,
the role of community development workers is very important as they are
located in the midst of communities. They act as a point of reference for
those most deprived or in need of government intervention.

In this regard, it is important that the individuals selected must always
be committed persons of good standing in the community so that they have
the credibility and legitimacy to escalate community issues with the
relevant authorities. In this House today, we have two such exemplary
community development workers. May I please request the House to
acknowledge the presence of Ms Khuselwa Dlungwane from the Eastern Cape and
Ms Siena Cloete from the Free State. They are in the gallery. [Applause.]
Thank you.

One other key area in the work of the Presidency is to provide leadership
in the implementation of the Human Resource Development Strategy, HRDSA, of
South Africa. This strategy was canvassed widely amongst practitioners and
stakeholders and has been welcomed as a critical mechanism to address our
skills shortages. The HRD Strategy will be managed in the Department of
Higher Education and Training, which is currently revising it and the
strategy will be ready for publication by August this year.

Central to the realisation of the goals of the HRDSA is the alignment of
strategies that are subordinate to it. One of these is the National Skills
Development Strategy, which directs the spending of the 1% payroll levy
contributed by employers. The HRD Strategy calls for the establishment of
the Human Resource Development Council chaired by the Deputy President. We
launched this HRD Council in March this year. This advisory body comprises
of representatives from all social partners, research agencies, education
and training bodies, as well as experts in the field of human capital
development. The HRD Council’s secretariat is being established in the
Department of Higher Education and Training.

The position of Leader of Government Business is provided for in the
Constitution and in the rules of Parliament. Effectively, our purpose is co-
ordination and harmonisation of the interaction between the executive and
the legislature. There is, unfortunately, a tendency to use this office
largely as a channel for complaints. I have also received numerous requests
for government business opportunities. Many out there believe I am in
charge of government business. [Laughter.] This is a genuine
misunderstanding and I have had to explain very courteously that I am not
in charge of any business.

I wish to reiterate that parliamentary oversight as provided for in the
Constitution is crucial and should be rigorously observed. I am aware that
as there are new Members of Parliament and new Ministers, challenges have
arisen that are perceived to be affecting the relationship between
Parliament and the executive. Let me reiterate that these two arms of the
state are enjoined by the Constitution to work co-operatively although they
have different mandates. This Assembly is obligated to oversee
implementation by the executive, which is responsible for implementing
government programmes and therefore should be accorded time and space to do
so. For that reason, there should be no uncertainty regarding these
distinct yet complementary functions.

One instrument that the Assembly uses to hold the executive accountable is
parliamentary questions.

Mr M J ELLIS: And your friends in the DA!

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Regrettably, a large number of questions were
unanswered at the end of last year, thus pitting some Ministers against
Parliament. All Ministers who had outstanding questions were asked to
provide written explanations as to why they had failed to reply as provided
for in the Rules of this House. Having considered their explanations and
also engaging Ministers directly, I wish to reassure this House that this
challenge is being overcome.

Measures being implemented include allocating more resources to ensure that
questions are not only answered on time but that they provide the necessary
detail as well. In some instances, capacity in Ministries is being
enhanced. Henceforth, directors-general will play a more active role in
this process. We will closely monitor progress in this regard.

Notwithstanding time pressures resulting from the need to accommodate the
Fifa World Cup, we remain confident that the 2010 legislative programme
will be implemented successfully. Cabinet is closely monitoring
implementation and the Leader of Government Business presents monthly
progress reports to Cabinet.

As I stated at the beginning, as we prepare to mark the centenary of the
Union of South Africa, the pursuit of public good compels us to realise the
creation of a better life for all. We are a rights-based country that
continues to learn how these rights should be defended and upheld by all
citizens. We have confidence in the ability of our people to defend our
democracy and to define what is right and wrong. Indeed, our history in the
struggle for democracy instructs us that we cannot worship in obedience
what is wrong.

As we make final preparations to receive the world during the months of
June and July for the Fifa World Cup, let us remember and show to the world
that, indeed, we are a country alive with possibilities. Ke a leboga. [I
thank you.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I would like to thank the hon Deputy President. Deputy
President, you will note that I did give you extra time because you were
answering the question of questions, that you were addressing the issue of
questions.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Hon President, Deputy President and Mr Speaker, as you so
often say, Mr President, when you want to avoid making a decision, today we
must debate, we must discuss and we must consult on your budget and, it is
hoped, we can appease everybody.

Firstly, the ID requests that your office provides us with more details on
the performance agreements you have signed with your Ministers. We firmly
believe that since government leaders were put in their positions by
ordinary South Africans, their performance evaluations should be made
public, at least on a quarterly basis.

Secondly, Mr President, we would like to commend you for taking a public
HIV test. This is certainly a turning point in our painful history in terms
of fighting this pandemic. Together with our courageous Minister of Health,
you have illustrated that through solid leadership we can mobilise the
nation to deal with the stigma of HIV and Aids.

The Presidency should also set an example in terms of efficient and ethical
leadership. This is particularly difficult, Mr President, when your office
continues to be plagued by internal squabbles and bickering. All over the
Presidency a lack of decisive leadership is evident, with ongoing battles
over who really controls economic policy and endless confusion over
Ministers whose mandates overlap.

Your bloated office even failed to advise you to declare your interests. It
is not good for a President to break the law. Ignorance of the law is no
excuse.

Mr President, the ID also notes some of your office’s more positive efforts
this year, such as your quarterly meetings with opposition parties and our
celebration of national days together. This kind of engagement across party
lines, which is evidence of a shared patriotism, is long overdue.

However, I differ with your view and that of hon Ramatlhodi that our
Constitution is not under threat. You need only look at all the
Constitutional Court judgments against this government. Then you will see
that you are wrong. That is what I base my statement on when I say that the
Constitution is under threat.

These judgments prove the point that the Constitution has become more
democratic than some of its drafters – I say “some”, because I am one of
the drafters. The ID will continue to defend our Constitution and we will
put our faith in the independence of our judiciary, which has shown that it
will not fail to act on any excesses of government.
Equally worrying is your government’s complete lack of understanding of
ethical governance, as enshrined in our Constitution. The number of times
we have heard leaders say that all these unethical and corrupt practices
are not illegal - that nobody is breaking the law - is becoming countless,
too many to count. For example, there is Chancellor House, Petro SA, and
many others.

What we must remember, Mr President, is that the struggle was not about
overcoming apartheid and apartheid laws only. It was also about building a
strong, ethical and value-based society where leaders put the people first,
before their own pockets.

Finally, Mr President, you must please ensure that the R1,1 billion set
aside for the National Development Agency for the next three years is used
to improve the lives of our young people. The ID supports the budget and it
also supports the proposal that a portfolio committee be established next
year that can monitor the expenditure of the budget.

Mr Speaker, on a point of order: Why are there no women speakers in this
Parliament speaking today? Of the first 10 speakers, I’m the first woman
speaker. If you look at the next 20 speakers, there are two or three women.
We don’t just want more dresses in this Parliament; we want more women
speakers. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members! I would like to thank the hon
Patricia de Lille and apologise for being a male speaker, but that wasn’t
my decision. [Laughter.] I would like to invite the hon
Trevor Manuel, the Minister in the Presidency.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Thank you
very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, His Excellency President Zuma, the hon
Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, the National Planning Commission held its
inaugural meeting on Monday and Tuesday this week, as the President has
already shared with us.

It has taken us a long time to get to this point, a process that started
with our appointment as Ministers last May. In my first Budget Vote speech
last year, I outlined the need for a planning commission, what a planning
commission could do, what role it could play in the policy arena and how it
could contribute towards both better planning and greater coherence in
government.

In August, we brought to this House a draft Green Paper on National
Strategic Planning. Following an extensive debate – it should have been
shorter, but the hon Trollip participated - and public consultation
process, we released a revised Green Paper in January this year.

Hon Speaker, through this process, we have arrived at a consensus on the
nature and type of planning commission we seek, on the role of the
commission, on the type of commissioners and, broadly, on the areas that
the planning commission would cover. Allow me to summarise what we have
agreed to.

We have established a National Planning Commission, in the first instance,
to attempt to produce a unifying vision and strategic plan for the country
that has broad buy-in across all sectors of society and yet retains the
ability to confront the critical trade-offs and challenges we face over the
next 20 years. The work of the Planning Commission is meant to sharpen the
focus of government, to use a long-term lens to obtain greater policy
coherence in government, to independently and critically appraise our
policies and conduct in-depth research on how best we can achieve our
objectives.

We have chosen a commission of external commissioners, comprising, largely,
experts tasked with advising government on issues relating to the long-term
development trajectory of the country.

In January this year, President Zuma invited the public to nominate people
to the National Planning Commission. We received an overwhelming response
with 1 280 nominees. The calibre of the people nominated was exceptionally
high. Clearly, the opportunity to participate in so great a calling saw the
nomination of some of our country’s best minds.
Besides the fact that there are hundreds of very skilled and experienced
South Africans, the nomination process also showed the willingness of these
smart and skilled South Africans to play a role in shaping our collective
future. I would like to thank every person who allowed him- or herself to
be nominated. The sheer scale and quality presented the President with the
daunting challenge of selecting just a few.

Mr Speaker, I do hope that we can still make a call on the skills and
acumen of those who were nominated but not appointed to the National
Planning Commission to play a role as we call on their skills.

After careful consideration of the list of nominees and the expertise
required on the commission, the President announced the names of 25
commissioners on 30 April 2010. Amongst the 25 is Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, who
has been appointed as deputy chairperson, and who brings knowledge and
experience to the commission that has helped shape the trade union
movement, our Constitution, this Parliament, the business sector and NGOs.

Now, I know that there is some strange behaviour among some journalists.
They keep asking why there are so few this, or so many that. It’s a strange
question indeed. I’m reminded by their behaviour of what happened in July
1991 when the ANC held its first conference inside the country. Newspapers
would publish a kind of league table: “Arnold Stofile, Xhosa,
noncommunist”, made the narrow national list. [Laughter.] “Jeff Radebe,
Zulu, definitely a communist”. [Laughter.] And this is how they carried on,
and then they got to Pallo Jordan and said, “ons weet nie”. [we don’t
know.] [Laughter.] So, I just want to plead that we move beyond such
perverse behaviour. I’m glad that the entire commission thinks of that kind
of behaviour by journalists as completely perverse and voyeuristic.

The participation of commissioners and the quality of discussions at our
first meeting this week confirmed unequivocally that we not only have
amongst the nation’s top experts in a variety of disciplines, but that we
also have a single team of highly motivated people of the highest integrity
who want to operate together as a single commission, regardless of who
nominated them. All share a common commitment to seeing South Africa become
a better place in the future, a country that we will increasingly be proud
of as a place where we want our children to live and thrive.

In welcoming the commissioners yesterday, the President pledged the full
support of Cabinet and the Presidency for the work of the commission, as he
did again this afternoon. I’d like to lift some of the issues that he
raised there. He said, firstly, that the mandate of the commission needs
“to take a broad, crosscutting, independent and critical view of South
Africa, to help define the South Africa we seek to achieve in 20 years’
time and to map out a path to achieve those objectives”.

Secondly, he said that “the National Planning Commission will revitalise
the work of government. By drawing on the best available expertise, the
commission will be able to identify and confront challenges head-on.” In
other words, we are not looking at a commission that must be apologetic to
government or that must try to be loved by government. We are looking at a
commission that is going to deal with issues very frankly: not seeking
favours from government, he said, but seeking to help this country and its
people.

He said, thirdly, that “Government has often taken a sectoral and short-
term view that has hampered development. Taking a long-term and independent
view will add impetus, focus and coherence to our work.” And, we believe,
that it is better done by the compatriot South Africans from the
intelligentsia who are not going to be guessing or shouting slogans, but
who are going to be saying that this is how it should be done
scientifically, and therefore help government to do things differently.

Fourthly, he said, “This will no doubt lead to an improved performance in
government. By involving wider society in its work, it will rally the
nation around a common vision.”

Then the President said that the establishment of the National Planning
Commission “is our promise to the people of South Africa that we are
building a state that will grow the economy, reduce poverty and improve the
quality of life of our citizens”.

One of the challenges, colleagues, that you are faced with, he said, is
that South Africa is divided into two: extreme poverty on one side and
extreme richness on the other. The gap is too big. How do you bring this
together? How do you harmonise? If it remains where it is, we will not be
free of problems. Problems will continue, he said.

He said, finally, in that regard that he wanted to state that the National
Planning Commission had the full support of the executive. He said that the
National Planning Commission must do things properly, without fear or
favour. He said: We will support you on that, even if you disagree with
government, because we will know that you are not doing it from any
subjective point of view.

I think that as the National Planning Commission we are immensely honoured,
humbled and privileged to be given such a broad mandate and such strong
encouragement at the point where we start our work.

I also want to say this afternoon, Mr Speaker, that it is a measure of
brave and bold leadership to give such an enthusiastic mandate to a
grouping outside of Cabinet. So, Mr President, on behalf of the entire
National Planning Commission, I have the task of thanking you for that
support. It will make a difference. We know that the NPC will drive change,
and sometimes we will be quite unloved by our colleagues in Cabinet, but
that is part of what the commissioners accept as their remit.

The commissioners were at one in saying that Parliament should play a role
in facilitating dialogue both on the vision and on the national plan.
Drawing on the positive role played by Parliament in getting consensus
around the Green Paper, we are of the view that Parliament is suitably
placed to bring together diverse views from all walks of society to enrich
the work of the commission and of the government in general. I will engage
with you, Mr Speaker, and with the Chairperson of the NCOP to explore ways
of facilitating this process on a permanent basis.

Our intention, as the commission, is to produce a draft vision and a
national plan for Cabinet within 18 months, hon De Zille, I mean, De Lille.
Sorry, dyslexia gets me sometimes. [Laughter.] That is the first objective
that I have in my strategic plan: to produce a draft vision and a national
plan for Cabinet within 18 months. We will also produce reports on
crosscutting issues that have an impact on our long-term development. We
will also respond to specific requests from Cabinet from time to time.

At an administrative level, we are in the process of developing the
capacity to support the work of the commission. We are building a small,
professional and capable secretariat that will add value to both the work
of the commission and to the Office of the Presidency in general.

We should remind ourselves that in trying to do better, in working
differently, we have two new Ministers in the Presidency. My colleague
Minister Chabane, who is tasked with Performance Monitoring and Evaluation,
has an enormous task. I think that the 15 minutes given to him this
afternoon is quite inadequate. Parliament must engage with the issues. And
then there is me. At both the ministerial level and at the level of the
secretariat, we are working closely with the Ministry and Department of
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation. Our work is interconnected in
several respects.

We will support their work in shaping priorities, in developing indicators
and in producing evidence of what is working and what is not working and,
similarly, they will support our work through the role that they play in
developing outcomes, performance agreements and delivery agreements.

In conclusion, hon Speaker, I would like to thank both the President and
the Deputy President for the support that they have given us in our work
over the past year. We know that once we get into the nuts and bolts of our
work, we will call on their support and inspiration more frequently. I also
wish to thank the staff in the Ministry and in the Presidency for the hard
work that they do in making our country a better place. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I would like to thank the hon Minister. I also thank
him especially for giving part of his time to the other Minister,
responsible for performance monitoring. I also want to say that the 15
minutes given to him is more than adequate. [Laughter.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mr Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, and hon
members, the UDM supports Vote No 1. [Applause.] My address today will
focus on the proposed National Planning Commission.

In 1999 we handed in, in this House, to the then President of the Republic,
a UDM policy document titled, “The challenge of our time: Government must
do more”. Back then, already, we identified the challenge facing the nation
as follows:

   There is no consensus on a macroeconomic policy that can transform the
   economy in a manner that could create and spread wealth wider and improve
   the lot of the disadvantaged majority.

In the same policy document we argued strongly for the need to convene an
economic indaba from which the nation could emerge with a coherent economic
vision shared by all, as we did in the ’90s, to find a political solution
for this country.

The work of the National Planning Commission, as well as the public debate
initiative of the Minister of Economic Development, would be more effective
if they were guided by the resolutions taken by the nation at the suggested
economic indaba. We should not put the cart before the horse. The National
Planning Commission and other economic initiatives by government need to
draw their terms of reference from the suggested economic indaba, otherwise
we are likely to waste another three or four years on a talk-shop.

Indeed, following the economic indaba the National Planning Commission’s
first order of business should be to conduct a proper audit of our
resources and to manage it for future generations; not the current
situation in which there seems to be a free-for-all of looting of state
resources, such as the Chancellor House-Eskom deal and similar schemes.

What we need is the political will to finish the transition that was
started at the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, Codesa. Indeed,
this government has had a mandate, since 1994, to find a policy consensus
on the burning economic issues of unemployment and poverty. Instead, that
mandate has been dodged in order to maintain a status quo in which one
third of the adult population is unemployed and the vast majority of people
own less than a quarter of the land.

At the envisaged economic indaba, we could ask questions about, for
example, the extent to which some of the sunset clauses have become an
impediment to the economic advancement of the majority. For how long, Mr
President, will the millions who live in the desolate former Bantustans and
townships that were the dumping grounds of apartheid, accept their lot?

As long as we fail as a country to acknowledge this main cause of conflict
in this country, namely an economic policy that fails to include all South
Africans, we are heading for a major disaster. Already, the signs of civil
uprising are visible in many communities.

A transformed economic order will give impetus to other social and
educational programmes that are designed to truly integrate our society and
create a new democratic South African ethos.

Finally, Mr President, I agree with you: The growing culture of anarchy and
violence in this country is a matter of grave concern. The rights to public
protest and industrial action are freedoms that we cherish. They include
the right to publicly protest about the lack of service delivery, which is
why we should not allow these freedoms to be abused.
It is becoming commonplace for public marches to be characterised by death
threats, malicious damage to private and government property and the
assault of people. Hundreds of millions of rands’ worthy of damage have
been caused by arsonists burning down trains, buses, councillor homes and
even libraries. We need decisive leadership to counter this, but it must be
coupled with greater responsiveness from government.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Freedom without control is not real freedom. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE,  FORESTRY  AND  FISHERIES:  Mr  Speaker,
many South Africans experience uncertainty with  regard  to  the  future  of
this country. Julius Malema, Eugène TerreBlanche  and  confusing  statements
about land and nationalisation have contributed to this uncertainty.

Uncertainty  always  has  negative  consequences.  Uncertainty   makes   for
businesses not investing in the economy. Uncertainty makes for  farmers  not
expanding  their  farming  activities,  and  thus  not  creating   any   new
employment opportunities in rural areas. Uncertainty makes for  some  soccer
tourists not coming to South Africa, etc.

How can this uncertainty be cleared away? It can  be  cleared  away  through
fewer populist propaganda statements, by the ANC and by others, about  where
South Africa is going. I’m tired of debates in this House,  outside  and  in
the media which are not based on facts, but on propaganda myths.

Let me give you some examples: It’s a  myth  that  “because  whites  created
racism, blacks have no capacity to be racists”. This is an ANC Youth  League
statement from the Sunday Times. This is  a  myth.  I  can  show  with  many
quotes that there are many good black people, many good  white  people,  but
also white racists and black racists. Those are the facts.

Another myth is that a large number of  white  people  would  be  killed  by
black people on 27 April 2010. Nothing happened; that’s a fact.

Yet another myth is that the nationalisation of land in  South  Africa  will
resolve poverty problems in the country.  The  fact  is  that  a  comparison
between the performance of the economies of Zambia and Zimbabwe  since  1994
proved that this myth is wrong. In the case of Zambia, where the  government
supported private property and successfully  followed  free-market  reforms,
the Gross Domestic Product more than  tripled  between  1994  and  2008.  In
Zimbabwe, where  the  policy  of  nationalisation  had  been  followed,  the
economy had shrunk, over the same  period,  by  approximately  half  of  its
size. Unemployment increased from 20% to 80% and  life  expectancy  declined
from 60 to 34 years. Those are the facts.

Die meeste beeste in Suid-Afrika word deur die  boere  self  gesteel.  Twak.
Die polisie se feite weerlê dit. Verlede jaar  is  daar  33 000  beeste  ter
waarde van R255 miljoen gesteel. Nêrens  was  daar  ’n  aanduiding  dat  die
boere dit steel nie, maar dit word uitgestuur  buite  toe.  (Translation  of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The majority of cattle are stolen by the farmers themselves. Nonsense.  The
police’s facts refute this. Last year, 33 000 cattle to the  value  of  R255
million were stolen. Nowhere has there been an indication that  the  farmers
were stealing it, but that is the message being sent out.]

Many myths affect white and black people. In this way, there’s  currently  a
myth which is widely being circulated amongst white people that the ANC  has
a finely constructed plan to, when a signal  is  given,  wipe  out  all  the
white people. This is not true, and it won’t be that easy while I’m  around.


Another fact is that the ANC membership was only officially  opened  to  all
races by the Morogoro gathering in Tanzania on 25 April 1969,  and  not,  as
some people say, long before that, etc, etc.

In uncertain times, the great enemy of the  truth  is  very  often  not  the
deliberate lie, but the persuasive myth.  According  to  the  dictionary,  a
myth is a fictional story. John F Kennedy said  that  the  belief  in  myths
allows us the comfort of an  opinion  without  the  discomfort  of  thought.
Maybe that is the reason why those with the most  opinions  often  have  the
fewest facts.

The ANC often gives me the impression that, instead of altering their  views
to fit the facts, they alter the facts to fit their views and  their  myths.
I can give you examples from Mr Malema and Mr  Jimmy  Manyi,  especially  on
this.

Remember, facts do not cease to exist  because  they  are  ignored.  If  one
wants to destroy South Africa, then this government, the President and  this
Parliament should take decisions  based  on  propaganda  myths  and  not  on
facts.

Hon President, it’s time to put the real facts on the table. If we do  this,
we can take correct decisions that will benefit all South Africans. If  not,
we will continue with unending propaganda debates to the detriment of  South
Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, I want to say to the
hon Mulder that the facts are that the ANC is a wonderful organisation.
That’s what you should have said. [Laughter.]

Hon members, Mr Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President, you have to feel
somewhat sad at the words of the hon De Lille. She correctly pointed out
that poor legislation had been drafted from time to time, and that this had
been thrown out by the Constitutional Court.

She then said that she would defend the Constitution, but it is this very
Constitution that gave rise to the court that made the decision. That is a
very peculiar defence. She must never be given a bow and arrow, because she
will shoot at absolutely the wrong target. [Laughter.] [Applause.] She
really is quite frightening.

Commentators and our protagonists in South Africa have developed the rather
unfortunate and useless habit of personal attacks rather than coherent
articulation of alternative vision and programmes. The incessant personal
attacks on President Zuma and his government serve to expose this absence
of any concrete plan that has the stature to challenge the vision and
programmes placed before the nation and the world by the government led by
President Zuma.

In the past week attempts have been made to suggest that our government
lacks a vision, policy and practical programmes. Those who took the trouble
to read our strategic plans and to follow the Budget Votes know that there
are plans, there is implementation, and know that this is a government in
action.

Furthermore, this government has a vision, one that is shaped by our
nation. It is a vision first articulated by the liberation movements and
those formations that actively participated in the struggle for freedom.
Their aspirations for a free and democratic South Africa are set out in the
Constitution of South Africa, which fully captures the kind of society we
wish to build, fully articulates the principles that we believe should
characterise and influence our society, and sets out the objectives that we
should pursue as we implement our national and international obligations.
Our vision is the promotion and full establishment of a united, nonracial,
nonsexist, democratic society in which the inherent dignity of every person
is honoured, respected, and upheld.

There appears to be confusion between vision and plans in current
discourse. There are some who believe that the National Planning Commission
will set out a never-before articulated vision in the strategy it will
craft. While there is provision for a long-term plan that provides a view
of the future South Africa, our vision is the Constitution. The commission
will certainly incorporate the founding document of our democracy into
their perspective.

Our country continues to be challenged by the need to strive for greater
cohesion, stronger unity and a society in which all, irrespective of race,
gender, religion, culture and political philosophy, contribute to creating
a better society and an improved quality of life for all.

This aspiration is a complex challenge for South Africa, primarily because
the dehumanising imprint of our racist past is extremely difficult to
dislodge. The task would be easier to pursue if each one of us agreed that
the creation of this new society depended on the contribution of every
South African and not just on President Zuma, his government or the ANC.
Each leader, as she speaks, strengthens or diminishes the values inherent
in the Constitution. When we find a person accused and guilty even before
they appear in court through our own finding, before there has been a
judgment, we offend the Constitution. [Applause.]

When we defend, in whatever manner, South Africans who promote racism, hate
speech and violence we diminish our founding document. Each one of us
contributes to its status or its diminishing by virtue of our actions and
our words - each one of us, each one of us.

The ANC did not create the racism that led to the majority of the people of
this country being the poorest, the least educated and the most vulnerable
in our society. Thus, it is not their sole responsibility to devise
solutions. Opposition parties, the media, the private sector and every
individual have a role to play. Since all of us aspire for this new South
Africa we have to ask ourselves each day: What have I contributed to this
national agenda? [Applause.]  

In this regard, the creation of the National Planning Commission must be
applauded and welcomed, and we support this aspect and all aspects of the
budget of the Presidency. The Presidency, in appointing commissioners, has
drawn in men and women – although I would say, Mr President, not enough
women - from varied sectors and backgrounds, each of whom can make a
significant contribution to the practical realisation of the society our
Constitution aspires to.

Creating a nonracial society requires the very solutions and actions that
our President has begun implementing. His attention to education, to the
programmes in education, particularly his focus on quality and increased
access to skills training and to higher education of quality, confirm his
attention to the core issues that confront our societies. These
interventions and programmes will benefit all schools, all learners and all
involved in education and training.

Furthermore, the Presidency has reached out to all communities in our
country in a genuine endeavour to strengthen inclusion and to ensure that
all communities experience the impact of a caring and responsive
government. Of course, much more needs to be done to cement nonracialism
and to assure South Africans that all leaders care about all of them, and
not just about sections of particular communities.

Nonracialism requires much more than inclusion. It means addressing
inadequate employment opportunities and inadequate shelter, and ensuring
improved health facilities and improved health status. Again, these are the
priorities President Zuma addressed in his budget.

The Presidency has gone well beyond socioeconomic rights and has created
the basis for the most vulnerable and neglected to be supported. The
creation of the Rural Development department focuses attention on fellow
citizens who are generally invisible to many of us today. These communities
will have dedicated programmes and policies. We hope that this will lead to
rural communities being treated with dignity and care.

A further aspect of response to our national vision of a better society is
that of ensuring that the vulnerable in all race groups enjoy access to
government services. This is why the President has devoted attention to
meeting with communities from all the groups that make up our society to
identify their needs with them, and to ensure that they know that this
government is a government for all the people. No leader has been as active
as the President in reaching out to all of us. [Applause.]

Future success in building a nonracial culture and character in our society
requires dedicated attention to all the policies and practices that have
the potential to support success. This includes due attention to statements
and actions by all leaders. All parties in this House claim allegiance to
the Constitution. Thus, building a South Africa that reflects all its
aspirations goes well beyond hostility to the ANC. All parties had the
opportunity to express their perspective on our freedom at the recent
Freedom Day celebrations. Sadly, some of the leaders – some, not all -
failed to inspire, but the Presidency must be applauded for opening that
space. [Applause.] We trust that parties will build on this example and
ensure that in future they also practise inclusion.

A great deal is often said about the need to strengthen the organs of civil
society in all sectors of social action. The Presidency has ensured a focus
on traditional leadership, religious sectors and sector-based associations.
Of course, this is not a new set of activities; it has been a feature of
the work of Presidents Mandela, Mbeki, Motlanthe, and now President Zuma.

One of the most encouraging perspectives of South Africa is the evidence of
progress that is being made in gender equity. The creation of the new
Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities will allow the
Presidency to ensure co-ordinated and integrated responses to the promotion
of increased gender equity. All of us know that more must be done to stop
abuse and violence against women, but it is clear that the Presidency has
begun the necessary commitment to resources for this vital obligation.

Of course, culture, religion and language are vital for achieving success
in nation-building and in building a society that has shared values and
practices. The horror that all South Africans expressed at the disgraceful,
forced marriage of children in the Eastern Cape indicates that we are
beginning to develop shared values, and that we endorse the vision of our
Constitution that the practice of culture and religion must be accompanied
by attention to equality and dignity for all.

All these positive responses of the Presidency and the work that is
indicated in the budget documents that have been tabled for Parliament by
the President, as well as the work carried out by the Deputy President and
the Ministers in the Presidency, clearly indicate that there is a national
vision in action and an unchallengeable commitment to giving effect to the
ideals and aspirations that are at the heart of our country’s national
vision, our Constitution.

We believe, hon Speaker, that with support for this budget the Presidency
will be able to concretely execute its work in ensuring that the
Constitution of South Africa remains a living document that visibly and
fundamentally alters the lives of the people of our country, so that our
wish that all might have a better life is recognised under the leadership
of President Zuma. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I would like to thank the hon Minister of Science and
Technology. Hon members, the proceedings of the House will be suspended for
15 minutes to allow for a comfort break. The bells will be rung to alert
members to the resumption of business. Business suspended at 17:24 and
resumed at 17:44.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION AND
ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very much, hon Speaker.

Hon President, hon Deputy President, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, I’m tempted to do what the hon Ellis advised we should do in his
speech on the debate of the budget of Parliament, to respond to some of the
issues that have been raised by former speakers who came before me; and,
secondly, to take note of the comments that were made by the Deputy
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries in that we must deal with
the facts.

I would like to correct the hon member Trollip, the Leader of the
Opposition, who suggested that the Presidency did not table a strategic
plan. I have with me, hon Trollip, I can give it to you, a letter sent by
the Presidency to the Speaker to confirm our submission. I have with me,
hon Trollip, I can give it to you ... [Laughter.] [Applause.] ...
confirmation of the submission of the strategic plan of the Presidency
tabled in this House. Those are records of this House, not records of the
Presidency. [Interjections.]
The President is both the head of state and the head of government. It is
therefore important to understand the type of capacity and the support
required to fulfil these two roles. We have in the past presented to this
House the budget for the Government Communication and Information System,
the GCIS, the International Marketing Council, the IMC, and the Media
Development and Diversity Agency, the MDDA, which form part of our work.

It gives me a great pleasure to address you today on the occasion of the
tabling of yet another budget of the Presidency and that of the Department
for Performance Monitoring and Evaluation in the Presidency.

Hon members will notice that we refer to ourselves as a department rather
than a Ministry, as we have done previously. We have since proclaimed the
Ministry as a department. The department does not yet have a Vote and is
currently operating under the Vote of The Presidency, but we intend to
address this matter in the budget adjustment process in October this year.

In June last year, we committed ourselves to a number of milestones that
formed the basis for our budget. We said: “It is important to highlight
that the birth of this Ministry was a deliberate response to the needs and
aspirations of millions of South Africans who, through their ballots, gave
us an opportunity to govern the country.”
Since the last time we appeared before this House, we have been hard at
work setting up and developing the monitoring and evaluation system for the
executive and the Public Service.

Allow me to give you feedback on the commitments we have made.
We have developed a position paper titled “Improving Government
Performance: Our Approach”, and presented it to this House in September
last year.

We also undertook to develop 20 to 30 politically determined outcome
indicators based on the five priorities of government by October 2009.
These priorities are, to remind ourselves: rural development, basic
education, health, safety and job creation. We have also placed additional
emphasis on human settlements and local government.

In the course of developing the outcomes we decided to reduce the number to
12 for better strategic focus. These outcomes were developed and negotiated
with the relevant departments for discussion by the Cabinet lekgotla held
in February this year. As hon members might be aware, President Jacob Zuma
announced on 30 April this year that he had signed performance agreements
with Ministers.

The primary purpose of the performance agreements is to serve as a
management tool and not as a punitive mechanism. The agreements enable the
President to provide us with an indication of the key issues that he would
want us to focus on and his expectations of our performance in this regard.
The performance agreements commit us to working together with all spheres
of government, to better achieve the outcomes.

In doing all this work, we moved with the required speed and caution to
make sure that we delivered effectively and efficiently on our mandate.
There are no benchmarks or references we could use, but we are pleased with
what we have managed to achieve within such a short space of time.

I wish to say to all South Africans that we are mindful of the enormous
responsibility which has been placed on us as a department and of the
public expectations we have to meet. We are committed and determined to
meet your expectations to the best of our ability. The changes we are
bringing about will change how government works and give effect to our new
way of doing things. It is an intense process, which will in the long term
help us build and deliver a better life for all our people.

Hon members, while we have performed reasonably well in rolling out
government programmes and initiatives since 1994, we acknowledge that the
state has not performed as optimally as we desired. The service delivery
protests we have witnessed in some parts of the country are an indication
that a lot of work still needs to be done. The Performance Monitoring and
Evaluation Department in the Presidency has been established to improve
government performance and monitor and evaluate the progress we are making.


The department is also meant to identify problem areas in the system and
assist to unlock them to speed up delivery. We are also tasked with
refocusing the work of government and ensuring that the limited resources
we have are better used in priority areas to realise maximum value for
investments made.

The identified outcomes were developed to increase the strategic focus of
government and enable us to focus our attention on critical issues that
require improvement. This does not mean that other activities of government
are not important or will be neglected. For each of these outcomes, we have
worked with the relevant departments to identify the outputs required to
achieve the outcome, and to set targets and measurable indicators. These
outputs and targets have also been included in the performance agreements
between the President and the Ministers.

Together with their provincial and local government counterparts,
departments are now engaged in the process of developing detailed delivery
agreements for each outcome.

The delivery agreements will refine the outputs and targets and include
action plans with clear roles and responsibilities of all the stakeholders
for the outcomes to be achieved. We have produced and distributed
guidelines to drive the development of the agreements.

The development of the delivery agreements is being co-ordinated by
existing government structures such as the Cabinet committees, Ministers
meetings with provincial MECs and the clusters.
Where the delivery agreements involve more than one sphere of government,
they will have the status of intergovernmental implementation protocols in
terms of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act.

The President will also request premiers to enter into intergovernmental
protocols with him, which will focus on outcomes areas that have major
intergovernmental implications, for example health, basic education, local
government and human settlements. These protocols will also provide a
useful basis for the work of the President’s Co-ordinating Council, the
PCC, meetings which the President has occasionally with the Premiers.

We have set the target for the delivery agreements to be ready for
presentation to the July Cabinet lekgotla. Once the delivery agreements
have been finalised, the co-ordinating structures of government will then
focus on monitoring and evaluating progress against the outcomes, outputs
and targets. The structures will further facilitate the ironing out of
bottlenecks and the integration of the activities of all affected
stakeholders.

We will play a supporting role in all the co-ordinating structures. This is
to ensure that the agenda remains focused on the delivery agreement and
facilitates integration and links across the outcomes and with monitoring
and evaluation. This work will be done by the team of outcome specialists,
which my department is in the process of recruiting.

The monitoring of the delivery agreements will be on two levels: Firstly,
broad overarching indicators will be tracked, for example life expectancy,
maternal mortality, poverty levels, literacy rates, crime levels, etc.
Secondly, we will monitor the contributory activities and the targets that
we need to achieve.

Reports will be provided to the Cabinet committees every two months. In
addition, administrative and expenditure information will be corroborated
by information from various surveys, specialised studies and independent
sources as far as possible. We look forward to a fruitful collaboration
with civil society and academia in this regard.

As a department, we will also conduct our own monitoring and evaluation.
Subsequent to Cabinet discussion, the programme of action will be updated
and made public. The main purpose of these reports will be to provide
Cabinet with an indication of the degree to which the outcomes are being
achieved, based on objective analysis of evidence.

When monitoring and evaluation indicates that activities and outputs are
not resulting in the desired outcomes as intended, this should result in
adjustments to the activities and outputs. The results of our monitoring
and evaluation work will therefore also be used to provide a feedback loop
to annual reviews of the delivery agreements.

Lastly, government will also institutionalise formal evaluation processes.
These are the longer term and in-depth studies that probe deeper into
policy and delivery successes and failures. It is envisaged that this work
will be done in conjunction with National Treasury and sector departments.
My office will be releasing policy guidelines in this regard shortly.

In June this year my department will publish a new programme of action
based on the outputs and targets for the 12 outcomes. This version will be
improved as more detailed delivery agreements are finalised.

Following the approval of the position paper, development of the outcomes
and signing of performance agreements, we are now in the process of
recruitment. We have since appointed a Director-General, Dr Sean Phillips,
who is present in the Chamber today, to oversee the establishment of the
department to start the process of monitoring and evaluation.

As you are aware, the President established the Presidential Hotline last
year to make government and the Presidency more accessible to the public,
and to help deal with service delivery blockages. The hotline has
experienced a high volume of calls from citizens who are determined to
communicate with government. Many issues have been resolved, but not with
the speed we desire.

The President has decided to place the hotline under my office as a
performance monitoring and evaluation tool to assess the performance of
government against the citizens’ needs. We are in the process of evaluating
its performance and introducing interventions to make it more efficient and
for it to respond effectively to the public’s needs. The information
collected by the hotline gives us an indication of whether services are
reaching our people and how efficient we are as government at reaching our
people. I also wish to assure all those who have contacted the hotline that
their concerns are taken seriously and, in some areas, issues raised are
being incorporated into government plans.

The service delivery protests also highlight our inability to effectively
communicate with our people. The President has led from the front and
visited a number of communities, as he said earlier. Government is
embarking on a public-participation campaign, co-ordinated by the GCIS, to
report to citizens on what plans they have for development in their
respective areas.

To ensure that the Presidency is effective and efficient in its work, we
have restructured the Presidency to respond to the current challenges we
face. With the establishment of the National Planning Commission and the
performance monitoring and evaluation functions, the Policy Co-ordination
and Advisory Services was disestablished. However, all PCAS functions were
retained in the Presidency.

The planning function is now under the National Planning Commission, and
monitoring and evaluation under the Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
Department. The policy support, analysis and advice capacity has been moved
to strengthen the Cabinet office.

Another critical component of our work is youth development through the
National Youth Development Agency, the NYDA. The NYDA has, in its strategy,
adopted key performance areas, amongst others, economic participation,
education and skills development, information services and communications
and national youth service.

The key performance areas now serve as a guideline as the National Youth
Development Agency tackles young people’s challenges, particularly of those
based in the rural areas and those with disabilities. This will be achieved
through supporting self-employment initiatives, linking young people to job
opportunities, referring them to the relevant organisations and offering
free career guidance at its youth centres.

In his state of the nation address, President Zuma called on the NYDA to
establish its structures throughout the country. The NYDA seeks to have
structures in provinces and in all 283 municipalities in the next three
years so that its accessibility, especially in the most rural communities,
can be improved. In the next three months offices in Welkom, Tzaneen and
Richards Bay will be established.

In its strategy for the economic participation of young people, the NYDA
has since its establishment disbursed over 7 500 microfinance loans to the
value of R23 million and R3 million small and medium enterprise loans. A
total of 4 224 business consultancy services vouchers were issued to the
value of R33 million. [Applause.] Over 16 000 young people were also
engaged under the National Youth Service Programme.

In view of the funding challenges for 2010-11, the NYDA had to revise its
targets. For 2010-11 MTEF submission, the NYDA was allocated R369,973
million. Youth unemployment is very high. We need a co-ordinated effort by
all stakeholders to deal with this matter. The budget allocated to the NYDA
is inadequate. If this institution is to fulfil its mandate, more resources
need to be allocated to it.

However, the NYDA recognises that not all its funding should come from the
government. As such, the organisation has made strides by entering into
partnerships with some of the country’s smallest and biggest organisations,
both public and private, for youth development purposes.

Turning to the budget, the Presidency received an amount of ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION AND
ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very much. My time was taken up by the hon
Trollip. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Mr Speaker, I have not debated with the hon Collins since we
negotiated the Bill of Rights, but I am not going to respond to him as my
preceding speaker. I am going to talk about something closer to our old
portfolio than his new one, and I wish to address my hon President.

Sir, I said in the state of the nation address last June that the hon
President’s choice of a Chief Justice would be the single most important
act of his Presidency. I also suggested that there was a natural successor.
He assured me most courteously in reply that he would make a good choice,
and I think that it is only right that I should acknowledge that he has,
indeed, made not only a good, but a great choice. We look forward to the
modernisation of an administratively independent judicial branch under the
leadership of the Chief Justice, and also to the modernisation of our civil
justice system.

However, sir, the exact opposite has occurred at the prosecuting authority.
There, the hon President’s startling choice for National Director of Public
Prosecutions, the NDPP, has, within months, caused a crisis at that
institution, and it is obvious, but perhaps it needs saying, that the
independent courts cannot play their part in dispensing, specifically,
criminal justice if criminal prosecution is compromised.

Meneer, die fragmentering en die gevolglike neutralisering van die
Vervolgingsgesag lyk na ’n kru quid pro quo vir die vestiging van
institusioneel onafhanklike howe. En die agb President het hier ’n direkte
verantwoordelikheid. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Sir, the fragmentation and subsequent neutralisation of the Prosecuting
Authority appears to be a crude quid pro quo for the establishment of
institutionally independent courts. And the hon President has a direct
responsibility in this regard.]

It was only last Wednesday that the hon Justice Minister said in his budget
speech that the key pillars in the fight against crime and corruption
remain the specialised units – plural – that fall under the National
Prosecuting Authority, the NPA. He was formally reporting back to us after
we had revealed the Simelane plan to him a week earlier, to his visible
surprise in the committee. The hon Minister then rode off and rescued the
Asset Forfeiture Unit, AFU, perhaps placating the public via the media
where the AFU has built up a profile for itself.

Maar ons oud-kollega mnr Willie Hofmeyr is maar die kleinboetie van adv
Chris Jordaan, u weet. Dit is adv Jordaan wat die kommersiële skurke
vastrek en laat sit, met 3 000 sake per jaar teenoor Willie se 300 per
jaar, R112 miljoen aan uitbetalings aan slagoffers teenoor Willie se
R29 miljoen, en ’n syfer van 94% skuldigbevindings teenoor 63%.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[But our former colleague Mr Willie Hofmeyr is but a smaller-scale version
of adv Chris Jordaan, you know. It is adv Jordaan who tracks down criminals
and throws them into jail, with his 3 000 cases per year against Willie’s
300, his R112 million pay-outs to victims compared to Willie’s R29 million,
and a conviction rate of 94% as opposed to 63%.]

Why was no one told, hon President, that while the hon Minister was meeting
Adv Simelane the Specialised Commercial Crimes Unit, the SCCU, had already
been disbanded? That is, despite a spectacular success rate in the
notoriously difficult business of securing convictions for commercial
crime. A figure of 94% is nothing unusual for that unit.

On the day before the ministerial meeting, the Public Servants Association,
the PSA, reported that the NPA had told it that the SCCU was being
restructured because its head was retiring. Adv Jordaan is not retiring.
And to the hon Minister who is now not with us at the moment, I must say
that the executive “final responsibility” demonstrably does not work,
contrary to what he somewhat smugly asserted in a debate last Wednesday.

But it is you, sir the hon President, that I am addressing, because the
special directorates, Sir, are your responsibility. The buck stops
literally with you. The special directorates are created by presidential
proclamation. The relevant sections of the National Prosecuting Authority
Act are 13, 14 and 24(3). The SCCU’s head and its 200 staff members were
recruited and appointed to specific positions in that directorate because
of their skills. Sir, you would have to revoke the presidential
proclamation before they can be demoted or redeployed.

Now, did you know, or agree to this? And we would like an answer; the
question is not rhetorical. If you did not, then Adv Simelane is in
defiance of presidential orders. That is bad. Sir, if you did know, that is
worse! And here is why: Equality before the law will be a dead letter if
you allow the NDPP to close down our best corruption busters. Mr President,
it is an act so irrational that we have to ask if the SCCU is just too good
for the ANC and its cronies’ comfort!

Dit lyk vir ons na ’n vorm van vrywaring van vervolging van vriende. [To us
it looks like a form of indemnity from prosecution for friends.]

And selective justice, sir, is no justice at all. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Speaker, hon
President, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers, Members of Parliament, the
ANC supports the Vote of the Presidency as it is an enabler for the
Presidency to provide political leadership of this country domestically and
in international community engagements.
At the 52nd conference in Polokwane, we as the ANC, noting that the
situation in the world continued to change drastically in recent years and
that more people than ever before live in democratic communities,
proclaimed that a just world and a better Africa was a possibility. This
conviction continues to guide us as we work hard for a better Africa and a
peaceful world. Through your leadership, Mr President, we remain united
around your call for all of us to do work differently.

One of the responsibilities that we have not only committed ourselves to,
but also internalised as an obligation to achieve, is pursuing African
advancement through the fast-tracking of regional integration by
strengthening the African Peer Review Mechanism, the APRM, and advocating
for the democratisation of and equity in institutions and systems of global
economic governance.

With in this commitment, we uphold our international relations policy which
advocates pushing back the frontiers of poverty and underdevelopment in
South Africa and Africa based on the continental, economic and development
plan, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, Nepad. This commitment
also includes creating peace and pursuing peaceful resolutions to
conflicts; contributing to peace efforts in Africa and in the world;
building and consolidating strategic partnerships to advance the country’s
developmental agenda; building and reforming African continental
institutions; and continuing to exert influence on global, political and
economic issues.

We played a critical role in the creation of Nepad and we hosted its
secretariat as we understood that working for Africa’s advancement meant
taking responsibilities and working to implement them. Nepad is the African
Union’s programme of action at a practical level to intensify the struggle
against poverty and underdevelopment, founded on the principles of
accountability, ownership and partnership.

It is the main frame of reference for intra-African relations and Africa’s
partnership with international partners, such as the European Union
Strategic Partnership; the Forum for Africa-China Co-operation; the Group
of Seven most industrialised nations plus Russia, commonly known as the G8;
the New Asian-African Strategic Partnership; and the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, commonly known as the OECD.

South Africa continues to play a role in the activities of Nepad. Under the
leadership and guidance of our President, our voices were lifted in
acknowledgement of all at the African Union Heads of State and Government
Summit in Ethiopia in January this year to the effect that Nepad should be
strengthened to live up to the realisation of its founding mandate.

Of course, it takes visionary and responsible leadership to contribute in
steering the continent away from poverty and underdevelopment and to
economic growth and development. As we discuss and celebrate Africa’s
advancement, we should never forget where we come from, lest we undermine
the reality that it takes unity and co-operation derived from mutual
respect for nations of the continent and the world to thrive.

A realist perspective expressed by some South African international
relations policy analysts reflected that in the years before 1994, our
“foreign relations” policy, as it was then referred to, focused primarily
on Southern Africa and rested upon a combination of promoting economic
interests, in the form of flows of South African exports and investments in
the region, and on military destabilisation as part of the aggressive
defence of apartheid.

We say thanks to the heroic leadership of our struggle whose views continue
to guide us as we march on in the journey of Africa’s advancement. As our
icon, Tatana Nelson Mandela, said when addressing the Davos World Economic
Forum in 1999:

  Africa is beyond bemoaning the past for its problems. The task of undoing
  that past is on the shoulders of African leaders themselves, with the
  support of those willing to join in a continental renewal. We have a new
  generation of leaders who know that Africa must take responsibility for
  its own destiny, that Africa will uplift itself only by its own efforts
  in partnership with those who wish her well.

As we march on in this journey of Africa’s advancement, we will always
remember that the road will not always be smooth, hence we also agree that
we may have to do things differently to respond to each given situation in
so far as our having to strive for implementation of agreements and
treaties that we enter into, in measured speed, is concerned.

The words of our President in his address at the World Economic Conference
in Tanzania recently confirms that, yes, Africa’s advancement programme
owes its roots to its own soil. He said, “Africa should start to use its
own resources to get out of the trap of underdevelopment.”

South Africa is one of those African states that played a leading role in
ensuring that there had to be a voluntary instrument for member states of
the AU to assist one another in working for the realisation of the
objectives of Nepad, so that regional integration, political stability, and
economic growth and development should be realised.

This voluntary instrument, founded in 2003, is called the African Peer
Review Mechanism, the APRM. The APRM provides space for AU member states to
assess one another as peers and to guide each other, so that we can say
that it is each according to capability and each according to need. We
share experience and reflect on those things that we would advise each
other about in the areas of democracy and political governance, economic
governance and management, corporate governance, and socioeconomic
development.

About 30 AU member states have now acceded to this review mechanism. Twelve
of them have been peer reviewed. In July later this year, Mauritius and
Ethiopia will be peer reviewed. We will, accordingly, approach lead
agencies for comment on the reports of these countries. The beauty of the
African Peer Review Mechanism is that it is a country process. It is highly
interactive and brings together civil society, government and business.

South Africa has acceded to the African Peer Review Mechanism, as we
believe that it is a useful instrument in facilitating interstate
engagements on issues of political stability, good governance and economic
development.

We are amongst the first five states to be peer reviewed. We have since
submitted our first accountability report, in January 2009, in which we
shared with African Union member states our legislative and policy
standards, as well as our accedence to the international treaties and
conventions.

In successive reports to the first one, we will account to the extent to
which we have succeeded in implementing these laws, policies and
international instruments, leading up to a period when we will be ready for
the second review. Our peers identified, advised and would like to see us
reflect on what we are doing about some critical issues that are
crosscutting in the four thematic areas of the APRM that I alluded to
earlier.

Of course, our preparation to respond to these issues is at an advanced
stage. We have been engaging APRM sectors in consultative sessions in all
the provinces in the country. We have so far received inputs, broadly, on
issues such as challenges to service delivery, the land reform issues,
stakeholder participation, poverty and inequality, the fight against
racism, anticorruption, violence against women and children, and HIV and
Aids. We will receive further comments on xenophobia, diversity,
affirmative action, cross-border movement of people, and black economic
empowerment.

Regarding the matters for attention that I referred to as we respond to
these crosscutting issues, our peers in the APRM believe that we have the
capacity to deal with them. To the extent that some debates arise and some
debates are, of course, informed by the fact that we need to clarify some
of these issues, we consider this as a call for us to indicate how we are
dealing with these matters.

They want us to indicate whether the debate in each suggests that there is
a crisis, or if it is a function of democratic agility and the slow pace of
positive advancement. South Africa will soon tell our consolidated stories
on these issues when we submit our second APRM accountability report. It is
waiting for the completion of one important chapter: the Fifa 2010 Soccer
World Cup tournament that we are hosting. We definitely have to conclude
this chapter so that the activities of the tournament will form part of the
report when we then prepare it.

Having declared ourselves an activist Fourth Parliament of a democratic
South Africa, it is expected of this honourable House to rise and be
counted as one of the active participants in the writing of the second
report of the APRM.

We are looking forward, without any doubt, to seeing Parliament in action,
as was the case when we went through the country’s self-assessment process
and the writing of the country’s self-assessment report in terms of the
APRM in the period up until 2006.

Participating in the APRM processes is not only for APRM compliance. It is
also a moment for self-reflection as it provides a mirror for reflection on
our record of performance in the areas of democracy, political stability,
economic growth and development.

This Parliament led by example at the conclusion of the self-assessment
process when it appointed a team of experts to introspect its state of
readiness as a people’s Parliament.

Taking the cue from that leadership by Parliament, we are leading a project
modelled around the self-reflection of the APRM, in order to introspect the
Public Service with a view to defining an architecture of our Public
Service ready to drive a developmental agenda.

We interpret the performance agreement that we signed with the hon
President to be premised on this demand. May we, as we celebrate Africa Day
this year, once more confirm that a just world and a better Africa is a
possibility and that we will make it happen through our own efforts.

Ku nga va ku ri xihoxo lexikulu eka un’wana wa vatswari va mina eka swa
tipolitiki, Nkul Pharephare Mothupi, loko a nga ndzi twa ndzi nyika nkanelo
wa mina ndzi gimeta ndzi nga nghenisanga ririmi ra manana. Hikwalaho, ndzi
rhandza ku gimeta nkanelo wa mina hi ku vula leswaku tiko ra hina ra Afrika
Dzonga ri amukele ntwanano wa Nhlangano wa Matiko ya Misava eka ku
kamakamana na vukungundzwana.

Hi endlile tano tanihi mfungho wo tiyimisela ku humelela eka mafumele
lamanene emisaveni hinkwayo. Ha rona mpfhumba leri, hi ya emahlweni hi
vurhangeri bya Presidente Zuma leswaku matiko hinkwawo ya misava ya fanele
ya sayina ntwanano wo xopaxopana hi vuntangha bya matiko. Ku nga ri khale
ha tshembha leswaku mhaka leyi yi ta fika emakumu.

Ku humelela ka matiko ya misava swi lawuriwa hi vuswikoti na ku tinyiketa
ka wona eka ku tirhisana. A swi hi vuyiseli nchumu ku pfukelana matimba, ku
tshwukiselana mahlo hambi ku vutlelana mimfumo handle ka ku hi vuyisela
ntsena ngati, swirilo na vusweti. A hi swi papalateni. Tiko ra hina ri
nghenerile ntwanano wo tirhisana na Nhlangano wa Ntirhisano hi swo
Hluvukisa Ikhonomi.

Hi ku ya hi ntwanano lowu, hi yirisa vatirhelamfumo, hambi i vo hlawuriwa
kumbe vo thoriwa, ku ba mati leswaku tingwenya ti etlela loko va tirha
ematikweni ya le handle na loko va amukela vukorhokeri hi vatirhi vo huma
ehandle. Ku endla tano i manyala ya vukungundzwana. Na wona ntwanano lowu
wu katsa ku xopaxopana ka matiko hi vuntangha.

Loko ha ha ri eka mhaka leyi hi ri tiko, hi vika leswaku hi pfumerile ku
kamberiwa hi tlhela hi endla leswi hi nga tsundzuxiwa swona. Hi ku ya hi
ntwanano lowu wa OECD, hi kamberiwile ro sungula hi tintangha ta hina hi
2008. Sweswi ha ha ku kamberiwa ra vumbirhi laha tiko ra Slovenia na
Amerika a va ri vona varhangeri eka vukambisisi lebyi. Xiviko xi ta huma ku
nga ri khale.

Hinkwaswo leswi swi komba leswaku hi tiyimiserile ku tirhisana na matiko ya
misava naswona varhangeri va hina va twisisa xidemokirasi. Hi ri ku dya hi
ku engeta. [Va phokotela.] (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[It would be a big mistake if one of my  political  mentors,  Mr  Pharephare
Mothupi, heard me concluding my discussion without using my  mother  tongue.
As a result, I would like to conclude  my  discussion  by  saying  that  our
country, South Africa, has accepted the United Nations  agreement  to  fight
corruption.

We have done so as a sign of commitment to  good  governance  in  the  whole
world. Through this instrument, we surge forward  under  the  leadership  of
President Zuma so that the  entire  international  community  can  sign  the
African Peer Review Mechanism. It  won’t  be  long  before  this  matter  is
finalised.

The success of the international community  depends  on  its  abilities  and
commitment to work together. There is no benefit  in  fighting  each  other,
causing  animosity  or  overthrowing  governments  which  only   result   in
bloodshed, crisis and poverty. Let us avoid this. Our  country  has  entered
into an agreement to work together with the Organisation  for  Economic  Co-
operation and Development.

According to the agreement, we forbid government officials, whether  elected
or appointed, to accept bribes when they work in foreign countries and  when
they receive services rendered by foreigners. To do that is  a  damning  act
of corruption. And this agreement also includes the review of  countries  by
their peers.

While on this issue as a country, we report  that  we  have  acceded  to  be
reviewed and to do  what  we  have  been  advised.  According  to  the  OECD
agreement, we were peer reviewed for the first time in  2008.  Now  we  have
just been peer reviewed for the second time, and Slovenia and  America  were
the leaders in the review.

All of this shows that  we  are  committed  to  working  together  with  the
international community and our leaders  understand  democracy.  I  rest  my
case, lest I not be afforded the opportunity in future. [Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
members, on behalf of the ACDP, it is my pleasure to dedicate my speech
today to the “Fly the Flag” for South Africa campaign. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, there is too much noise in the Chamber!

Rev K R J MESHOE: The ACDP hopes the World Cup will unite all people of our
beautiful land, boost our image internationally, strengthen our tourism
sector, and that the event will be incident free.

Having said that, I want to raise some concerns that the ACDP has. I have
spoken to the National Commissioner twice, including on Friday last week,
about increasing threats of xenophobic attacks against foreign nationals in
our country.

While the National Commissioner assured me that the police will not allow
the attacks to take place during the World Cup, no assurance was given that
they would not take place afterwards.

Many foreign nationals who have been advised by locals to leave the country
for their own safety have already left, while many, we are told, are
planning to leave early next month before the games begin. I want to ask
the President to please look into this serious matter and ensure that the
2008 xenophobic attacks are not repeated after the World Cup.

This morning, I received a phone call from Pastor Minambo of the Audacity
of Faith Church in Tembisa. He called to tell me that he has been forced to
get out of Tembisa, because he is a foreigner. The windows of his church
building have been broken on several occasions to force him out.

Local police have advised him to leave for his own safety because they
cannot protect him or his family. So, he has decided to leave Tembisa to
look for a place where he would be welcomed as a foreigner.
Mr President, I believe this is totally unacceptable. If this sort of
behaviour is allowed to continue and even servants of God are threatened
with death just because they were not born in South Africa, then I believe
that those perpetuating this evil will invite God’s judgment on this nation
for failing to protect the foreigners among us.

For the record, this Parliament must know, Mr President, that God places
responsibility on government to protect foreigners among us.

What the ACDP would love to see after the World Cup is the return of
spectators from all over the world, with their families, to our beautiful
country, owing to the wonderful hospitality South Africans gave them.

Apart from the issue of security, our other concern is that of possible
strikes that may take place during the World Cup. While our Constitution
protects our people’s right to strike, the ACDP is very concerned about the
violence that often accompanies strikes in our country.

It is reported that informal traders are planning protests for being
excluded from benefiting during the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. Many of
those in Gauteng claim that, and I quote:

  During the building of the Soccer City, we provided food to most of the
  workers; therefore we feel we are not part of the process.

The ACDP urges the President to use his influence to ensure that this
impasse between informal traders and Fifa is resolved amicably very soon,
so that this aggrieved group does not resort to violent strikes during the
games.

Reports about a train transporting petrol and diesel that was derailed
between Durban and Johannesburg in an apparent sabotage action by striking
Transnet workers are worrying. Why did striking workers fiddle with railway
lines, loosen railway plates to cause the train to derail, throw rocks at
locomotives and set some locomotives alight?

Such actions, particularly after the recent Rovos Rail train derailment
that led to many tourists being injured and three workers losing their
lives, have the potential of our railways and trains being declared unsafe
by both locals and potential tourists, and we cannot allow that to happen.

We believe government should have negotiated an arrangement with the
unions, particularly Cosatu, in that there would be no strikes during the
World Cup as most strikes in our country turn violent, as happened this
week.

The ACDP believes that even though the World Cup is in 29 days’ time, it is
not yet too late, Mr President, to try to get a settlement before the
kickoff. We believe that commitment from all the unions is necessary so
that we can ensure that our participation and the people of South Africa
make the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup the greatest ever. And we believe that
together we can. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Speaker Mr Max Sisulu, hon
President Mr Jacob Zuma, hon Deputy President Mr Kgalema Motlanthe, hon
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members, distinguished guests, ladies
and gentlemen, a few days ago our fourth democratic government turned one
year old. This reminds us of the journey we began in 1994, which was a
result of a rich history and heritage from which we must learn, as we move
forward to consolidate our democracy.

In moving ahead, we must follow in the footsteps of our forebears who, in
the early 20th century, saw the need for unity in action to liberate all
South Africans from the yoke of racist oppression. This need for unity
inspired the formation of the ANC in 1912.

Since its inception, the ANC has pursued the principle of united action.
Therefore, it forged unity with other progressive movements, in the spirit
of solidarity, with other oppressed South Africans and with white
compatriots committed to ending the scourge of apartheid. This formed the
foundation of the dream of a nonracist and nonsexist society. It is around
this dream that our people mobilised all sections of South African society
to fight for freedom, human rights and dignity.

The history of our struggle teaches us that victory against any form of
adversity requires the participation of multitudes of people and their
organisations. In bringing all these actors together, the ANC built a
national liberation movement guided by the value of unity, despite the
diversity of the peoples and organisations in our society.

So, the ANC has experience in working with diverse communities. You can go
back into its history. I want to name but a few of the pacts that have been
signed: the Three Doctors’ Pact, the Women’s Charter, the Freedom Charter,
the Women’s March, the UDF, and so on. This is what has made the ANC strong
and why the ANC has been able to come up with very strong, uncontested
views that have been able to stand the test of time.

In this context, it is fitting to recall the words of the great pioneer and
revolutionary Pixley ka Isaka Seme, who called on Africans to forget the
differences of the past and unite together in one organisation. He said,
“We are one people. These divisions, these jealousies, are the cause of all
our woes today.”

It is our view that Seme’s guidance should find expression in the society
we live in today and inspire us to work together in building a united,
nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous South Africa. In this regard, we must
build a new social movement, which will re-energise every citizen of our
country - irrespective of race, gender, religion, age and irrespective of
whether they reside in rural or urban areas - around the idea that the
future and prosperity of our nation is in our hands.

Accordingly, let us strengthen a social compact between government and the
all the people of South Africa, and ensure that we base it on progressive
social values that seek to build our society rather than destroy it. Mr
President, we need to follow your example in this regard, as you recently
demonstrated when you reached out to the poor and working-class members of
the Afrikaner community.

Mr M WATERS: Travel vouchers!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Travel vouchers, yes! You know
what? You have a big problem. [Interjections.] We have forgiven you, but
you do not want to forget. You have forgotten what your great grandfathers
did to us. [Interjections.] They maimed and killed our people. They
committed all sorts of injustices, but you always come up with these
things. [Applause.] We have forgiven you. You must learn to forgive. We
have even been through the courts. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, order! [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: ... doesn’t justify your activities. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: It doesn’t ...

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Further, I want to emphasise
that we need the concerted inclusion and participation of traditional
leaders in all the platforms that seek to build our society, as they have
been active agents historically in building unity in our communities.

Women must be at the forefront of championing these values. Having achieved
a 50:50 quota of gender parity in government, we must now pursue policies
and actions that will contribute to the full emancipation of women. The ANC
has always championed the idea that women’s rights are human rights, and I
am very proud that we continue to live out this ideal.

The rights of women include our right to bodily integrity so that we can
decide what to do with our own bodies and our own lives. These are the
values of choice and substantive democratic practice that should shape our
people and our institutions. I want to take this opportunity to call on all
women in positions of power and influence not to rest on their laurels. We
have a responsibility to continue the fight against all forms of
discrimination, especially because of the positions we have been privileged
enough to hold.

Towards the achievement of these values, the Presidency must take the lead
in working with inclusive women’s organisations, such as the Progressive
Women’s Movement, to address common challenges facing women regardless of
their station in life. While we say, “A woman’s place is not in the
kitchen,” as Ambassador Mthintso usually says, we must all know that there
are women who still do not have a kitchen, and for us the struggle
continues. [Applause.]

Mr President, the existing partnership between government and business
under your stewardship is commendable. However, there must be an
understanding that the economy is still in the hands of a few South
Africans, predominantly white males, and a growing but small black male
elite.

It is now high time for a social compact that aims to transform the economy
for the benefit of all South Africans. The so-called democratic dividend
must be for all who work and live in South Africa. In terms of women’s
participation in the economy, we need to continue to open doors for women
to do business, through providing access to skills, capital and
preferential procurement processes.

The relationship between government and the workers must be nurtured
consistently, given the role that workers play in the economy. We must
continue to promote and protect the rights of workers. Of course, we expect
them to exercise these rights responsibly.

Equally, we expect the leaders of companies to be responsible stewards of
the economy, and to avoid the risk of sacrificing long-term growth and
sustained job creation by succumbing to the type of greed which
precipitated ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Continue, hon member.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: ... which precipitated the
current global economic crisis.

Mr President, I take this opportunity to applaud labour, business and
community-based organisations for their participation in the National
Economic Development and Labour Council, Nedlac. We set up institutions
like this to foster social dialogue, and to facilitate consensus on issues
of social and economic policy.

United action requires the involvement of civil-society organisations.
South Africa has a rich history of social activism buttressed by a vibrant
civil society.

In the 1980s, with solidarity support from the international community, we
created a state of dual power throughout black communities in which
organisations such as Sached, the SA Committee on Higher Education Trust,
the National Education Crisis Committee, the SA Council of Churches, the
network of advice offices together with the Black Sash and various other
civic movements provided alternative services and built people’s
institutions for people’s power. Investment in strengthening this tradition
will ensure that we emerge victorious against racism, sexism, poverty and
underdevelopment.

In addition, we will further rely on the influence and space that faith-
based organisations occupy in our society. These are organisations that
must help us instil the values espoused in our Constitution. These values
include human, civil and political rights as well as social, economic and
cultural rights.

I can say proudly that, generally, faith-based organisations have been
supportive of progressive policies that promote gender equality.

Ngalokho ngithi, Malibongwe! [To that I say, let it be praised!]

Mr President, it is our task not only to build South Africa, but to build a
collective South African and African identity. To do this, we need to move
from so-called tolerance towards acceptance of progressive customs and
traditions. I want to emphasise that many of the immutable values such as
mutual respect, dignity and integrity are embedded in the cultures of most
South Africans.

Mongameli, ngifuna ukuthi uma ngifuna ukuhlaba inkomo kwami, umakhelwane
wami angaphatheki kabi ... [Mr President, I want my neighbour not to be
overly concerned when I slaughter a cow at my house ...]

... because that is how I communicate and relate to my ancestors. So, that
is the understanding we are fighting for.

There was a point in our history when young African intellectuals emerged
from mission schools to translate their education into practical scenarios
that responded to the challenges of their times. That is what our country
needs currently: an emergence of professionals and intellectuals that help
us respond to the development needs of our country.

In this regard, we need to invite black intellectuals in particular to be
part of the social discourse, and ensure that we accept original views
regardless of race or gender. They must come up with fruitful views on how
to take the country forward.

We need organic intellectuals who grow out of our communities and use those
experiences to shape a better country for all citizens.  Even in our
universities, we need staff and students to broaden their horizons. They
must never be concerned about how high-flown their ideas are, but rather
how grounded those ideas are. [Applause.]

In conclusion, I must emphasise that we need to build social capital as key
to dealing with the challenges we face, and ultimately in creating a
prosperous and caring society. I therefore commend and applaud the many
NGOs, faith-based organisations, development agencies and academia, among
other partners, who continue to work jointly with us to create a better
life for all our people. They have realised that it is our collective
responsibility to make South Africa a better place for all its citizens.
Truly, working together we can do more. The ANC supports this Vote.
[Applause.]

Dr W G JAMES: Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy President, hon members, it
is, of course, ironic that the two virgin Ministries whose purpose it is to
enhance, through planning, monitoring and evaluation, the building of what
Joel Netshitenzhe calls a “capable state” are themselves victim to the same
logic that makes our state bureaucracy so slow and unresponsive. It took a
full year to put the National Planning Commission together. The celebrated
ministerial performance agreements were signed at the beginning of May this
year, a full year since President Zuma assumed office.

Allow me to make a few points directed at Minister Collins Chabane’s new
Ministry. Firstly, a great deal was made of how the Zuma government desired
to be moved by performance. [Interjections.] Yet, it is unclear ...
[Interjections.] ... how the best people for the jobs at the highest level
are to be appointed to ensure that things get done. The boundaries between
excellence and mediocrity are, at best, shadowy, aggravated by executive
vacillation.

Secondly, the principal vehicle of ministerial performance accountability,
the performance agreements or contracts, have taken a full year to come to
conclusion, as I’ve said. It turns out, too, that Ministers set their own
targets, which, of course, defeats the purpose of the exercise. Those who
desire little more than enjoying the comforts of office instead of
experiencing the inner joy of a job well done may rest assured of the
uninterrupted indulgence of the ministerial lifestyle.

Thirdly, President Jacob Zuma promised that Ministers who do not exert
themselves would be shown the door. No-one has been shown the door, despite
the fact that some are in no great hurry to get the job done.
[Interjections.] Minister Collins Chabane once made the fatuous point ...

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Dr W G JAMES: Minister Collins Chabane once made the fatuous point that we
would not be evaluating the individual Ministers, but rather monitoring the
system.

Fourthly, Minister Chabane does not set the best example in the very
Ministry that should develop an impeccable record of probity and integrity.
He has used his official credit card for personal purposes and has failed
to respond to parliamentary questions - and he is not alone in this -
showing disdain for the parliamentary oversight obligations that we have.
It is one thing to praise discipline; it is quite another to submit oneself
to it.

I will make two points now about the Ministry of the National Planning
Commission, falling under the leadership of Minister Trevor Manuel.
Firstly, it is that the National Planning Commission, NPC, is made up of
individuals drawn from different sectors inside and outside of government
and hired because they are experts in their fields. Planning in the 21st
century requires expert knowledge in a mix of fields pertinent to our
times. It is a concern that there are no world-class experts in geology,
climate change, demography or security serving on the commission. Minister
Manuel today promised that such experts are to be brought into the service
of the NPC in its deliberations, and that is a very good thing.

Secondly, it is, of course, essential that the NPC does not become a victim
of cadre deployment. Most of the members have current or historical ties
with the ANC, either by way of government or by way of the political party.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: You are the
exception! [Laughter.]

Dr W G JAMES: This brings the independence and objectivity of the NPC and
the integrity of its mission into doubt. It may, indeed, be a pious hope
that the moral authority of Minister Manuel would successfully shield the
NPC from political interference.

The argument is - and this is an argument we support - that we need two
virgin Ministries to fix a broken government. Let’s face the facts: This
democratic government has done many good things since 1994, and we should
salute the achievements. [Applause.] But you and, in fact, all of us do not
know how to create sustainable jobs under globalisation. We do not know how
to build enough houses, neither do we know how to build communities or undo
the fragmented social aberrations - those dormitory suburbs - created under
apartheid.

Our primary, secondary and tertiary education system has let us down and,
frankly, I do not think we know what we are doing. [Interjections.] The
poverty levels are our national shame. Inequality levels are as perverse as
they are sickening. Children go to bed hungry, without food, a fact most
painful to the heart of any parent or individual with a conscience. I
recently visited an orphanage in Mbekweni in my hometown of Paarl, and the
children there sang to me a song that they sing to fortify themselves when
they are hungry at night. You do know that if you took the food thrown out
by wasteful families and all the restaurants in this country, there would
be enough of it to feed every South African, young and old. Thank you very
much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Mr President, Mr Deputy President, I think the hon Manuel has
it right: the ANC has a problem. It is a majority problem. We have too many
people that support the ANC and too many people in this House – so we have
a majority problem.

We don’t have the problem of the UK. Do you know that in 80 years in the UK
- the country loved so much by the DA – no party has won by more than 50%
of the vote? We have won 66%, so we have a problem. [Laughter.] [Applause.]


This is a problem we are now quite used to and we are going to manage it.
Last Monday, I was invited by the Black Management Forum at the University
of Cape Town to have a debate, and they gave me a very nice present today
with my name on it. I have declared it. I am declaring it now.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

This debate was about the economic situation in South Africa and our
policies. My opponent was a young MP from the DA. I will not mention her
name because she is a nice lady and she spoke very well. It was a wonderful
opportunity for us to engage on ideology and politics. What she did was to
give me a lecture about DA values, and the values that she articulated were
twofold: The first value was the role of the individual in society, a great
emphasis on the individual; and the second value was the free market and
how it will solve problems in our country.

I want to deal with those two. Let me deal with the role of the individual
in society, as understood by the DA and my young friend from the DA. She
said that the DA stands for open opportunity for all, that success is up to
the individual and that people should be allowed to do things for
themselves. Those are the three cardinal values about the individual.

Those people who read books and understand things will know that these
values come from the classical liberal tradition, which is an important
tradition from which the ANC has borrowed quite a lot. Her problem,
however, is that the individual in our society is not a self-contained
entity. We are all social beings. We live in society, and so when you
articulate the open opportunity for individuals in society, please remember
that the individual lives in society and is part of it.

Let me give you some examples. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please allow the speaker to be heard.

Prof B TUROK: We have a President and a Deputy President who did not have
some of the advantages that some individuals on my left have had and,
indeed, that I have had. They had no opportunity to become President and
Deputy President automatically in the society that we had before 1994. Did
they, in their lives, these two gentlemen, have an open opportunity –
according to DA philosophy? No! Was it up to the individual to make
progress? No! Were they allowed to do things for themselves? No!

HON MEMBERS: No!

Prof B TUROK: That is why they became social actors as social beings.
[Applause.] So, you see, we do appreciate merit. Let me say to you quite
clearly that we respect the individual and we appreciate merit. Merit is
important and, indeed, merit counts in the ANC. But the social structure
counts for more, and this is what you fail to understand. [Interjections.]

The fact of the matter is that these two gentlemen, the President and the
Deputy President, arrived in their present positions because of the ANC.
Without the ANC, maybe they would not have done that. They are social
actors in a social context, and it’s the society and the organisation that
they belong to, including merit, that brought them to the positions that
they hold at the moment. [Applause.]

So, let me tell you that while the individual is important, the social
context is more so. Now, does the ANC respect the individual? Yes, but in a
democratic sense. The individual is part of a political system in which
democratic values are uppermost. This is why your constant harping about
individual merit ... You know, when Helen Zille was here, sitting right
there, she used to talk about merit, merit, merit. But we said to her that
the apartheid system blocked merit, and so there was no opportunity for
all.

And so “individuals”, to quote you, were not allowed to do things for
themselves. Indeed, I respect the liberal values of classical scholarship.
I respect them, but you distort them. Classical liberal literature respects
the individual, but pays attention to the society.

Let us take a man like Amartya Sen, a great philosopher who, in fact, won
the Nobel Prize. What does he say? Just listen carefully. He says:
“Individual freedoms” – you’re talking about freedom all the time – “can be
seen to be a social commitment, and this requires the state to play an
active role in advancing the subjective freedom of the people”. So, there
are two important ideas here: a social commitment, and the role of the
state to play an active role.

Some of you may have heard of a gentleman called Plekhanov, a Marxist
Russian philosopher. People on this side have read him. [Interjections.] He
wrote a book which I have on my desk ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order!

Prof B TUROK: I thought that would excite them, you know. [Laughter.] I
really did. You know, let me confess: I deliberately used the word Marxism,
because I thought you would wake up. [Laughter.] [Applause.] I wasn’t going
to use Marxism because I knew this would excite you too much, but that’s
fine.

Let me say what Plekhanov says. He wrote the essay, The Role of the
Individual in History, and he says the possibility of the outstanding
individual to express himself and to achieve something is determined by the
nature of that society. In other words, the outstanding individual, of
which they are many on this side, will fulfil himself depending on the
nature of the society. Let me say that the ANC stands for a fair society of
overcoming the blockages of the past, of overcoming inequality, etc, etc.

Now, let me turn to my favourite subject, which is the free market of the
DA. Yes, we were given a lecture at the University of Cape Town under the
auspices of the Black Management Forum. It was a very good forum with a
nice turnout. My colleague here will probably have something to say about
it. So, what is this free market that will solve all our problems?

Let me remind you that South Africa was not built by a free market. Indeed,
South Africa was built by powerful monopolies - gold mining, diamond
mining, etc - who were working in collusion. And, indeed, the Competition
Commission of today is telling us that that collusion continues. We do not
have a free market in South Africa. Because the monopolies are so powerful
and because they still control the commanding heights of the economy, the
free-market ideology of the DA, therefore, is a little bit passé. Not only
is it passé, but we see now ... [Interjections. Hang on, hang on! I am
educating you ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order!

Prof B TUROK: They don’t want to be educated. [Interjections.] [Applause.]
I appeal to you, Speaker. You know, I am a professor and I am supposed to
lecture you. [Laughter.] [Applause.] So, please allow me. [Interjections.]
You know, what I would normally do in a classroom when the students
misbehaved is throw chalk at them. [Laughter.] All I have here is a glass
of water. [Laughter.] So, I don’t want to do that because that would be
unparliamentary.

We know that for several decades the free-market philosophy did win
globally and, indeed, the whole world began to follow the free market. For
several decades all our universities were teaching neoclassical economics,
macroeconomic stabilisation, all that stuff. And, by the way, that was
encouraged because the command economy of the Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe failed. So, a climate was created in which the free market could
flourish and the command economy was in trouble. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Prof B TUROK: You know all that, okay. I will continue with the lecture,
Part 2. [Laughter.] Now, what has happened, however, is that the mixed
economies of China, India, Brazil and Korea have flourished, and indeed
they are keeping the world economy afloat. [Interjections.] So, you see,
the mixed economies have flourished and the free-market economies ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, allow the speaker to be heard!

Prof B TUROK: That’s fine, I am enjoying myself. [Laughter.] Speaker, allow
them to yell. It’s fine. Let me quote from the Financial Times of London. I
have an article here which will astonish you free marketers. It says ...
[Interjections.] Let me read it, please. [Interjections.] You’re good
students.

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Order!

Prof B TUROK: It says, “Faith in free market blinded the IMF.” It goes on
to analyse the reasons for the international crisis, and it says ...
[Interjections.] I can’t read the whole thing ... If you give me your time,
I will read it. It was this boundless faith in markets’ self-regulatory
capacity that appears to be at the root of the IMF’s failure to detect
problems.

You see, they were mesmerised, like you ... [Laughter.] ... by the
international free-market philosophy, and so they couldn’t see the crisis
that was coming and so here we are. What do we say? What do we say?
[Interjections.] We say ...

Mr M J ELLIS: We say ... [Inaudible.]

Prof B TUROK: Yes, okay. Keep talking, it’s fine. [Interjections.] You
know, I can’t hear you because I am speaking louder than you. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker ...

Prof B TUROK: No, no. No questions. Sit down. Sit down. [Laughter.] No
questions.

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon member.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I simply want to know whether I can use a
microphone to tell Mr Turok what we were saying? [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Please take your seat, hon member. And turn off your
microphone.
Prof B TUROK: So, what do we say? To sum up, what do we say? What does the
ANC say and what does this government say? Firstly, we say that the state
must be deliberately interventionist. [Applause.] It must not dodge the
issue. A government must govern and the state must intervene.
[Interjections.] That is the lesson of the mixed economies of China, India,
Brazil, etc. And so we say the state must intervene.

Mr M WATERS: Has it got the capacity?

Prof B TUROK: Oh, there is plenty of capacity. [Interjections.] You should
have been at the lecture by Prof Ha-Joon Chang yesterday. You dodged that,
although one or two of your people were there. He is a South Korean
internationally famous economist and professor of economics at the
University of Cambridge. He said to us: Why are you not using the capacity
that you have in South Africa? Compared to South Korea, when they began to
develop, he said South Africa has far higher ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order!

Prof B TUROK: Yes, cool it. Cool it. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] So, there
is plenty of capability in South Africa. We can make nuclear weapons, so
why can’t we use that capability? Is that a lack of capability? You may not
be able to do it, but we can do it. [Laughter.]
Secondly, with regard to deliberate intervention, we need to harness that
capital, as Rob Davies and others were saying in terms of the Industrial
Policy Action Plan. We need to harness capital and push it to expand the
productive base. And what I said to the students at the Black Management
Forum debate at the University of Cape Town is, let’s talk a little bit
less about growing the economy and more about expanding the economy.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Did they listen?

Prof B TUROK: They listened very well, and applauded, and gave me a
present. So there! [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

So, we say, harness capital, expand the productive base of South Africa.
Let’s become a manufacturing country par excellence. Let’s export to the
whole world. Why not? [Applause.] And if you expand the industrial base,
plenty of black entrepreneurs will get jobs, which leads me to my last
point, procurement.

We need to ensure that there is a great deal of procurement so that black
business can grow, and that is what I said to the Black Management Forum.
Let us grow the economy - never mind about BEE deals at the top. Expand the
economy at the bottom, and that will suck in black excellence, black
experience, black enterprise, and so on.

That is the position of the ANC and the government, and I really feel sorry
for you. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mna L M MPHAHLELE: Seboledi, Mopresidente Nxamalala, Motlatša Mopresidente,
Maloko a Palamente a hlomphegago, baeng ka moka, Mopresidente o boletše
taba ye bohlokwa kudu. O boletše ka pholisi ya polelo. Ke a ipotšiša gore
na mmušo o tla dira eng gore o hlabolle dipolelo ka moka tša Afrika Borwa.
Ga bjale dipolelo tša rena ke dipolelo tša go kgabiša, e sego dipolelo tšeo
go ithutwago ka tšona dithuto tše bohlokwa go swana le Dipalo, Kgwebo,
Molao, Mahlale le tše dingwe.

Re le ba PAC re re go ka ba kaone ge, sa pele, re ka dira gore leleme la
Afrika Borwa e be leleme la bobedi la kgapeletšo ge bana ba ithuta dikolong
ka moka. Sa bobedi, re rata ge maswao a ditsela a ka ba ka leleme la Afrika
Borwa leo le bolelwago tikolong yeo maswao a tla bego a beilwe go yona. Sa
boraro, dikgwebo - go swana le dipanka le dikgwebo tšeo di dirago
dillathekeng - di swanetše gore di diriše maleme a Afrika Borwa. Mohlala ka
ga se ke Absa. Ge o fihla metšheneng ya Absa o a tseba gore o swanetše o
tobetše kae le ge o sa tsebe sekgowa. Sa bone, dingwalwa tša maleme a
Afrika Borwa di swanetše gore di ate. Go swanetše gape gore go be le difoka
tšeo di tlago thopša ke batho bao ba ngwadilego ka maleme a Afrika Borwa.
Tše ka moka ke nagana gore di tla buša botho bja rena. Ga bjale ga re tšewe
bjalo ka batho ka lebaka la gore ge motho a bolela maleme a mangwe, batho
ba mo tšea bjalo ka motho wa maemo. Eupša ge motho a bolela maleme a
gaborena batho ga ba mo tšee bjalo ka motho. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Hon Speaker, President Nxamalala, Deputy President, hon
Members of Parliament, distinguished guests, the President raised a very
important issue, the language policy. I ask myself how government plans to
develop all indigenous languages. Our languages are currently used
unofficially and not as a medium of instruction for subjects such as
mathematics, economics, law, science and others.

As the PAC, we would appreciate it if, firstly, it is made compulsory for
learners in all schools to take one indigenous language as their first
additional language. Secondly, we would also like to see road signs written
in the indigenous language spoken in the particular area in which the sign
is placed. Thirdly, institutions such as banks and cellphone companies must
use indigenous languages. Absa is such an example. Absa’s ATMs are user-
friendly to everyone, including people who do not understand English.
Fourthly, we need more literary work in indigenous languages. There must be
awards for indigenous writers. I think all this will bring back our
humanity. We are currently being taken for granted. When you speak some of
the foreign languages, you are treated with dignity and respect, but when
you speak one of the indigenous languages, you are not treated with the
same dignity and respect.]

Comrade President, the PAC family holds the view that the National Planning
Commission must be afforded sufficient resources. This will enable the
commission to travel throughout the world and learn from other countries,
instead of relying solely on state institutions such as Statistics SA.

With South Africa fast becoming a serious player in the international
arena, we can no longer rely on individuals’ charm and charisma. We need
institutional memory with regard to mediation, diplomacy, peace and
international interventions. We need a well-resourced office that will
champion the country’s strategic international relations regardless of who
is in power.

The highest office in the land should do some soul-searching in
communication and public engagement. It seems the Presidency has been
expanded without necessarily being strengthened. The failure by the
President to declare his interests on time, in compliance with the law,
clearly shows that there is no technocratic capacity in the highest office.
Some of us who hold your office in high esteem were deeply embarrassed by
this incompetence. What embarrassed us more was the discord of voices from
the Presidency trying to justify a mistake. With this type of spokesperson,
you need no enemy to tarnish your public image.

With regard to public engagement, the presidential hotline, 17737, is a
good idea. But good ideas that are underfunded end up fading away. In
conclusion, the PAC supports the Budget. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to place on record
that it was in fact me who the hon Turok was debating with at the
University of Cape Town. [Laughter.] I have no problem with placing this on
the record, because I think we both fought a good fight. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order! Let the speaker be heard.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: But, ultimately, I think it’s important for me to clarify
the position that he tried to infer was the DA’s. It has always interested
me how quick the ANC is to try and make it look like the DA policy is
callous, uncaring and unfeeling, when there is plenty of evidence, both in
our government and in our programmes of action, that it is not.

What we advocate, Prof Turok, is not a free market. We advocate a market
which allows people to fulfil that potential by providing them with basic
services, basic education, basic health care, transport, infrastructure -
the means to start from a minimum basic level and then to make choices
about what to do with their future. [Applause.] What is so wrong with that?
Why must the government be at the centre of everything? If you are in
business, government must decide how you make money. If you are one of the
poorest of the poor, government must decide how and where services must be
allocated to you. Why not give people the freedom to make these choices?
This is what the DA advocates, not the distortion he tried to put forward
in this House. [Applause.]

Mr Speaker, earlier in today’s debate the President announced that he would
be launching the presidential national dialogue on a common national
identity later this year. This follows the hon President’s call earlier
this year for a national debate on South Africa’s morality. Now, as a
liberal political organisation, the DA has always had an in-principle
objection ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members!

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: ... to the notion of the government seeking to direct or
shape the morality and personal convictions of private citizens. We have
voiced this objection on a number of occasions and from a number of
platforms, the substance of the objection being that it contradicts the
letter and the spirit of our Constitution, which guarantees our rights to
hold views that are different from those of others and to express those
views. The Constitution spells out the limitations on this freedom. They
include such things as the advocacy of hatred and the incitement of
imminent violence.

But to say that South Africans don’t have a right to use their own culture
to judge others, as President Zuma said in his speech to the House of
Traditional Leaders – that it is unconstitutional to do so - is clearly
wrong. The Constitution actually champions the rights of individuals to
hold contrary views, and rightly so. Because where would we be today if we
weren’t able to hold contrary views, and debate those views?
The President uses the word “debate” in framing this forthcoming dialogue,
and that word “debate” casts an innocuous shadow over the dialogue, making
it seem like it’s democratic and interactive. But if the ultimate goal is,
as the President has previously stated, for us to reach “common
understanding as South Africans”, then the attempt is, in fact, to shape
the consciousness of private citizens.

There is more than enough space in South Africa’s democracy - amongst
private citizenry, in churches, in schools, in taverns and in places of
education - to allow our people endless opportunities to discuss questions
of who we are as a nation. That space should be jealously guarded in a free
and democratic society.

If the President were truly concerned about morality and nation-building,
then he would apply his efforts to the moral and ethical decay within the
government ranks that he leads, where Ministers live high on the hog using
public money and those with political connections abuse them shamelessly
for the sake of personal enrichment.

Take, for example, the scandal which erupted recently over the so-called
investment arm of the ANC, Chancellor House, and its R5,8 -billion stake in
an Eskom deal to build boilers for a new power station in Limpopo, a deal
from which the ANC stands to make hundreds and hundreds of millions of
rand, funnelled straight from the public purse into the coffers of the
governing party.
Or, take the ANC Youth League president, Julius Malema, who has managed to
secure R140 - million worth of contracts in his home province, using his
political connections there. There are countless other examples, both high
profile and not so high profile, which demonstrate the hon President’s
failure to address the moral and ethical rot of corruption in government.

Earlier the hon Pandor tried to suggest that we in the opposition lack
concrete plans to differentiate ourselves from the ANC. Hon Pandor, I can
tell you that in the Western Cape the DA has just gazetted draft
legislation to prevent public servants, members of the executive and their
immediate families, from doing business with the provincial government.
And, just last month, Premier Helen Zille passed amendments to the
Ministerial Handbook, lowering the cap on the allocation for the purchase
of new ministerial vehicles by over half.

We don’t just criticise the ANC on these matters anymore; we are a party of
government now. [Interjections.] We take steps, actively, to ensure that
the vices of the governing party are not replicated in our own provincial
government. [Applause.] We also want to demonstrate to the people of this
country how easy it is, with good, decisive and principled leadership, to
prevent graft and avarice from taking root and strangling the public purse.

The ANC would like South Africans to believe that it is very difficult and
time-consuming to implement measures to curb things like waste and endemic
corruption in the state. The DA is rolling back this perception and showing
that the only thing the ANC lacks is the political will to do so. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr P S SIZANI: Hon Speaker, hon President Jacob Zuma, hon Deputy President
Kgalema Motlanthe, director-general and your staff ... Ndabezitha, Mntwana
kaPhindangene, nawo wonke amaKhosi akhona kuleNdlu ... [... Ndabezitha,
Mntwana wakwa Phindangene, and all the traditional leaders who are present
in this House ...]

... hon members, distinguished guests, in 1974, I was a Student Christian
Movement member. I was like this lady who was here now. [Interjections.] My
friend asked me back then, “Comrade Stone, just assume we were colonised by
the Arabs in South Africa, what religion would we have?” Before I could
answer, he said, “Oh, let’s assume we were colonised by the Chinese. What
religion would we have?” In the end we agreed that we are Christians
because we were colonised by Christians. And then he concluded, “So, you
are imposing an accident of history on me.”

Now this lady, in her understanding of systems of governance and economy,
has a view ...

An HON MEMBER: Much better than you!
Mr P S SIZANI: Yes, of course, she may have. But remember this: In this
country, more than 50% of its citizens live in rural areas, in abject
poverty ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order!

Mr P S SIZANI: And those people did not create that poverty. They were born
into it, and they were kept under it, by brute force. [Interjections.] Now
the ANC is called upon to undo that, and we are called upon to undo it in
15 years! When it was done over 300 years! [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Hon President, when you put in place a Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform, you specifically directed government to address this problem.
However, there is no illusion in the ANC. Your freedom, which you call
freedom, is not the same freedom as understood by those people. Because
freedom of movement for capital means freedom of movement of your money all
over the world, as long as you get the highest interest rates.
[Interjections.] And freedom of movement for those suffering masses in the
rural areas is physical movement, because they have no money. So we know we
are addressing a huge problem.

When you talk about jobs, who is the giver of jobs? Capital.
[Interjections.] The Western Cape is a new phenomenon. This country has
been divided under apartheid for many years. [Interjections.] The gentleman
from the FF Plus who spoke here has said there are myths which are covering
the truth. One truth is this choice story that you are talking about here.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, when you refer to members of the House, you refer
to them as “hon members”, not as “this lady” or “that gentleman”. You
should refer to them as “hon members”.

Mr P S SIZANI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

We have no illusions in the ANC. We have a clear understanding that to
address poverty and provide decent jobs is a struggle. It is not a struggle
only because of political will, but also because of mobilising resources to
go to where the people are. Now these hon members on my left talk about
choice. What choice? The person who has money, has a choice to buy clothes,
to buy houses, live where they want to live, broadcast their adverts to
everybody. The people in the rural areas have no choice. They live there
under duress, under grinding poverty. Now you come here and talk about
choice, believing that choice is a phenomenon that is a reality for those
people. We know that choice is not a choice for those people; it’s a
struggle.

Let me turn to the consequences of insecurity for those people. The
deteriorating health situation that we find in the rural areas is caused by
the absence of soil, on which they have been crammed in a reserve. This has
caused soil erosion, and therefore they cannot plant food to feed
themselves.

The hon President of our country is saying that 60% of the food that these
people must have must come from their own labour, from their own land. But
where is the land? [Interjections.] Where is the land? The land is in the
hands of huge conglomerates and corporations in our country. That land is
not producing food and that land is lying fallow.

And now you are telling us that they have a choice. We have a choice to
make food for these people, and make sure that there is tenure. We are
introducing a system in our government, through the ANC, to make sure that
we are going to create a secure tenure system, to remove all these smash-
and-grab tenure systems since 1652. [Applause.]

For the first time in the history of this country there will be no more
smash-and-grab tenure systems. There will be a regulated form of tenure in
terms of which, whether you have money or not, you must have access to
land, because land is a basic source of food, is a basic source of wealth,
is a basic source of housing, is a basic source of security. [Applause.]
There is no way that we can live for another 15 years and leave this
country under this form of tenure that we have. We must make sure that the
land is shared among those who work it. [Applause.]

Comrade President, the hon Shilowa was here. [Interjections.] Maybe the
Whip of Cope will report. With me here are photos of what has happened in
Muyexe, Ward 7. Photos don’t lie. If the hon Shilowa wanted to see, he
would not have missed the 300 houses that have already been completed in
Ward 7 under this pilot, where we are going to build a total of 350 houses
for the people. All of them are still standing. They are built with
facebrick, as are the houses in Sandton. [Interjections.]

The hon Shilowa would not have missed the Thusong Centre in that ward if he
wanted to see it. The hon Shilowa would not have missed the satellite
police station in the same ward if he wanted to see it. In that ward there
is a clinic that is open five days a week for eight hours a day. He could
have seen it if he wanted to see it. The hon Shilowa would have met the 36
women that are planting and reaping vegetables. They are selling to Spar in
Giyani and in Tzaneen. He would have seen that if he wanted to see it.
There is fencing that is taking place in that ward, for 114 homestead
gardens. If the hon Shilowa wanted to see it, he would have seen it. We are
making the bare minimum in livable conditions for the people in that area
to demonstrate that we can do this, and we are going to expand it
throughout the country.

But the people in Muyexe have boreholes that are still functional. There
are toilets where there were none before, that are built with facebrick.
There were none there before. I wonder whether the hon Shilowa wanted to
see this. If he really wanted to see this, he would have gone to Chief
Muyexe, Kgoshi Muyexe. He is the chairperson of the council of stakeholders
of that area, of the greater Giyani.

The hon Shilowa, if you did not want to speak to the kgoshi, at least you
could have gone to the ward councillor of Ward 7. He would have taken you
around to show you what I am talking about. I don’t quite understand hon
Shilowa coming here to Parliament. A leader of a political party visiting a
rural area would at least ask my office in advance, “Can you prepare
something? I want to go to Muyexe, can you show me around?” He did not
happen to be in Muyexe. Maybe he didn’t go. [Interjections.]

The ANC has undertaken to change the face of our rural villages and
communities through comprehensive support programmes with proper monitoring
mechanisms to ensure sustainable improvements in the livelihoods of the
rural poor, the farmworkers, the farm dwellers and small farmers,
especially women. Employment creation, quality jobs and sustainable
livelihoods can only be a reality if we work in concretely identified
labour-absorbing sectors, and invest resources accordingly. Structural
weaknesses in the economy must be identified and addressed, building on the
good work that has been done over the past 16 years. The commitment to
create 4 million jobs by 2014 must be taken seriously, and all the sectors
must make concrete commitments on what they can be doing in real terms.

The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform has visited a
number of provinces. We have gone to KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape,
and members from this side were part of the delegation. They have seen for
themselves what is happening in Burgershowe, in Mlalazi, in Qumbu, in
Tsolo. They may even visit Riemvasmaak to see for themselves that this
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform has initiated programmes to
make sure that the people will be able to take responsibility for their own
livelihoods and sustainable life.

We must take practical steps to ensure that we change the face of our rural
villages and communities. We must do it soon, through the provision of
infrastructure development: water, electricity, roads, transport and
economic activity.

Hon Speaker, the department has received a large sum of money, R860 million
to be exact, to recapitalise all the parcels of land that have been given
to people via restitution and the Land Redistribution and Agricultural
Development programme, specifically to make sure that these communities are
able to use the land to produce the food and look after themselves, and not
wait for government to come and help them. What we require is that all the
departments of the government crowd in around the initiatives that are
taking place in the pilots.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, on that happy note, your time has expired.
[Applause.] Hon member, your time has expired. Please go back to your seat.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I now wish to invite the hon K J Dikobo, and wish to announce
that this is the hon Dikobo’s maiden speech. So, please listen attentively
and please do not heckle or interrupt. [Applause.]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Hon Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, hon
members, guests, without characterising or commenting on how they were, we
want to congratulate you, Mr President, on completing 100 days as head of
state. We have noted the appointment of commissioners to the National
Planning Commission and we wish to wish them well in the execution of their
duties and mandate.

The idea of establishing the commission remains a good one. The functions
of the commission are very clear and we hope that the commission will
operate as a body independent from those who appointed the commissioners.
We want to caution that there should not be a gap between policy and
implementation.
Differently put, there is a need to ensure that monitoring of
implementation takes place. Good policies on their own, Mr President,
cannot and will not change the quality of life of our people. It is the
implementation of those policies that will make a difference in their
lives.

We were very excited, Mr President, when you announced that Ministers would
enter into some form of performance contract. We are glad to hear that all
of them have signed. To the Ministers we can only sing the wedding song, Go
saena mo ga se morabaraba [Getting married is not a game]. But even more,
we hope that the content of those contracts will be made public so that we
can all know and understand what their key performance areas and expected
outcomes are.

We have also noted with appreciation, Mr President, your comment on the
progress in Zimbabwe, albeit very slow progress. As you and your team
continue in your role to bring the parties together, please impress on all
the role-players that the implementation of the Global Political Agreement
is the only sensible way to go for Zimbabwe.

Our support for the role chosen by the people of Zimbabwe comes from our
experience and knowledge that this model has succeeded in other countries:
Burundi, Kenya and, to certain extent, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the DRC. It also comes from our experience of how the other model
has failed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Somalia. Azapo supports the Budget
Vote. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms M N PHALISO: Speaker, hon President, Deputy President - all protocol
observed - the ruins of the Kingdoms of Mapungubwe and Monomotapa are
messengers from the past bearing testimony to the fact that South Africans
were advanced artisans and engineers long before the colonial period. If it
were not for the disruption caused by colonialism of a special type, South
Africa, as a region, would have remained a giant producer and processor of
intermediary goods for local consumption and export purposes. The use of
armed force to alienate our people from the means of production and, thus,
turn them into proletariats of two worlds, is the mother of the current
state of affairs - a 0,66 Gini coefficient, the highest in the world.

South Africa has the highest income inequality in the world because of the
conscious, systematic and deliberate underdevelopment of the majority of
the South African population. Colonialism of a special type, as practised
by the apartheid regime, decided that the education given to the majority
of our people should be shorn of all the necessary ingredients essential
for the creation of an economically active citizenry.

While the apartheid regime is nothing but a painful memory in more ways
than one, the people are governing. However, the question remains: Are the
people sharing in the country’s wealth? If the answer is negative, we, as
their legitimate representatives, and in line with the Freedom Charter’s
assertion that no government can claim authority unless it is based on the
will of the people, must ask ourselves whether we have legislated and
enforced legislation enough to ensure the realisation of this ideal of our
people. We need to ask ourselves whether the door to skills development has
been opened enough to ensure that our people are skilled to drive their own
economy.

Sceptics of the old growth path had cautioned that an export-led growth
strategy would benefit capital-intensive and high-skilled industries, while
in labour-intensive industries workers would be retrenched and factories
closed. They also cautioned that liberalising trade lowers inflation, but
it makes imports cheaper than domestically produced products. This would
inevitably lead to the closure of factories or job losses; high
unemployment and continuing job losses in the formal sector and rising
joblessness, especially among the youth; continued mass poverty; and deep
inequalities based on class, race and gender - the triple oppression.

It is against this backdrop that the 2010 ANC January 8 Statement makes it
mandatory for our government to pursue sustained development, based on an
inclusive growth path. In the same vein, the 2009 ANC manifesto commits to
ensuring that state-led industrial policy leads to the transformation of
the economy. It further states that such a state-led industrial policy
programme will direct public and private investment to support decent work
outcomes, including employment creation and broad economic transformation;
reduce youth unemployment, including targeted wage subsidies aimed at
lowering the cost and risk of hiring inexperienced workseekers; and support
labour-intensive industries through industrial policy intervention, skills
development, infrastructure investment and public employment programmes.

The contradiction, though, is that this high rate of unemployment coexists
with an equally high employment rate - at 24,3% narrow employment rate and
31,1% unemployment rate, with the inclusion of discouraged workers.
Ideally, unemployment would be absorbed by the considerably open labour
market. However, this prospect is negated by our objective condition of a
critical skills shortage, which is a highly specialised labour-market need.
The specialised needs of our labour market have led to the import of skills
for a number of critical projects, especially infrastructure development
ones which have responded to the lack of local artisans and civil engineers
by importing such skills.

The import of skills does not only affect the rate of unemployment but also
the market value of all final goods and services that we produce within a
particular period. This kind of phenomenon has led to South Africa being a
consumer of imported final goods and, thus, helping to create jobs in other
countries rather than, in the main, producing goods here which South Africa
consumes. South Africa has found herself trapped in a negative balance of
trade because of its skills deficit. Of course, skills poachers that have
brain drained our country of medical skills have not, in the main, made the
situation easier. But even without the poachers as a factor, the truth is
that we are not producing enough skills to drive our own economy.

The ANC recognises the necessity to transform the economy in order to
ensure that women are at the centre. The key task in ensuring economic
growth and decent jobs is to ensure a strong responsive economic system
that principally serves all South African women. This can happen through
ensuring that the state plays a leading role in ensuring the implementation
of the industrial policy. This is to ensure that women are key drivers of
growth. Through the developmental state, the call of women to drive growth
to create jobs seeks to break away from the old growth path.

In respect of the need for skilling and reskilling, job creation is decent
work, particularly for women. The ANC’s call for the creation of decent
work refers to employment with all benefits and protection within the
discourse of labour rights. This speaks to matters of a provident fund,
paid maternity leave, and medical aid in a manner that promotes a better
life for all women.

At the beginning of 2006, under the leadership of the Presidency and, in
particular, with the support of leaders in the labour federations, business
and civil society, the Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition,
Jipsa, was formed. Through its structures, such as the joint task team and
the technical working group, and with the assistance of funding from the
Business Trust and project management by the National Business Initiative,
a process of identifying and clearing blockages began.

The initiative, albeit an important one, was a short-term response to a
systemic requirement for a human resource development strategy and
structures that work. The important work and studies undertaken by Jipsa
that were not implemented will be taken forward, as the staff of the Jipsa
secretariat are absorbed into the Department of Higher Education and
Training.

The basic education foundation, whose strengths and quality determines the
capacity for skills acquisition, is an area that cannot be left unattended.
In this regard, we should welcome the initiative to conduct annually
independently moderated assessments in Grades 3, 6 and 9. These assessments
will focus on the critical foundation skills of literacy and numeracy that
are fundamental for learning. The success of this initiative will improve
the numbers of learners that qualify with a university entrance and
subsequently increase the broader matric pass rate.

Skills acquisition also takes place on the factory floor where many of our
people, who continue to be classified as unskilled, are doing most of the
complicated work for a pittance because of their lack of formal
qualifications. This lack of formal accreditation of these toiling masses
has not only led to their being exploited - based on the fact that their
employers, though enjoying the proceeds of the work of their skilfulness,
opportunistically continue remunerating them as unskilled labour - but has
also locked them in a belief that they remain unskilled even though they
work skilfully. In that regard, they cannot rely on their experience and
skills to seek employment elsewhere as, there also, they will be deemed
unskilled.

The proposed new sector education and training authority, Seta, landscape,
in summary, features the recertification of 15 Setas with minor changes;
the amalgamation of several Setas to ensure greater efficiency, resulting
in the establishment of six new Setas; the reduction of 23 Setas to 21; and
the recently launched Quality Council for Trades and Occupations which has
the mandate to address the quality of training in and for the workplace and
to ensure that workplace training and knowledge is accredited and
certificated, including proper recognition of prior learning.

This initiative will ensure that our skills base is accorded its true
reflection and improve the situation of many skilled workers whose
workplace-acquired skills had never been acknowledged, accredited or
certificated. The FET colleges remain fundamental in publicly driven,
skills-development college infrastructure. However, there has been a view
that college is a consolation prize for university, and that colleges are
not necessarily institutions of choice. It is important that this myth be
dispelled, not just through oral utterances, but support for FET colleges.
The FET colleges should also be capacitated to produce the kind of skill
that is so needed by the economy which, in its nascent stages, is
assimilated into the mainstream economy.

It is the skilled people, more than professions, who are the engines behind
any economy. Our education system is geared towards producing professions
more than skills. It is no wonder that a learner becomes part of the
education system for 12 years, from Grade R to Grade 12, but emerges out of
this system unemployable and with no skills to work independently.

Critically, we must ensure that the numerous offers of job training do
undertake a proper assessment of the recognition of prior learning and the
important skills that are derived from this life experience process. More
often than not, it is these skills which have been honed out of the
practical working experience of millions of workers that are far more
useful to the economy than abstract certification which cannot be applied
practically in the workplace and leads to unemployment.

A united and democratic nation able to take its rightful place in the
family of nations and to heal the divisions of the past will be built
through broadening the skills base. This can be achieved by strengthening
the education foundation, diversifying skills acquisition and ratification
methods, and capacitating skills-generating centres for a local skills-
driven and job-generating economic growth path. Only such a nation can
restore the glory that belonged to the proud economically independent
generation of our Mapungubwe and Monomotapa ancestors. Indeed, South Africa
can once more produce a generation of artisans, engineers and other
economically driven skills. The ANC supports Budget Vote 1: The Presidency.
I thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Mr Speaker, comrades and hon members, this Budget Vote indeed
takes place at a time of heightened expectations and excitement due to the
World Cup. We are privileged, both as a country and continent, to be
hosting the biggest sporting spectacle.

The APC calls on all South Africans to fully support our national team,
Bafana Bafana, and all African teams in the spirit of Pan-African
solidarity. The APC hopes that the six African teams will do us proud.
Cameroon and Senegal have, in the past, raised the African flag high. These
teams have a unique opportunity to raise the flag higher.

Congratulations to government, the SA Football Association, Safa, and the
Local Organising Committee on a job well done in preparing for this
occasion in a way that will enhance the global standing of our continent
and people. Those who have questioned our ability to host a successful
World Cup have been resoundingly proven wrong.

Having said that, we cannot, nonetheless, take our eyes off the ball, that
is, the continual pursuance of the noble and strategic goals of
transformation and good governance. Sixteen years down the line,
transformation is still a journey. It cannot be acceptable that significant
areas of our socioeconomic life remain untransformed and reflective of the
yesteryears of minority domination. It can neither be acceptable nor
tolerable that the majority continue to suffer social and economic
exclusion.

We fought for freedom to ensure change, change for the better in the lives
of the African people in general and the working class in particular. How
government resources are used has a great bearing on the material
conditions of the people. There continues to be a pressing need to ensure
that accountability is accepted and practised as a matter of course. Public
administration must serve the people, as outlined in the Constitution and
in line with the Batho Pele principles. There must be national
consciousness and pride in serving the public.

As the head of state, Comrade President, you have the responsibility to
ensure that all of government adheres to and promotes good governance. You
have made a call for a culture change in government. We need to see firm
action to enforce compliance.

The APC thanks you, Comrade President, for having all parties in Parliament
take part in national day rallies. Remember, it was a request from some of
us. However, the APC deplores the fact that, on these same days, some
leaders organise sideshows, conducting themselves in ways that do not
foster the spirit of unity that was called for in the first instance. The
APC fully supports this inclusive approach.

We would be failing in our internationalist duties if we did not speak out
in support of the oppressed but heroic people of Palestine. Our government
must never lower its voice in demanding freedom for the Palestinians and
condemning the deplorable conditions of their existence under Israeli
oppression. The Palestinians deserve their freedom. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, this certainly has been a very odd debate. We
have been informed by some Ministers; we have been scolded by Minister
Pandor; we have been shouted at by the Deputy Minister of Social
Development; we have been uplifted by members of the DA; and we have been
entertained by the hon Turok with his patronising views, I might add, of
those younger than himself, which probably, Ben, is everybody in this
House. [Laughter.]

I want to say that I really do not know why the ANC do not use Mr Turok
more often. He certainly is remarkably entertaining, and I think that the
students gave him a bracelet with his name on it, because they thought his
views were so old-fashioned that he must be very old and therefore in
danger of forgetting his name. [Laughter.] I want to ask you, Mr Turok: Has
it got your address on as well? [Laughter.] I want to say, hon Turok, you
were very firmly put in your place today by one person very much younger
that yourself who did an outstanding job.

Prof B TUROK: Mr Speaker, on a point of order.

The SPEAKER: What’s your point of order, hon member?

Prof B TUROK: There are two grounds to my point of order. The first one is
that my name is “hon Turok”, and the second one is that this is ageism. We
don’t allow it. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Yes, we refer to members as “hon members” in the House.

Mr M J ELLIS: I’m very sorry, Ben. I mean, I beg your pardon, hon Turok.
[Laughter.]

Mr Speaker, the hon Sizani spoke very eloquently. He certainly has a very
engaging style and a very loud voice, and the picture he paints of being a
member of the only party that cares for the poor is, of course, very
entertaining, and absolute rubbish too, I might add. He quoted at length
the case of Giyani as an example of ANC concern and success, but we all
know that Giyani is a rural development pilot project; it has only just got
under way, while other pilot projects by the department have failed to get
off the ground at all.

More importantly, to the hon Sizani, what about the thousands of other
rural areas, villages and so on that have been completely neglected by the
ANC and which remain poor and unassisted by the government?

Mr President, your Budget Vote today is the final Budget Vote for this 2010
financial year. There have always been good and bad debates with all the
Budget Votes and it has been interesting to note that the tone is always
set by the person who leads the debate – in other words, the Minister – and
in this case today, Mr President, yourself. I want to say, sir, that this
House knows what tone you set today.

But, Mr President, you said that the government in the past year has
defined its style as smarter, better, faster. You indicated that you feel
that the people of South Africa can sense a new sense of urgency as a
result of the changing style of government.
Mr Speaker, I need to say to the hon President that it is highly
questionable whether there really is a new sense of urgency in this country
and with government, as the hon Trollip and other members of the opposition
have pointed out during the course of today.

Sir, we now come to the beginning of your second term of office and we do
sincerely hope that your second term of office will be more successful than
your first term, and that, indeed, there will be no own goals in exactly
the same way as we hope that Bafana Bafana will have no own goals, in the
World Cup. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, that concludes the list of speakers.
[Interjections.] Apologies, hon Deputy Minister, your name was on the
second page. I would like to invite you to address the House.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Speaker, it must be my complexion!
[Laughter.] Hon President, Deputy President, hon members, as we conclude
the debate on the Budget Vote of the Presidency, the question we should ask
ourselves is whether the opposition responded effectively and
constructively to the debate this time. Did they say anything that helps
the Presidency in the discharge of its mandate? [Interjections.] Or did
they use the debate, like many others before, as a platform for media sound
bites and finger-pointing? [Interjections.] Did the issues raised mirror
the concerns of ordinary South African citizens who still believe in the
promise of this country, even when the opposition obviously does not?

If not, it would seem as though some among the opposition have become
nothing more than those that sigh for the fleshpots of apartheid. If the
level of debate in this Parliament has deteriorated, it is as a result of
the opposition’s desperation to score points on matters affecting ordinary
South Africans, rather than to engage meaningfully on the true future of
this country. Their eagerness to celebrate what they perceive as early
failures speaks volumes about their bitter small-mindedness.

The opposition has become synonymous with doom. They did not need the year
to assess the President’s performance, because they had concluded before he
took office that he would be a failure. In fact, they came to the same
conclusion with regard to the other heads of state. They, too, are just a
series of failures. They hoped, with little regard for the people whose
lives have benefited as a result of our policies, that we would falter.

Instead of using this moment to play their part in building this country,
they behave liked the old, - fabled character Chicken Little by
hysterically yelling that the sky is falling down. [Laughter.] Today, hon
members, I wish to assure the Chicken Littles of this House that the sky is
not falling down. [Applause.] This debate offered this House and the nation
at large an opportunity to engage the Presidency constructively, to better
understand its vision, mission and programmes. Few democracies around the
world have an opportunity to do this.

In fact, the formation of the ANC in 1912 was, to put it bluntly, an
historical necessity. Borne of our people’s determination to wage a
concerted struggle for liberation, its formation ended the era of
resistance against colonial incursion and ushered in a new epoch of
fighting for liberation as one people. During the course of its evolution,
the ANC grew to become a microcosm of our new society, for which the
overwhelming majority of South Africans were fighting. It adopted the
values of nonracialism, nonsexism and democracy, and steadfastly pursued
these noble ideals even when its members and leaders were persecuted.

This is not the legacy of the ANC alone, but it belongs to the majority of
our people. The very formation of the ANC was to negate the divisive legacy
of 1910, which defined South Africa as a white man’s country and democracy
as a white man’s democracy, to the spiteful exclusion of the majority of
the population, merely on the basis of their race.

To continue to assume that the DA is liberal is fallacious. The DA is
actually conservative. [Interjections.] Perhaps what is needed the most,
amidst calls for lifestyle audits, is an ideology audit. The DA has proudly
labelled itself a liberal organisation. [Interjections.] By definition,
liberals are committed to liberty and equality. I ask: What liberty is
granted to blacks and coloureds that remain economic outcasts and social
captives of the most violent and desolate townships and slums of the
Western Cape? What liberty is granted to the same communities who are
purposely played like pawns against each other by the DA-led government?
[Interjections.] And what equality is granted to the dispossessed Africans
who are sidelined and undermined by the Western Cape dispensation? What
sort of fairness and respect for human rights warrants the incidents of
human beings being subjected to the humiliation of having to use toilets
without walls? [Interjections.] [Applause.]

With liberals like these, who needs conservatives? Clearly, the DA is
actually a lobby group for nostalgic, conservative interests. It is no more
a liberal party than Cope is united. But do not just take my word for it.
If you listen carefully, you will hear this condescending tone in their
insensitive demeaning of African culture; in the falsehoods pedalled about
the Presidency and, particularly, about the person of the President
himself; and in all sorts of profanities they yell from the sidelines.

We have grown to expect this behaviour from people who use terms like
“vampire state” to define our hard-earned democracy, because we know that
they share commonality with the type of conservative American Republicanism
which popularised this term with the intention of scaring the masses into
supporting them. Since they cannot inspire the masses to vote for them,
they conspire to scare or hoodwink them into it. One only needs to refer to
the DA’s “Stop Zuma” or “Fight Back” campaigns to prove the point.

Rather than focus on the potency and promise of their own policies, they
focus on personalities and scare tactics. This means two things: firstly,
that they are politically bankrupt; and, secondly, that they underestimate
the intellect of the masses. I think they might have taken the term
“opposition” too literally. If the ANC is for transformation, then they are
opposed to it. If the ANC is for better labour rights, then they oppose
that.

So, since the President has reaffirmed the hope and dream of Madiba’s
integrated rainbow nation, dare I ask if they oppose that too? I guess the
answer is reflected clearly in the Western Cape. We are tired of hearing
what you claim to be against. Can you, even for a brief moment, just tell
us what you are for? [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Hon Trollip, we did expect you to bring newspaper headlines. You neither
surprised nor disappointed us. As it may be disrespectful to claim that an
hon member is lazy, it should then be your researchers who are lazy. The
President has said explicitly that those who fail to deliver in the public
service or in government will be penalised. That was the purpose of the
performance agreement signed with the Ministers, but you cannot hear him
because you have already prejudged him and are stubbornly unprepared to
assess objectively his performance in this regard.

This government has been uncharacteristically candid in its assessment of
its own performance, and has been prepared to be assessed as candidly, not
just by the DA, but by the ordinary masses of our people. It was for this
reason that the government decided to post its programme of action on the
Internet and last year adopt a new monitoring and evaluation mechanism.
Furthermore, the President signed performance agreements with the Ministers
to hold them accountable.

Hon Mazibuko, national debate on moral values is not intended to shape
public views, but it is intended to ensure that our people debate openly
and freely the very things that are discussed on these sides. You both
claim to advocate free and open debate, and yet take flight every time such
platforms are provided. [Interjections.] To claim that moral decay
originates from the ANC is both disingenuous and totally misses the point.

Apartheid colonialism, which you so loyally defend, is the actual root
cause of the problems that our society sits with today. [Applause.] Premier
Helen Zille may implement all the cosmetic changes she wishes to implement,
including the ministerial handbook in the province, but the very value
system the DA represents encourages rapacious greed, economic plunder,
labour exploitation and racial humiliation. [Applause.]

The DA reminds one of the nineteenth century British imperialists who, when
they came to South Africa, shredded all illusions about liberalism and,
instead, adopted policies of racial prejudice and racial humiliation,
particularly towards black people. This reminds one of a pamphlet written
by Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, in which he says that
all events of great historical significance happen, as it were, twice. The
first time is a tragedy, the second time is a farce.

In the DA we have a farce, a pitiful incarnation of those imperialists of
the 19th century. We fought against those. We will fight against these at
this present-day moment. [Applause.]

Perhaps our history is the reason we have been targeted by Cope. Their
history was not drafted at the roots of oppression but, rather, on the
bloated bellies of a disgruntled bunch. Since they divorced themselves from
our vision of the future, they must now, through action, rewrite their own
history and purpose. But it seems they have come to notice that after
divorce comes custody battles. [Laughter.] [Applause.] This is not a
custody battle over the best means to serve the people, but, rather, a
battle over who will wear the captain’s hat.

Cope is not a party created on the foundation of principles and progressive
ideologies. Instead, it is a party backed by disregard for the other side
of the coin of democracy, which is respecting and accepting the decisions
taken by a majority, even, and especially if, you disagree with them. If
they were as introspective as they are critical of us, they would have
realised long ago that the faults they accuse us of are, in fact, within
themselves. And while they attempt to mend their internal quarrels, I offer
this Shakespearean quote to them:

  The fault, dear Brutus, lies not in our stars,
  But in us, that we are underlings.

And you are, indeed, underlings in policy and in leadership. The policy
bankruptcy in this organisation is not only frightening, but confusing. It
is difficult to know, when you are listening to its leaders, which one
policy pronouncement you should take. But lack of direction is always
expected from three-headed monsters. [Laughter.] This does not only relate
to previous flip-flopping about black economic empowerment and affirmative
action, but the organisation tries to be more progressive than the ANC and,
at the same time, seeks to align itself with the DA.

The fact is that Cope cannot walk on both sides of the road and in
different directions at the same time. They must take a stance. If they are
truly for transformation, as their manifesto claims, why have they not been
outspoken about the lack of transformation in the Western Cape? The
blossoming of Cope and the DA’s romance has come at the expense of poor
people who were misled into supporting their manifesto. What our people
know about Cope thus far, besides its policy fumbles and insistent
leadership squabbles, is that Cope is as right-wing as the DA is. But, of
course, small minds also think alike. They all wield pettiness and
bitterness as a medium of engagement.

Hon Shilowa, it did not surprise us that Cope, as you said, will not
support this Budget Vote. Were we honest, we would consider that this
government took office in the midst of a deep and brutal recession. It is
disingenuous to stand here and claim that close to a million jobs were lost
under the President’s watch. He took office when the job blood bath was
already under way as a result of a global recession that was not created
either by the President or the ANC. Actually, under the President’s watch,
half a million jobs were created under the Public Works Programme. Again,
you allow your personal hatred of the President to cloud your good judgment
and honest appraisal. [Applause.]

The hon Shilowa probably has the memory of a rat. As Premier of Gauteng, he
also rode in luxury cars, stayed in five-star hotels and enjoyed the many
perks of his office. Conveniently, he stands at this podium today and
points fingers. What shameful dishonesty! [Interjections.] Maybe the hon
member will take this House into his confidence about the R20 million that
disappeared under his watch. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Why did they have to spin auditors’
reports? Where is Parliament’s money? Our taxes?

Mr M S SHILOWA: Mr Speaker ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, please take your seat. Hon Shilowa?

Mr M S SHILOWA: Speaker, I rise on a point of order: I think the member is
out of order. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order!

Mr M S SHILOWA: He asks where is the R20 million given to the budget, and I
think if he is accusing me of having misspent ... [Interjections.] Listen
to me ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Let the speaker to be heard, hon members!

Mr M S SHILOWA: If he is accusing me of having misspent R20 million, I want
him to repeat it, both here and outside. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
[Interjections.]
The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Hon member, using words like “shameful
dishonesty” is unparliamentary. Those you are not allowed to use, but
continue.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much. The same hon
member accused the President of having lost South Africa a million jobs
under his watch, and he certainly forgets. But the hon member failed to
voluntarily acknowledge his own child, and has the audacity to stand here
and point fingers. The same hon member!

Still on the issue of the memory of a rat: Cope’s founding member, Mr
Terror Lekota – your nemesis, sir – was sanctioned by this very House in
May 2003 for failure to disclose his business interests. Shame on him! He
is not a member of the House. And shame on selective amnesia and selective
morality! Maybe these inconvenient truths are too inconvenient, but they
must be mentioned.

A certain hon member’s wife was chairperson of the Industrial Development
Corporation, the IDC, and approved a loan for her company, in which she had
shares. [Interjections.] She had a chauffeur-driven car, even though she
was not an executive chairperson. Well, you be the judge.

Mr President, thank you very much to you and the Deputy President for your
wise, collective leadership. Under your stewardship, we have great hope
that together we can, and will, do more. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate interrupted.
The House adjourned at 20:08.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Government Notice No R. 269 published in Government Gazette No
       33087 dated 9 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/658), in
       terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 289 published in Government Gazette No
       33109 dated 13 April 2010: Correction Notice:  Amendment of Schedule
       No 3 (No 3/659), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
       No 91 of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 341 published in Government Gazette No
       33140 dated 30 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1403),
       in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R. 342 published in Government Gazette No
       33140 dated 30 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/330), in
       terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 357 published in Government Gazette No
       33165 dated 7 May 2010: Correction Notice:  Amendment of Schedule No
       1 (No 1/1/1404), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
       No 91 of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R. 358 published in Government Gazette No
       33165 dated 7 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/331), in
       terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


