---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-08-25
---

WEDNESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                   ______

The Council met at 14:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORT – see col 000.

             VISIT BY MR T MATSUMOTO AND HIS EXCELLENCY T OZAWA

        ILL HEALTH OF CHIEF WHIP AND APPOINTMENT OF ACTING CHIEF WHIP

                               (Announcements)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I wish to recognise in the
gallery the delegation from the National Diet of Japan, led by Mr T
Matsumoto, MP, and accompanied by His Excellency Mr T Ozawa, the Ambassador
of Japan to the Republic of South Africa. [Applause.]

The second thing that I want to announce to you is that the hon Chief Whip
is not well. She was admitted to hospital yesterday, and I went to the
hospital to see her last night. Hon Mazosiwe has been appointed Acting
Chief Whip. [Applause.]

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

  Steps to reduce incidence of rape and violence against women and children

13.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Deputy President:


      (1)   Whether, in light of the celebration of August as Women’s Month,
           and in view of the high incidence of rape and  violence  against
           women and children, the government has taken any steps to reduce
           the occurrence of such incidents; if not, why not; if  so,  what
           are the relevant details;


      (2)   what measures are being taken to further ensure gender equality?
                                                        CO347E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Good afternoon, hon Chairperson and hon members. I
will respond to the question asked by Mr D A Worth. Since 1994 one of
government’s top priorities has been the eradication of violence against
women and children. Government has unequivocally committed itself to
reducing violence against women and children.

Our legislative framework to protect women and children is comprehensive.
This includes measures to tighten the bail laws and minimum sentences for,
among others, crimes against women and children listed in the Domestic
Violence Act and the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters)
Amendment Act, which brought about a comprehensive and extensive review and
amendment of the laws relating to sexual offences. The Prevention and
Combating of Trafficking in Persons Bill currently before the National
Assembly, in particular, focuses on women and children, since victims of
trafficking often end up being victims of sexual exploitation and child
labour.

Various government departments have put measures in place to facilitate the
implementation of the Domestic Violence Act. For instance, resources have
been made available for the development of policies and programmes,
outreach and education, training, the hiring of personnel, the
establishment of family court centres, and the 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence Against Women and Children campaign.

The theme for this Women’s Month and, indeed, for the entire year is:
“Working together for equal opportunities and progress for all women”. This
theme clearly highlights the need for close collaboration among all
stakeholders to accelerate responses to the challenges faced by women -
especially rural women - and girls and women with disabilities.

Gender-based violence is a complex societal problem that demands an
integrated and multifaceted response. We need to investigate and address
both the causal and influencing factors; we need to encourage reporting;
and we need to accelerate the transformation of our criminal justice system
to ensure effective and successful management of cases of gender-based
violence.

While a sound legislative framework exists in this country to support and
protect women and children from gender-based violence, it is giving
material effect to the legislative provisions that poses the greatest
challenge. Much more needs to be done if we are to be successful in
creating an environment where women and children can feel safe and move
around freely without anxiety or fear. The focus in future needs to be more
on the implementation of our laws and policies, which is not always easy -
especially in the prevailing economic climate.

With respect to gender equality, government enacted the Employment Equity
Act, Act 55 of 1998, to achieve equity in the workplace. Such equity must
be achieved through the elimination of discrimination against women and
ensuring equitable representation by women in all occupational categories.

Furthermore, government adopted a target of 50% representation of women at
all levels of decision-making in all spheres of government. The country is
on track towards achieving this target, and this is clearly reflected in
both the executive and administrative levels in the country. However, the
country is still facing challenges in achieving these targets in the
private sector. I thank you for your attention.

Mr D A WORTH: Thank you, Deputy President, for your detailed reply. In the
context of my question and your reply, in your opinion, how do we manage or
get that Domestic Violence Act to be more effectively implemented? We have
this wonderful Bill, but it is certainly not being implemented to its
fullest extent. What are your comments on that, Deputy President?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It’s actually us who should answer that
question because we have got to monitor the implementation. However, I
won’t deny the Deputy President the opportunity to respond, if he wishes
to.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, I think the challenge arises precisely
because, in a domestic situation, the perpetrator and the victim are often
people who are related. Certainly, in African communities, this is what
happens: In families, once there’s abuse of whatever kind, the uncles,
aunts and other family members come to the fore and mediate. In the
majority of cases they advise against such incidents being reported to law
enforcement units. They tend to treat it more as an internal family matter,
under the illusion that the prestige and good name of the family would be
dragged through the mud by bringing such incidents into the open. I think
that is what tends to blunt the effectiveness of this Act. Thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, I would like to ask the Deputy President whether, in
light of the increased incidence of rape in South Africa, government will
consider reinstating the specialised units in the SA Police Force to deal
with such crimes.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Harris. If we go by the performance of
the criminal justice system during the Fifa World Cup, it should be
possible for us to apprehend offenders, including those who engage in rape.
I think the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development has assured
the country that the special courts will remain in place, and that the
additional 40 000 police officers will remain on the beat.

I’m sure hon members are aware that in the Eastern Cape this week we woke
up to reports of the most horrendous deeds that were visited upon a family.
An old, old grandparent and grandchildren were slaughtered. Those offenders
are appearing in court today. I think if we continue to deal with offences
of whatever nature with this kind of efficiency and speed, we should be
able to deal even with the perpetrators of rape, without having a
specialised unit. I suppose, out of practical experience, if we find that a
much more specialised unit would be effective to deal with rape offences,
that would be considered favourably. Thank you.

Mr O DE BEER: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy President, it is a well-known
fact that women who lack adequate formal education and skills will remain
subservient to males who are better educated and skilled. Therefore I wish
to ask: What big steps has government put in place for the women students
who complete their education to skill them on how to protect themselves
against violence and rape?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, I think the government can only do so
much to ensure that the laws that have been enacted are understood by all
citizens - regardless of their levels of education - so that these should
be used as a form of protection against abuse as well as rape.

The difficulty, as I indicated earlier on, is that these are offences
which, in the main, happen within family settings rather than just out
there in the public space. Because of that, there are no early warnings or
signals that indicate that such an offence is about to be committed. If you
add into the mix substance abuse and so on, then the challenge becomes even
more complex.

But, generally speaking, the government would like to ensure that all women
are aware, first and foremost, of their protections and are able to read
the indicators. Sometimes it becomes possible to read the intentions of
certain approaches. Of course, government alone will not be able to be
omnipresent and reach out to everyone. This is work that we ought to do in
partnership with community-based organisations, NGOs and other kinds of
formations. Thank you.

    Position regarding commitment by African countries to increase health
                             expenditure by 15%

14.   Mr M J R de Villiers (DA) asked the Deputy President:


     (1)    Whether the commitment that was signed by African  countries  in
           2001 in Abuja, Nigeria, to increase their expenditure on  health
           by up to 15%, was an agreement document between these countries;
           if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what is  the
           status of this agreement as an implementation document;


      (2)   whether South Africa formed part of the African  countries  that
           committed themselves to this agreement; if not, why not; if  so,
           what are the relevant details;


      (3)   (a) what percentage of this 15% that was committed  to  will  be
           spent on HIV/Aids, (b) what percentage  is  currently  spent  on
           HIV/Aids, (c) where does the SA National Aids Council  fit  into
           the (i) planning and (ii) decision-making  on  how  the  15%  is
           spent   and   (d)   how   is   this   expenditure   implemented?
                                  CO348E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson and hon members, in order to address the
exceptional challenges of HIV/Aids, tuberculosis and other related
infectious diseases, the heads of state of the then Organisation for
African Unity held a special summit in Abuja, Nigeria from 24 to 27 April
2001, specifically devoted to this issue. The summit adopted a declaration
in which the heads of state and governments pledged to set a target of
allocating 15% of their governments’ annual budgets to the improvement of
the health sector.

No specific amount was pledged for HIV/Aids. The declaration merely stated
that an appropriate and adequate portion of this amount should be put at
the disposal of the national commissions or councils for the fight against
HIV/Aids, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases.
Although the declaration is not a binding document and the 15% of the
annual budget was a target, our government, the South African government,
is close to achieving this goal in that health expenditure as a percentage
of total government spending, excluding the public entities, is currently
in the region of 13%.

In 2009-10, over 11% of the health budget was spent on HIV/Aids in the
public health sector. However, this may be an underestimate, as it excludes
the hospitalisation costs of people with HIV/Aids. The operations of the SA
National Aids Council, Sanac, secretariat are currently funded through the
national Department of Health’s budget. In addition, provinces allocate
funding to support provincial Aids councils and many municipalities support
local Aids councils. It is difficult to quantify the total amount of
funding that is spent on the functioning of the national, provincial and
district Aids councils. The total amount of funds set aside in the national
Department of Health’s budget for Sanac operations for the 2010-11
financial year is R4,7 million.

Decisions regarding the Sanac programme of action and, therefore,
expenditure are taken at many levels. At a strategic level, decisions are
taken by the Sanac Plenary, which is chaired by the Deputy President and co-
chaired by a member of civil society, currently Mr Mark Heywood. At an
operational level, decisions are taken by the chief executive officer of
Sanac, Dr Nono Simelela.

At present, the secretariat is working with the national Department of
Health to determine its budget requirements for the next Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework period. The department therefore is a conduit for
funds for Sanac until it becomes an independent legal entity with its own
board.

Public sector HIV/Aids expenditure occurs at all levels of the health
system: district, province and national. In addition, all government
departments have programmes aimed at HIV prevention. These programmes are
co-ordinated by the Department of Public Service and Administration on
behalf of government, and the Department of Public Service and
Administration represents all government departments as a sector in Sanac.
I thank you.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, my follow-up question to the Deputy
President is that life skills in the development of HIV/Aids are critical
to empower women and communities to combat this pandemic. Certain provinces
in South Africa underspent on this programme. Deputy President, what is the
government doing to address this situation? What is your comment? I thank
you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson and hon members, as you know, the
government does not take kindly to rollovers. In these difficult times, any
rollovers, particularly in this area of work, would be criticised very
severely by government, because resources to do work, particularly the
prevention of new infections, are very difficult to come by. Therefore,
with the limited resources available, we do urge provincial governments to
ensure that this money is spent on what it was allocated for.

Of course, the NCOP would be within its rights, as a House, to criticise
any government level or sphere that does not spend all of its allocated
resources for health purposes. If there are rollovers, these would be
clearly reflected in the Auditor-General’s report. I think that is a joint
responsibility, from our side, certainly, as national government, as a
structure. As I said, I chair the SA National Aids Council. On a regular
basis we try to nudge all sectors to do what is required of them, because
the emphasis of our efforts is on prevention.

Prevention can only be attained if the general public is well aware of the
factors that cause our people to be vulnerable to new infections. The idea
is to prevent new infections and to treat those who are already infected.
That is why there is a good campaign being run in the province of KwaZulu-
Natal on medical male circumcision, precisely because it has been proved
that medical male circumcision prevents new infections by up to 60%. It is
not the total answer, but it is a step in the right direction. That
campaign is going fairly well in the province of KwaZulu-Natal and other
parts of the country. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, the Deputy President has indicated to us that the
expenditure in 2009-10 on health was 13% of total expenditure. Given that,
nine years ago, we made a commitment to aim at 15%, I would like to ask the
Deputy President whether that is still our aim. If it is, has he any idea
of when we might get to the 15%?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, this declaration was a commitment
towards the improvement of the health sector in its totality. As you know,
hon members, health is one of our priorities, together with education, the
fight against crime and corruption, the creation of more jobs, and rural
development. So, because it is a priority, we believe that we should be
able to reach this target and surpass it in the next few years.

Some of the initiatives that are taken to improve the health sector, such
as the reopening of the colleges for training nurses, would ensure that our
primary health care system is up and running once again. You know that in
this country we have a good reputation for training well-qualified,
efficient nurses. That is why other countries, like Saudi Arabia and the
United Kingdom, have been recruiting and poaching our nurses. We want to go
back to ensuring that we train, once again, nurses who would ensure that
our primary health care system works efficiently. So, I have no doubt in my
mind that we should be able to reach this target of 15% sooner rather than
later. Thank you.
  Programmes to sustain national pride and unity among the people of South
                                   Africa

15.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the government has instituted any programmes  to  ensure
           that we sustain the national pride and unity that the people  of
           South Africa and the  African  continent  displayed  during  the
           hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup soccer  tournament;  if  not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether such programmes are currently being implemented; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether the Presidency will consider such programmes in order to
           enhance our shared nationhood and good citizenship; if not,  why
           not;    if    so,    what    are    the    relevant     details?
                                  CO349E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, as we heard in the debate
in the Joint Sitting last week, the South African government was inspired
by the enthusiasm displayed by people from all races and walks of life of
this country in the build-up to and throughout the course of the 2010 Fifa
World Cup.

To capitalise on the positive mood that prevailed in the run-up to and
throughout the event, the South African government is in liaison with the
International Marketing Council to conceptualise a programme aimed at
building on the enthusiasm of South Africans, which was expressed in their
cohesion as a nation united under a common flag and anthem.

This programme will seek to develop and entrench a nation brand of ubuntu,
of unity through our diversity, of innovation and creativity, and of
possibilities. A campaign has already been developed and will be launched
within the next few weeks.

In addition, government supports other initiatives currently under way by
the private sector which encourage South Africans to build on this spirit
even after the World Cup.

Some private businesses continue to infuse the flying of the national flag
in their campaigns and we encourage others to do likewise. We have seen the
flying of the flag over the past days, especially in the build-up to and
during the friendly match between our national football team, Bafana
Bafana, and their Ghanaian counterparts, the Black Stars, on 11 August
2010. I thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, given the fact that we are all in agreement
that we need to nurture the national pride and unity that seized our
nation, specifically during the 2010 Soccer World Cup, I want to ask the
hon Deputy President whether he foresees that any written commitments are
going to be called for by government from all identified role-players, so
that we can sustain the momentum until the task of nation-building is
completed in all aspects. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson and hon members, indeed, what is first
and foremost required of us is to draw the relevant lessons from the
experience of hosting the World Cup in the manner in which we did. Then we
must apply those lessons to tackling the stubborn challenges that face us.

For instance, the preparations for this Fifa World Cup enabled us to co-
ordinate activities between the three spheres of government – national,
provincial and the host cities, which is local government – to ensure that
we were able to deliver infrastructure within set timelines.

I think, if we were to tackle the challenge of providing bulk economic and
social infrastructure for communities in the rural areas as well as the
townships – by that I mean ensuring that the roads are tarred, potable
water is available and accessible in the homesteads, a sewerage system is
rolled out and mud schools are replaced with brick and mortar school
buildings with sports facilities – identify them, communicate the
programme, roll them out in the same spirit and mobilise the broadest cross-
section of the population behind them, we would be able to deliver and, by
doing so, be creating the environment for much better national cohesion.
Two weeks ago I was in Bloemfontein in the Free State, and ...
[Interjections.]

Vrystaat? Vrystaat, ja. Vrystaat. [Gelag] [Free State? Free State, yes.
Free State.][Laughter.]

I was in the Vrystaat [Free State], and one of the places that I had to
check on is an old township in Kroonstad, called Marabastad. This is an
old, old township. The buildings were disintegrating. The houses there were
disintegrating out of sheer old age. But new ones were being built and I
was really pleased that part of the white community in Kroonstad – those of
them who are homeless and without their own homes – applied for those
houses. Seventy-four of them were allocated houses and they are going to be
living in Marabastad.

So, that is where we are with regard to the provision of bulk economic and
social infrastructure. We are advancing in terms of national cohesion.
Thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, I would like to ask the Deputy President whether the
government has instituted any programmes to ensure that we sustain the
national pride and unity that arises from the continued and regular use of
the five stadiums that we built at a cost of billions of rands to the South
African taxpayer.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, that is a work in progress
because, as you know, these stadia belong to the local municipalities, the
metros, and there are sporting associations that would like to enter into
arrangements. So, it’s early days. Discussions involving various
associations of sport and the local municipalities are in progress.

I am also aware that the Ministries of Sport and Recreation, and Arts and
Culture have initiated processes of developing programmes which would
ensure that these stadia do not become white elephants. There are also
plans to develop the precincts around the stadia, so that there should
always be activity around them.

Therefore the utilisation of these stadia will be enhanced by the outcomes
of these deliberations. As I said, this is a work in progress; we should,
perhaps in the next session, be able give you much more specific answers to
this question. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, Mr Acting President, one of the most effective
counteractions against vigilantism is organised crime-fighting. Now, one of
the best ever rural crime-fighting or crime prevention units that we have
ever had in the country was the commandos.
Now, we all know that there were negative associations with the commandos
and we can’t argue with that. But, at the same time, we must acknowledge
the good work they did, especially on the farms, protecting farm workers,
farm owners and farmers alike.

Has the government any plan to substitute that, over and above the Police
Service reservists, which do not seem to work as well as the commandos did?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, we have passed that question. We
are dealing with Question 15 – the 2010 Fifa World Cup. That’s what we are
dealing with.

Mr A WATSON: [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes.

  Awareness programmes to encourage involvement of communities in the fight
                                against crime

16.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the government has established any awareness  programmes
           to  encourage  communities  to  name  and  shame   persons   who
           participate in criminal activities with the view of  taking  the
           fight  against  crime  to  community   level   and   encouraging
           communities to reclaim positive values;  if  not,  what  is  the
           position in this regard;  if  so,  (a)  what  is  the  level  of
           involvement of the  communities  and  (b)  to  what  extent  are
           communities encouraged to be part of  the  fight  against  crime
           beyond the community police forums;


      (2)   whether any measures are in place to ensure that this initiative
           does not encourage vigilantism; if not, why  not;  if  so,  what
           measures?                         CO351E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, there is no awareness programme that
I am aware of specifically to name and shame persons who participate in
criminal activities.

Our programmes run by the SA Police Service, SAPS, at national and
provincial level and through police stations include as a consistent
message in their engagement with communities that crime must be reported
either at the police stations or through the Crime Stop telephone number.

In addition, the SAPS has entered into a partnership with Primedia for the
establishment of the Crime Line website and sms line, which also allows
members of the public to report criminal activity through these mediums.

Encouraging communities to break the silence, especially about gender-based
violence and crimes against children, also forms part of the messaging used
in crime awareness campaigns. Communities are also called upon to work with
the police to combat crime.

Initiatives are undertaken with the community police forums, CPFs, but
communication tools such as community radio, newspaper articles, door-to-
door campaigns and direct engagement with stakeholder groups, for example
school visits, are also used.

The awareness programmes include specific messages to encourage communities
to report crime to the SAPS and not to take the law into their own hands by
becoming involved in vigilantism. Our police act against vigilantism and
ensure that such actions are publicised to serve as a deterrent to
individuals in communities who want to take the law into their own hands.

The Ministry of Police, through the Civilian Secretariat for Police, has
also established a partnership unit which explores partnerships with
communities and civil society. I thank you.

Mr A WATSON: My apologies once again, Chair. I misread that section 2 was
part of Question 15, but will the Deputy President now consider my question
as part of Question 16? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, commandos were a phenomenon of a
particular time and place in our country. That does not mean that the
method applied by the commandos should be thrown out with the bath water.
From every experience in given circumstances, we should be able to draw the
relevant lessons and employ them because crime is a scourge that we must
combat and defeat wherever it manifests itself. The more communities are
organised to rebut crime and to work hand in glove with law enforcement
units, the better for their own safety and security.

Yes, indeed, if the farming community as well as farmhands and workers come
together to organise themselves into units under the guidance and
supervision of the law enforcement units, that shouldn’t pose a problem at
all. I am absolutely certain that the Minister of Police would be more than
happy to consider that and give his blessing as well as guidance to their
establishment. They may go by a different name, rather than commandos; but
if they are inclusive and aim at really combating crime by keeping the
farmlands as safe as possible, then why not? I am sure they would be
favourably considered. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, with regard to the question to the Deputy
President, wouldn’t it be a good idea to get former inmates who have now
been released, and possibly with officers from Correctional Services, to
speak to schools and the youth at the meetings to sensitise the youth to
what can happen if they commit crime, and also to alert them to the fact
that it is not nice to sit in jail? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, yes, indeed there is a programme already
in place. Last month, I was in KwaZulu-Natal at the Moral Regeneration
Movement Conference, and one of the key speakers was a former inmate who,
while in prison, furthered his studies. He studied law. He is a writer of
several books and has already produced three novels. He spoke and explained
to the audience and participants how he got into trouble with the law. He
was sentenced to 15 years and he is now out on parole. They even had two
different choirs of inmates performing musical items at that conference.

I know that such programmes exist in a number of areas; some of them play
football against teams in the community and, in the process, they are able
to advise particularly the young ones against the challenges of criminal
activities and that, indeed, crime does not pay. That is a core message
that they are spreading. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Chairperson, I would like to ask the hon Deputy
President a question that is actually linked to the one on women and
violence against women. We actually have a problem when people who rape are
let out on bail. Regarding the second statement, that of naming and shaming
in the communities, is there any programme in place that will deny rapists
bail?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay, I will allow the linkage. I know you are
taking a chance, but I will allow it.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Unfortunately, our Bill of Rights provides for all
South Africans who are arrested, for one offence or the other, to be
charged within 48 hours or be granted bail because it is against detention
without trial. Once somebody is charged, such a person can always apply for
bail. The only reason normally adduced by the state for opposing bail is
when an offender is a flight risk; if there is the possibility of a person
fleeing the country and never presenting himself.

In the majority of cases, there is not much that the state can do to
prevent the courts from granting bail to any offender. However, where there
is perhaps suspicion or even grounds for believing that such a person would
interfere with the victims and witnesses, the victims could either be
provided with protection - and the state can argue that if this person were
released on bail, then he could interfere with witnesses. The court would
rarely be persuaded by such argument, but the state is duty-bound to
provide the necessary protection for that period. But once the matter is
heard and finalised by the courts, there is not much that can be done about
it. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay, that deals with the follow-up questions
on that question. Just before we move to Question 17, I see the young
generation in the gallery. Welcome to the National Council of Provinces. We
are dealing with questions today. I hope one of you will be a Member of
Parliament in the future. I would follow that up, but I don’t know from
which school you are. They didn’t tell me.

 Impact of antipoverty community projects on poorest communities in KwaZulu-
                                    Natal

17.   Prince M M M Zulu (IFP) asked the Deputy President:


      (1)   Whether  the  antipoverty  community  projects  are  making  the
           desired impact upon the lives  of  the  poorest  communities  in
           KwaZulu-Natal; if not, why not; if so,  what  are  the  relevant
           details;


      (2)   whether commitments made by the campaign to the communities have
           been met; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                  CO353E
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, hon members, it is always
encouraging to note that hon members of this House are closely following
developments in the delivery and performance of government’s antipoverty
programmes. Let me state up front that the pace of delivery is not always
as fast as we desire and often the impact is not immediately visible.

However, this inspires us to roll up our sleeves and work harder in order
to lift our communities out of poverty. Indeed, government has rolled out
several antipoverty initiatives in all provinces, including KwaZulu-Natal.
These range from the Expanded Public Works Programme, the Comprehensive
Rural Development Programme, the Community Works Programme, the Community
Development Worker Programme, the National Rural Youth Service Programme,
Zibambele early childhood development, and a number of other initiatives
that support poor communities to earn livelihoods.

These are all in addition to the provision of free basic services and other
social protection measures that cushion people. The cumulative effect of
all these initiatives is the constant chipping away at the massive problem
of poverty that we have in our midst. It is my unwavering belief that the
sum total effect of these initiatives is having an impact on the lives of
poor people in our country.

We are taking children to early childhood development facilities. We are
ensuring that children whose parents cannot afford to pay school fees are
going to school. We are ensuring that those who need antiretroviral therapy
are getting the necessary medicines. We are getting communities to work for
the betterment of their people and their personal lives. We are getting our
unemployed youth to work.

The impact of all these initiatives cannot be measured in terms of days,
weeks or months. We believe it is a long journey towards a poverty-free
KwaZulu-Natal and South Africa. The commitments we have made to these
communities are being met on a daily basis. I need to inform hon members
that these communities are generally categorised into immediate
commitments, medium-term and long-term commitments.

We ensure that immediate commitments, such as taking a child to school,
putting a child on a child support grant, issuing of vital registration
documents, social relief of distress, health assessments, and linking
individuals to available opportunities are fulfilled in the shortest
possible time. The medium-term commitments certainly take a little more
time, and so do the long-term ones.

What is most important is that none of the commitments made by government
will be ignored or remain unattended to. We will do our utmost to follow up
on commitments made to the poor communities of KwaZulu-Natal. We will be
transparent with our successes as well as challenges confronted in
fulfilling the commitments. We have delivered on some of the commitments we
have made to the poor communities of KwaZulu-Natal and the rest of the
country. We are following up on those that are outstanding. All spheres of
government are aware of what needs to be done to meet all the commitments
made to the poor communities.

I chair an antipoverty interministerial committee, which reviews the
progress we are making with antipoverty initiatives. Last but not least, I
call upon all hon members in this House to join us in the fight against
poverty and to monitor progress and identify where we can do better. I
thank you for your attention.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, the Deputy President referred to the government
making progress against the massive problem of poverty in South Africa. I
would suggest that millions of South Africans, especially those in rural
provinces like the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, who experience grinding
poverty on a daily basis, would disagree with him.

I would like to ask him whether government would consider implementing what
the DA calls an income support and unemployment grant of R110 per month.
Cosatu calls it a basic income grant. I would like to know if the state
would consider introducing a grant like that and when last did they do a
viability study of a grant like that? I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, the last time we were asked to consider
the basic income grant, the administration of the proposal was seen as
prohibitive. Instead, the approach we follow is that of profiling
households. By doing so, we seek to identify poverty-stricken households.
We take our data and direction from Statistics SA’s provincial poverty
index.

When we go into those households, we try to identify change agents in each
of them. If we find someone who dropped out of school and did not complete
his or her studies but is keen to go back and complete those studies, we
then give dedicated support and we monitor such a person’s progress. We do
this in the belief that unless we identify such change agents and support
them, poverty will be transmitted from one generation of that family to the
next generation. The idea is that there have to be some members of the
family who can pull that household out of the morass of poverty.

This is over and above other initiatives. For instance, when there is an
aged person who does not have an ID, it is organised for him or her so that
that person can source from the pension fund. If there are children, they
will be registered for child support grants, and so on. So, all the other
grants are awarded, but the idea is that there must be some members of the
family who can be assisted in one way or the other.

In some instances, where the house is properly roofed and all that is
required is for the gutters to be fitted onto the house and a water tank to
be provided in order to harvest rainwater, the Department of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries is able to do that. They can provide that kind of
support and help the family. If there are extensive yards, they can help
people to till the ground, cultivate it and produce vegetables to
supplement the family supply of fresh vegetables. We have seen how those
kinds of interventions assist in that regard.

This weekend we went to Plettenberg Bay with the premier of the province,
Ms Helen Zille. We visited an area in the morning where in one of the
households there lived five different families. The main tenant of the
house was a Rastafarian gentleman who had taken some herbs. He told us
there was a whole community of them, living somewhere in another part of
the township. He requested that he be given ploughing fields where he would
go and till, together with the rest of his community. We persuaded him that
his yard was big enough and that he should begin there. We told him that we
would assist the rest of his community when we find them there, but that he
should till that piece of land he was staying on. It turned out that he had
rented out space in the yard and his sub-tenants were paying him R150 per
family. He had an income stream.

What I am trying to say is that it is helpful to have an understanding of
each household’s profile and intervene in that way, because a general basic
income scheme means that you give R100 to everyone, from the ones who need
it to those who don’t. From those who don’t need it, you then find another
way of deducting it from their income. The administration of it proved to
be a bit prohibitive. I am sorry I was a bit long-winded. I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The name of the school visiting us is Fondwe
Primary School, from Limpopo. It seems as if they are now leaving. Thank
you very much.

Mr R A LEES: Hon Chairperson, Deputy President, it is indeed gratifying to
see you here today, given the extent of your travels over the last week.
But it is great to hear about your travels too, Sir.

The question I would like to ask you, given your answer to the previous
question, is with regard to the food parcels which are indiscriminately
distributed among communities, many to needy families, but others to
whomever happens to be around. This seems to happen on a fairly regular
basis, particularly as we approach an election, as we are doing next year.
Does the Deputy President think this is a good thing and really a poverty
alleviation measure? I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Lees, I would phrase your question
differently, rather than saying “discriminately”, because we don’t have
proof of that.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, I said “indiscriminately”.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Indiscriminately?

Mr R A LEES: Mr Chair, I apologise for putting it badly. By saying
indiscriminately, I mean there is no selection process. Whoever happens to
be there, gets it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, as I understand it, food parcels are
distributed by the Ministry of Social Development. They follow the same
approach of identifying the people who need such food parcels. Some of them
are people who are HIV-positive and on treatment and therefore need to
receive food parcels before taking their treatment.

If there is any evidence that these are used to buy votes, that is
something that we will condemn up front. The food parcels must always be
given as relief to the needy, to those who are indigent and would otherwise
go without food if they did not receive such food parcels. They were never
meant for buying votes.
In any case, I think it would be a futile effort to try to buy votes by
providing people with food parcels because they will eat and once they have
had their fill, they will make their choices in accordance with their
preferences. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I recognise the Speaker of the Eastern Cape
legislature, Mr Xasa, who is our visitor. You are welcome in the NCOP. Mr
Mlenzana, I thought you had your hand up? Thank you very much.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Hon Chairperson, appreciating that fighting poverty is
everybody’s business, I wish to ask the Deputy President whether any of the
universities and/or technikons have been involved in coming up with fresh
ideas and new modes of doing things to make antipoverty community projects
viable, sustainable and profitable. I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, indeed, there are a number of universities that
pay attention to the efforts of combating poverty. They have come up with a
number of very useful proposals, in particular with regard to the
utilisation of the land.

I know that the University of the Witwatersrand and the University of
Stellenbosch, among others, have come up with a number of very good
innovative ways of treating very barren soil and utilising the limited
supply of water for irrigation. They also recommended vegetables and plants
that help to enhance the ecosystem. These methods have now been
incorporated into the work done by the Ministry of Rural Development and
Land Reform, trying to spread the method to communities that would
otherwise not have access to such information and knowledge. I thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Thank you, hon Chairperson and hon Deputy President, we
appreciate your frankness and we know you as an honest man in many things,
also in the answer you gave us this afternoon regarding the issue of the
buying of votes.

What would your position be in terms of the current situation which
transpired in the Northern Cape, where by-elections are taking place today.
Not more than a week ago, the department of social services actually closed
offices. Officials of those departments were instructed to specifically go
and canvass for the ANC, including by way of handing out food parcels.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: If the hon member has such information, I think he
should drop the Public Protector a line to go into that. The Public
Protector is authorised to do that and has the powers to investigate that.
Whatever the outcomes are, we will live with them here. I thank you.

  Position regarding offer of assistance to, and terms of engagements with
                                   Somalia


18.   Mr M P Sibande (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether South Africa will offer assistance to  Somalia  as  reportedly
      expressed by the African Union; if not, why not; if so, (a)  what  are
      the terms of engagement with Somalia and  (b)  what  are  the  further
      relevant details?                       CO362E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Chairperson, hon members, no final decision has
been made as to what South Africa’s assistance to Somalia will be.

One of the most important aspects, as acknowledged by the African leaders
at the Kampala summit, is that a military intervention alone would not
resolve the Somali conflict. A comprehensive approach that addresses the
political process, security and piracy is needed. As a result it is crucial
that the search for a comprehensive, all-inclusive solution is stepped up.

The major challenge is broadening participation in the Somali political
process to include an overwhelming number of parties, which will lead to an
all-inclusive ceasefire agreement. This has to be done in co-operation with
other African partners, in particular the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, Igad - an organisation to which Somalia belongs.

The African Union, through the chair of the commission, approached South
Africa to assist in relation to the contribution of troops, provision of
equipment to support the troops, assistance to the maritime component, or
funding for the peace mission, all of which would have financial and human
resource implications for South Africa. In view of these implications, it
is important that the matter first be discussed by our Cabinet before a
decision is taken.

In the meantime, South Africa will consult with other interested parties on
Somalia, like the Igad countries and the African Union mission in Somalia,
on how best to support the political process and find a lasting solution in
Somalia. I thank you.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Thank you, Deputy President, for your detailed reply. I
would like to put a follow-up question: Does this mean we are not giving in
to pressure by the United States of America, USA, and the European Union,
EU, for South Africa to go to Somalia? I ask this because the perception
exists that we are being pressurised by them. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: No, we will not give in to any such pressure, if it
exists at all. This is a matter that was discussed at the summit of the AU
in Kampala, and we will consider it in that context. Thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, I would like to ask if the Deputy President
believes that the instability in Somalia poses a security risk or a terror
threat to either South Africa or the international community.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, indeed, I do believe that the situation and
instability in Somalia pose a security threat to the whole continent. As
you know, even in the deep seas there are pirates who are known to have
hijacked a number of oil tankers for ransom. That is why the AU recognised
that it’s a challenge which would not submit to simple militaristic
intervention. It requires or demands a much more comprehensive response,
precisely because of its nature.

As South Africa, we have to be circumspect regarding the role we play,
because we would not want to invite onto our shores problems that are
extraneous. For that reason, we will play our role within the AU and United
Nations, UN. Thank you.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Chairperson, Deputy President, the problems of our
continent very quickly become our own problem as people migrate south to
run away from their countries’ problems. I therefore wish to ask: To what
extent is government using the Pan-African Parliament and the African Union
to deal with political instability, tension and conflict to help afflicted
Africans north of our borders? I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That’s a very big, broad question which
doesn’t have to do with Somalia but with peace and stability on the
continent. I leave it to the Deputy President, if he would like to respond
to it.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I concur, hon Chairperson. I’m in difficulty as well.
Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy President, if the SA National Defence Force, SANDF,
and its personnel get involved in Somalia, it will probably be at a higher
level of intensity than in any other conflict area we have been involved in
in Africa. We will have to be prepared to take casualties. It’s a
different, insurgency type of operation there.

I want to ask the Deputy President: Can I trust that before we commit any
Defence Force personnel, they will have the required logistical background
needed for what is really going on there and that they will be trained for
that type of operation? Thank you, Chair.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: As I said, there is no decision to deploy the SANDF
personnel to Somalia. Somalia is a very difficult proposition in the sense
that there is no state in Somalia. Therefore it is not as if you’d be going
there to assist the state to deal with a challenge or a problem. The
mission itself would not be a simple peacekeeping mission because there is
no peace. There is no state. The place is under the domain of a number of
families who have their own armies. It is really a much bigger problem than
we’ve ever dealt with before. So, I think before any decision is arrived
at, all of these factors would have to be taken into account. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Deputy President, given the dire situation that you described
in ... sorry, I have forgotten the country – Somalia, is it the position of
South Africa to discourage our citizens from travelling to that country and
is that advice being given to people who make contact with government
departments regarding travel to Somalia?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, as I said, there is no state in Somalia, so
there is not even direct transport to Somalia. As a state, we certainly
wouldn’t encourage anyone to travel to Somalia because, in the first place,
yes, it is a failed state. There is nothing.

As you know, historically, Somalia was two different colonies; one part was
a British colony and the other a French colony. After independence they
merged to create Somalia as we know it today. The one part is predominantly
Muslim, and the other part is predominantly Christian and English-speaking.

At one point, war broke out between them and the citizenry of the former
British colony was almost exterminated. They survived; they have pulled
themselves up by their own bootstraps; they have a thriving economy; they
have a parliament; they have their own army; and they call themselves
Somaliland. This part, which is recognised as Somalia, is without a state
and there is utter chaos, every day.

At the end of last year they bombed graduates - students who were
graduating at universities - and killed them. Last week they bombed the
meeting of what remains as government there. So, it’s a difficult, very
difficult, situation. It is not the kind of problem that can be solved by
the region or the continent alone. It is actually a Security Council
problem. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES

The Council adjourned at 15:23.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          WEDNESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill [B 23 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

TABLING

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated
        Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank
        of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2009-2010  [RP 95-2010].

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises


     a) Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Broadband  Infraco  (Pty)
        Limited for 2009-2010, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
        for 2009-2010 [RP 170-2010].

                          THURSDAY, 19 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill, 2010,
         submitted by the Minister of Home Affairs.


    (2)    Refugees Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of Home
         Affairs.


    (3)    Immigration Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Home Affairs.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select
        Committee on Social Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Fourth Parliament 2009-2014.

            Available on Parliament’s website: www.parliament.gov.za

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1. Report of the Select Committee on Economic Development on  its  Oversight
   Visit to Port Nolloth, Northern Cape, dated 01 June 2010.

The Select Committee on Economic Development, having  undertaken  the  above
oversight visit, reports as follows:

   1. Aim of the Visit

The Select Committee on Economic Development undertook  an  oversight  visit
to the  Richtersveld  Municipality,  Kammiesberg  Municipality  and  Namaqua
District Municipality to  discuss  the  impact  of  the  Socio-economic  and
Social Labour Plan of the mines on Local Government Municipalities and  also
to discuss  their  strategies  and  development  towards  achieving  service
delivery. The oversight visit took place on 16-18 March 2010.

The Committee also visited the Kleinzee-De Beers,  Alexander  Bay  (Alexkor)
and the Coignaas Mine to determine whether the social  responsibility  plans
(SLP)  are  being  adhered  to  by  the  respective  mines   towards   their
surrounding communities.

The Committee also visited the Community to hear  from  them  if  they  were
benefiting from the surrounding mines through the SLP and the form  of  such
benefits.

   2. Participants

Leader of the delegation: Hon. F Adams  [Chairperson:  Select  Committee  on
Economic Development].

Members of the delegation: Hon,  EC  Van  Lingen  (Eastern  Cape),  Hon,  MC
Dikgale (Limpopo), Hon, S S Chen (Gauteng), Hon R A Lees (KwaZulu-Natal).
Parliamentary support staff accompanying the delegation:  Ms  N  G  Dinizulu
(Committee Secretary) and Mr J Van der Westhuizen (Committee Assistant)
Kleinzee-De Beers

Mr S Ngcobo: Executive Director;  Mr  R  Blake:  Commercial  Manager;  Mr  A
Taylor: General Manager: Projects; Mr W Macdonald: Leader: Mineral  Resource
Rehabilitation; Mr D Cloete: Leader: Production and  Engineering,  Ms  Nadia
Williams: Mine  Safety  &  Security;  Mr  G  Klopper:  Manager:  Public  and
Corporate Affairs; Mr P Sparks: Operations Manager.

Provincial Department of Mineral Resources: Mr W Spiesens: Senior  Inspector
of Mines: Mr J Nieuwoudt: Deputy Director Mineral Laws

Alexander Bay (Alexkor): Mr W Basson: Mine Manager;  Mr  B  Lategan:  Acting
Chief Financial Officer; Mr C Wilmans: Acting HOD  Alexkor  Security;  Mr  K
Landers: Chief Safety Officer; Mr M Mpanza: Mine Engineer  and  Deputy  Mine
Manager

Richtersveld Municipality: Mr R Ambrosini: Mayor;  Mr  A  Jansen  and  Ms  E
Hasiku: Councillors; Mr J Cloete: Municipality

Kammiesberg Municipality: Ms S Cloete: Local Economic  Development  Officer;
Mr M Klaase: Mayor

Namaqua District Municipality: Mr I Groenewald: Head: Economic  Development;
Mr B Vass:  Speaker

3.    Briefing by Richtersveld Municipality

The Mayor  of  the  Richtersveld  Municipality  briefed  the  Committee.  He
informed the delegation that the Municipality serves five main towns  namely
Port Nolloth, Kuboes, Sanddrift, Lekkersing, Eksteensfontein  and  Alexander
Bay.  The head office is in Port Nolloth, which is by  far  the  largest  of
the five towns.

Although  each  one  of  the  towns  has  its  own  distinctive   historical
background,  they  all  share  similar  problems.   The  available  land  is
marginal farming land and communities have been historically  denied  access
to large tracts of valuable mining, fishing, mari-culture  and  agricultural
land.

Poor infrastructure and limited employment opportunities are but two of  the
serious economic challenges that the Richtersveld Municipality faces.

Mining has been the dominant industry within the Municipality  and  many  of
the poorer
communities have been dependant on a family member gaining income from  this
industry. With the current economic crisis  in  the  world,  mining  is  not
sustainable in the long term and the  region  is  already  experiencing  the
affects of downscaled production and retrenchments.  This has increased  the
number of unemployed people returning to the rural towns.

Within the municipality there are limited numbers of work opportunities  and
the mines control most  of  the  land  where  there  are  opportunities  for
industries such  as  irrigation  agriculture  and  mari-culture.   With  the
reaching  of  an  agreement  in  the  Richtersveld  Land  Claims  Case  this
situation will now change drastically.

Tourism is seen as a possible job creator  but  almost  all  the  successful
tourism initiatives are controlled from outside  of  the  region,  including
Springbok and Cape Town.  Thus strategies for future livelihood options  are
based on communities gaining access to the  land  and  resources  with  high
agriculture,  mari-culture  and  tourism  potential.  However,   for   these
businesses to be successful, Richtersveld Municipality needs  investment  to
maintain the infrastructure and for capacity building.

In  2008  the  Social  Responsibility  Projects   of   the   Department   of
Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  (DEAT)  were  to  be  managed  by  the
Municipality. When applications are successful they can play a big  role  in
improving the tourism infrastructure in  surrounding  communities,  provided
they are  planned  properly  and  linked  with  the  larger  infrastructural
network.  This will hopefully promote the influx of tourists into  the  area
now that the Transfrontier Park  Richtersveld/Ai-Ais  border  between  South
Africa and Namibia has opened at Sendelingsdrift.

3.1   Development Indicators of the Approach:

In five (5) years’ time Municipal residents will  be  involved  in  a  broad
range of economic activities that can be measured by comparing the  database
compiled by the Municipality.  Economic activities should be geared  towards
sustainable job creation that will result in an improvement  in  general  of
the standard of living in the entire Municipal area.

3.2   Approach to Achieving the Goals:

Strategic focus should be placed on the five most  important  industries  in
the region, namely tourism, fishing, mari-culture, agriculture and mining.

4.    Kamiesberg Municipality

Kamiesberg Municipality contributes 7%  to  the  Namaqua  District  economy.
Currently there are three major economic sectors  within  the  municipality,
namely Mining, Livestock  farming and Tourism.

Additional  emerging  sectors  are  also  developing.  They  include  mainly
Aquaculture and Conservational ecological restoration.  The  Local  Economic
Development Forum was established to meet on a quarterly  basis  to  discuss
economic issues.

4.1   Mining
      • Mining industry is the  region’s  core  employment  source  and  is
        downscaling, mainly because mines are reaching  the  end  of  their
        production lifespan;
      • In this area there are big deposits of Wollostonite near Kheis  and
        Lepelfontein;
      • A plant for the processing of the  Wollostonite  had  already  been
        built in Garies;
      • Testing of the processing  plant  is  under  way,  and  mining  and
        processing Wollostonite will start in the nearby future;
      • A number of smme’s can be developed around this project;
      • PDI groups are encouraged to get  mining  rights  for  Lepelfontein
        deposits;
      • Large deposits of Mica are to be found in Tweerivier;
      • PDI’s need funding and support in the drafting of business plans;
      • Mining economists have  to  prepare  a  feasibility  study  plus  a
        funding model and also have to research the markets;
      •  Deposits  of  copper  have  been  discovered  at  Rooifontein  and
        Kamassies.


4.2   Mining Beneficiation
      • An agreement had been signed by the mining companies who are mining
        granite in the area to dispose their  waste  blocks  to  Kamiesberg
        Municipality  for  the  manufacturing   of   tiles,   table   tops,
        thombstones, etc.
      • The Municipality started with the project in 2000, but  were  faced
        with  a shortage of funding and equipment and it had to be revived.
      • Kamiesberg, situated in the  succulent  Karoo,  is  the  only  arid
        hotspot in the world.
      • Namaqua National Park lies in the Kamiesberg and is about to expand
        along the Atlantic ocean to the Groen River.
      • A National tourism  asset  can  be  established  thus  creating  an
        increasing number of jobs.
      • Different tourism routes are proposed like flower  routes,  history
        routes, etc.
      • PDIs run Kookskerms on the same basis as a franchise, and they  are
        well supported by CI and DBSA.
      • A Proposed sustainable regional economic  hub,  called  the  Living
        Edge, is to be developed on the old Koignaas mines.
      • It is envisaged that this development  will  create  300  permanent
        jobs.
      • This project will be in partnership  with  De  Beers  and  Eden  in
        Cornwill England.
      • This will be a multi-faceted project in that it will tackle social,
        developmental and environmental challenges.


4.3.  Livestock  Farming

The small farmers are beginning to organize themselves in   cooperatives  as
legal entities to benefit  from  the  government’s  Boerbok  project  and  a
similar one from Shoprite Checkers

4.4   Mariculture

A Pilot abalone project was done by the University of  Stellenbosch  and  it
was found that abalone farming will be viable in this area. The  EIA  for  a
full abalone project is underway.
It is estimated that 80  permanent  jobs  will  be  created  and  that  SMME
contractors can provide security and food for the breeding abalone.

4.5   Social Labour Plan (SLP)

The projects are identified for funding by Transhex, De  Beers,  Forest  Oil
and Finestone. The Forest Oil did not commit itself to  fund  the  projects.
The Municipality will make  a  follow-up  with  the  Department  of  Mineral
Resources.

4.6   Small Medium and Micro Enterprises

The following opportunities exist: repairing and replacement  of  fences  on
municipal farms, and the breeding, marketing and selling of  Anatolian  dogs
to farmers.

4.6.1 Opportunities in the Tourism Field
       • Building and running of kookskerms
       • Homestays and guest houses to provide accommodation
       • Tourism guide business
       • Running of municipal-owned tourist facilities  through  outsourced
         management contracts


4.6.2 Opportunities in terms of Government-owned Infrastructure
    • Maintenance of buildings
    • Cleaning of buildings and premises
    • Maintenance of roads

5.    Namaqua District Municipality

Geographically the  Namaqua  District  Municipality  (NDM)  is  the  largest
district, and has a small and dispersed population. Each local  municipality
has a small population, Following upon  the  Namaqua  District  Municipality
(NDM), is the smallest the Karoo and  the  largest  one  is   NamaKhoi.  The
bigger part of the population enjoys higher education whereas  about  5%  of
the community has no schooling. About 5.1% of the population have  HIV/AIDS,
and this pandemic is growing rapidly due to a  lack  of  accessible  testing
facilities. The mining sector is the largest contributor to  Gross  Domestic
Product (GDP) (52%), but  its  contribution  towards  employing  communities
surrounding the NDM is declining.

6.    Local Economic Development

The District Municipality embarked on the development of  a  Local  Economic
Development Strategy in 2008, and the document entails an assessment of  the
economic development and  growth  opportunities  in  the  District  and  the
implementation of strategies.

6.1   Growth Opportunities
       • Agriculture
       • Facilitation of land reform
            The utilization  of  state  land  for  productive  use  and  the
         finalization of land claims.
            The availability of coastal and productive land along the  coast
         De Beers’ proclamation
       •  Offering  educational  and  financial  support  to  emerging  and
         community farmers
            In the Khai Ma Municipality, the state bought the  farm  Coboop,
         and it is developed along the Orange River.
       • The commercialization of hoodia farming
       • The development and expansion of mariculture parks in Port Nolloth


 2. Mining
The Namaqua District Municipality will ensure that  all  the  mines  in  the
area have approved the social  and  labour  plans  and  that  LED  forms  an
integral part of mining companies’ social programme. About 90% of the  mines
have approved SLPs and business plans are being developed whilst  some  have
already started with the implementation process.

6.3   Establishing SMMEs for Small-scale Development

The Namaqualand  Development  Agency  was  envisaged  to  assist  with  this
function. However,  the Council has disassociated  itself  from  the  Agency
due to various reasons and the district had to opt for other alternatives.

A discussion with De Beers is under way to  allow  for  and  prioritize  the
inclusion  of  small  miners  from  Namaqua  into  the  mining  model  being
developed as part of the proposed proclamation talks.

Expanding the value chain activities, especially beneficiation, is  an  area
of neglect and miner focus. However, diamond cutting and  polishing  remains
the vision. The  SLP  of  Naroehuis  Dimension  Stone  mine  near  Concordia
focuses on the granite cutting and polishing to be implemented soon.

Discussions with De Beers are taking  place  on  its  proposed  proclamation
process and the access of land for sustainable  development.  These  matters
are important priorities.
6.4   Electricity, Gas and Water

The building of a dam along the Orange River is a priority,  and  investment
in this regard is urgently  needed.  Various  SLPs  mention  the  assistance
towards electricity and water networks. The  important  priorities  are  the
desalination of water in the Port  Nolloth  /Hondeklip  Bay  areas  and  the
upgrading of the electricity network in Hondeklip Bay.

6.5   Construction

The EPWP is currently utilized to  assist  in  the  construction  of  roads,
houses, schools, etc. The tarring of the Garies/Hondeklip Bay road has  been
prioritized as this will ensure that the areas are  developed  to  its  full
potential. Government services are prioritized;  however  more  is  required
with regard to education and health.

The Nama Khoi Municipality also requested investment  proposals  on  various
prime land areas.  Furthermore,  the  possibility  of  building  a  mall  is
investigated to form part of the spatial development plan.

6.6.  Implementation

An  implementation  plan  is  based  on  the  establishment  of  a  District
Development  Agency  and  on  monitoring  and  evaluation  by  the   Namaqua
District. A possible PPP can be looked at to tap  into  the  experiences  of
Anglo Zimele’s Development Hubs. This will need engagement with  the  mining
houses.

7.    Alexander Bay (Alexkor)

7.1   Background

The  history  and  outcomes  of  the  Richtersveld  Community   (RVC)   land
restitution claim in respect of Alexander Bay is detailed.  The  details  of
the initial claim and the Deed of Settlement, that was finally  made  by  an
Order of Court in October 2007, were set out and explained. It was  reported
that a final settlement comprised a number of requirements, ie   a  transfer
and restoration of a portion of the land to the RVC. The land mining  rights
of Alexkor would be transferred to the community.

A Pooling and Sharing Joint Venture would have to be set up.  Alexkor  would
contribute  R200  million,  via  capitalization  from  the  State,  to  this
programme.  The  mariculture  and  agriculture  assets   of   Alexkor   were
transferred to the community. A sum of R190 million for reparation  purposes
would be paid to the  Investment  Holding  Company  over  three  years.  Two
payments were received from the Richtersveld Communal Property  Association,
namely R50 million for development and  R45  million  for  compensation  for
Alexkor’s occupation on transferred residential properties for ten years.

A  township  would  be  established  at  Alexander  Bay  and   environmental
rehabilitation has to take place. Alexkor would  retain  the  marine  mining
rights, but these would be under the control  of  the  Joint  Board  of  the
Joint Venture, as would the land mining rights of Richtersveld Mining.

The project’s success would depend largely on  the  upgrading  of  municipal
services. An engineering services assessment and a draft had been  designed,
and the Development Bank of South Africa was to implement the  project.  The
Kwesi V23 Engineers were appointed by Alexkor to  manage  the  project  from
preliminary phase to execution phase.

7.2   Scope of Upgrade

(i)   Phase 1
The process of upgrading will commence with the  following:  Sewer  Network,
Potable Water Network, Storm  Water  Control,  Road  upgrades,  Solid  waste
disposal and Cable ducting. The  total  costs  and  duration  estimated  for
Phase 1 and Phase 2 is R130 million.  The  estimate  for  phase  1  was  R52
million  and  the  tender  price  was  R42  million.  Phase  1   will   take
approximately a year. The duration of phase 2 will be  confirmed  after  the
second tender process had been finalised.

(ii)  Phase 2
Electrical and Mechanical installations:

7.3   Current status

The project was scheduled to commence on 1  March  2010.   However,  it  had
been delayed for one to five months due to a Heritage EIA.

7.4   Job Creation

Approximately 50 to 79 job opportunities at  an  unskilled  level  would  be
created.  Measures are being implemented to ensure that  all  six  towns  in
the Richtersveld community benefit  from  this  project.  Job  opportunities
from semi-skilled to skilled level  will  be  confirmed  after  a  scheduled
meeting, involving all parties, had taken place.

7.5   Mine Health and Safety
Over the past year Alexkor embarked on a rigorous campaign  to  enforce  and
instill proper Health and Safety practices to  ensure  a  better  and  safer
working environment for the company and its employees.

About 1 000 Fatality Free Shifts were  achieved  by  the  25th  of  November
2009. The efforts and contributions of  employees  and  contractors  towards
this  remarkable  achievement  were   recognized.   This   achievement   was
celebrated jointly by all the employees and contractors of  Alexkor  on  the
14th of December 2009.

7.6   Human Resources

Alexkor’s Human resources’ procedures were reviewed and updated in  November
2009 and Alexkor’s first Performance Management System  was  established  in
2009.

7.7   Reduction of the Post Retirement Medical Aid Liability

Alexkor has made material changes to the  underlying  medical  aid  plan  to
reduce liability to a  more  reasonable  and  affordable  amount  to  ensure
continued commercial viability of Alexkor and to retain  the  sustainability
of its operations as well as to  secure  pensioners’  future  benefits  with
regard to medical aid cover.

Alexkor has reduced the liability by R48  million,  from  the  R135  million
down to R87 million. The plan is to reduce the  liability  to  an  estimated
R55-R60 million from the current amount of R87 million.
7.8   Challenges

      • Limitations for long term planning
      • Availability of funds
      • Shortage of manpower

8.    Sanddrift Community

The following concerns were  raised  and  issues  were  put  forward  for  a
discussion:


    • The Community of Sanddrift  reported  that  there  were  no  permanent
      doctors in their modern and well equipped hospital;
    • The issue  of  racism  among  the  community  members,  hospitals  and
      workplace was raised;
    • One of the community members raised  a  concern  about  an  injury  at
      Alexkor and declared  that  up  to  now  he  had  not  been  paid  any
      compensation;
    • Heritage tourism is unique in the area and therefore the  municipality
      and government should be serious in  promoting  local  communities  on
      tourism;
    • Subcontractors are complaining  that,  when  they  are  subcontracted,
      Alexkor requires 52% of their income without contributing  a  cent  to
      the job;
    • High rate of accidents as result of  bad  roads  between  Alexkor  and
      Kubus;
    • The communities  complained  about  unfair  evictions  from  the  mine
      houses;
    • There are no proper  facilities,  e.g.  schools,  hospitals  and  play
      grounds;
    • The communities also mentioned that they are prepared to move  to  the
      RDP houses provided that Government builds better houses;
    • Property rights do not exist  in  Alexander  Bay   for  the  following
      reasons:
         o Renting is not secure;
         o No opportunity to invest;
         o The community members who have worked at the mine for many years
           cannot  purchase  a  property  in  Alexander   Bay   for   their
           retirement;
    • Fire fighting in the community - Joint Rescue Committee with  Transhex
      and Richtersveld Community.
    • Community must find an alternative to mining;
    • Road to Kuboes was destroyed by a tornado five years ago and  had  not
      been repaired as yet;
    • Richtersveld Restitution Land Claim  is  now  in  place,  however  the
      people are still without jobs and  there  are  no  benefits;  and  the
      implementation of the settlement agreement needs to be monitored;
    • The Chairperson of the Community Property Association  (CPA)  was  not
      present;
    • Community has problems with CPA and Pooling and Sharing Joint Venture;
    • An urgent call for the empowerment  and  management  training  of  the
      committees of these organizations;
    • Settlement Agreement is not implemented;
    • Mariculture project is not open to  the people  and  the  project  was
      closed down by the Richtersveld Agricultural Holdings Company;
    • Small-scale marine miners complained about  the  5%  royalties  to  be
      paid;
    • The inequality of deals offered to the contractors;
    • Problems with mining and prospecting rights in the area;
    • Due to climate change, shallow water miners have had  sea-mining  days
      reduced from 150 to 20 days; it was an in-house  project,  and  miners
      lost 80% of the mining fleet in last two years;
    • On 24 June 2008 M Temba CEO /  Chairperson  of  Alexkor,  investigated
      finances and  the  qualifications  of  the  Alexkor  board  and  other
      directorships ;
    • Port Nolloth has no water at night; and
    • A good technical high school is required.


9.    Kleinzee De Beers
9.1   Objectives

De Beers is actively conducting earthmoving and ecological  restoration  and
rehabilitation  to  reduce  the  mining  footprint.  It  is  also  exploring
different land uses as an alternative  to   mining  to  create  longer  term
socio-economic activities.

The Company seeks  other  win-win  opportunities  to  offset  rehabilitation
costs against economic development projects. Kleinzee is defining a  process
for progressive reduction in the overall liability through systematic  sign-
off  of  areas  defined  as  rehabilitated  (earthmoving   and   restoration
component).

Currently the focus is on safety, engagement of  stakeholders,  benchmarking
for the arid West Coast and to achieve the rehabilitated sign–off of 866  ha
by DMR. Small scale mining requires a  rehabilitation  plan  that  is  being
compiled at present.
The mine has about 1.7 million carats left or 100,000 carats for 17 years.
A new mining model has to be compiled with
    • Economic viability and sustainability for SMMEs;
    • Reducing rehabilitation liabilities;
    • Legal framework adjustments required.

9.2   Social Labour Plan:  Community  Development  and  Poverty  Eradication
Programmes

PROJECTS                                TOTAL SLP
|Livestock Farmers/Gardens           |R   600 000              |
|Early childhood Development         |R   630 000              |
|Multipurpose Centre                 |R1 250 000               |
|Community upliftment programmes     |R1 000 000               |
|HIV & AIDs                          |R   145 000              |
|Rural Educational Assistance        |R1 200 000               |
|programme                           |                         |
|Mathematics and Science Schools     |R   340 000              |
|programme                           |                         |

9.3   The Social Labour Plan Revision
        • The  need to review and submit amendments to SLP became apparent;
        • Objective is to review the De Beers Namaqualand Mines Social  and
          Labour Plan
               -  with  a  view  of  aligning  it  with  the   developmental
                 imperatives for the Namaqua District  in  conjunction  with
                 all the relevant stakeholders;
               - Ensuring that the funds committed in terms of the  SLP  are
                 optimally utilized for the  best  benefit  of  communities,
                 while taking into account those projects driven by  the  De
                 Beers Namaqualand Mines that are currently not included  in
                 the development framework for the District;
               -  Positioning  the  projects  agreed  upon  as  a  recorded,
                 integral part of the Local  Economic  Development  strategy
                 for the District;
               - Enabling De Beers to submit an amendment of the SLP that is
                 in tune with the socio-economic needs of the  District  and
                 based on smart objectives




The Department of Mineral Resources has to review and approve the  following
social labour plans.
Corporate Social Investment
|Kleinsee Primary School           |R21,2 million                        |
|Steinkopf Community Hall          |R2 million                           |
|Oukiep Training Centre            |R780,000                             |
|Nababeep and Dr van Niekerk       |R300,000                             |
|Hospitals                         |                                     |
|Small farmers projects            |R630,000                             |
|Rural educational upliftment in 3 |R1,250,000                           |
|communities                       |                                     |

9.4   Kleinzee Abalone Farm
      • The first phase of a 100 tons per annum production  unit  is  under
        construction;
      • It is designed to be expanded to 100 tons per unit;
      • The platforms are ready for a 200 tons per annum production;
      • 1,500 tons of water per hour (sea and recirculation pumping);
      • The 360 fibreglass tanks of 5x2m;
      • Seven seaweed production dams for feeding, water  purification  and
        heating;
      • Approximately 81 jobs were created with immediate  effect  and  182
        jobs will be created for full production;


9.5   Future Potential for Marine Aquaculture

      • Multifold expansion of current facilities;
      • Hatchery (short to medium term);
      • Ranching (medium term);
      • Expansion to processing other Mari-culture and by-products;
      • Many other opportunities exist due to the availability of sea water
        and infrastructure;
      • Introduction of additional investors/marine  aquaculture  companies
        in the area.


9.6   Kleinzee Correctional Centre Proposal

De Beers proposed to have a correctional facility of 1 000 beds at  the  Old
Dreyerspan single quarter complex.  This should consist of a  rehabilitation
centre and training facilities. De Beers had already made a  pre-feasibility
contribution, supported by local  communities.  Government  support  is  now
needed. The anticipated timelines for the project  to  kick  off  should  be
2011 to December 2012, provided that approval had been granted  by  December
2010.
9.7   Benefits

About  four  to  five   communities,   namely   Richtersveld,   Nama   Khoi,
Kamiesberg,and Namakwa are the beneficiaries of targeted  trusts.   Economic
benefits  will  flow  directly  to  local  communities.  The  abovementioned
communities will take full control of the trust.

9.8   Tourism Development

The Tourism initiative was launched by the De  Beers  Namaqualand  Mines  in
2001. This took place  in  order  to  develop  the  tourism  sector  on  the
Namaqualand coast. It  operates  under  the  brand  name  “Diamond  Coast  -
Forever Namaqualand”. The Tourism offices are situated in Kleinzee.  One  of
the sites of the De Beers Diamond Route is a  joint  initiative  between  De
Beers and E Oppenheimer & Don and Ponahalo that was recently launched.

9.9   Integrated Tourism Development

The Integrated Tourism Development is represented on  the  Nama  Khoi  Local
Tourism  Association.  Officials  of  the  Northern   Cape   Department   of
Environment and Nature Conservation are co-opted  to  serve  in  committees.
Fully bilingual guides are trained by the Field Guides’ Association  of  the
FGASA, THETA and DEAT and they are accredited and  qualified  in  First  Aid
Level III. Wide arrays of privately run accommodation establishments in  the
area are affiliated.

9.9.1 Functions
    • Manages De Beers properties where tourism is conducted;
    • Co-ordinate tourism-related activities; and
    • Acts as  a Local Tourism Forum

9.9.2 Reasons to Proclaim the Towns

Having the current mining settlements of Kleinzee and  Koingnaas  proclaimed
into public towns are key to:
    • Unlocking sustainable local economic development;
    • Diversification  and development;
    • Reduction in reliance on mining;
    • Improved regional socio-economic integration

9.10  Business Opportunities
Kleinzee had  been  approached  by  a  number  of  investors  interested  in
investing in these towns, including the establishment of:
    • Factories for light manufacture, e.g. foodstuffs,  steelwork  and  fog
      nets;
    • Hospitality and catering establishments;
    •  Educational  facilities,   including   a   Medical   University   and
      transforming the current Primary School into a Focus School;
    • Properly developers, including residential gold estates;
    • Power/energy generation, including a Gas Refinery and a Nuclear  power
      station in the longer term;
    • Tourism;
    • Crafts and Arts training and retail;
    • Automotive and general engineering service;
    • Government Departments;
    • Professional practices, e.g. Legal and Social Work.

9.11  The Living Edge of Africa Project (LEAP)

The vision of the project is to recast the legacy of mining into a  thriving
economic hub and a model of  sustainable  development,  creating  low-carbon
enterprises and jobs based on conservation and innovative technologies.
Enterprise nodes create synergy around  the  use  of  seawater,  freshwater,
energy,  nutrients,  humidity,  temperature  differentials  and  tourism  or
interpretive activities.

9.11.1 Project Progress to Date

The pre-feasibility study had  been  completed  and  reviewed  in  September
2009. A feasibility study is under way and  focuses  on  certain  identified
components and initiatives that form part of the project.

Conservation  International   contracted   to   conduct   fast-tracking   of
initiatives such as:
    • Land Art – pilot;
    • Engagement with marine aquaculture investors;
    • Feasibility on Seawater Greenhouses;
    • Institutional arrangements to be finalized;
    • Investigation on renewable energy (wind) ongoing;
    • Studies regarding conversion of Koingnaas and Hondeklip Bay to  “green
      towns”; and
    • Feasibility to complete these initiatives by April 2010.

9.11.2 Potential of Employment via Living Edge of Africa Project (EAP)
    • Employment to be created by specialist  companies  in  the  respective
      sectors; and
    • Emphasis on the implementation of projects  with  high  potential  for
      employment.

   The exact employment figures and timelines are currently  not  available.
   By the end of 2013 the total employment will grow by 500.

9.11.3 Wind Generation project

South Africa  needs  additional  electrical  energy.  Eskom  is  encouraging
industry to construct renewable energy power  generators  (wind,  solar  and
water). Namaqualand coastline had been identified as a suitable  region  for
wind power.

It is of  great  interest  for  many  companies  to  construct  wind  farms.
Fourteen companies requested to be included on the enquiry  list.  De  Beers
owns  mined-out  areas  that  are  available  for  wind  generation  plants.
Companies had been invited  to  make  proposals,  taking  into  account  the
interests of the local community and region.

10.   Recommendations by the Committee


      • Investigate and follow  up  on  the  Richtersveld  Land  Restitution
        Settlement as the facts disclosed by municipalities do not  coincide
        with those expressed by the communities.
      • The Committee must monitor progress that  has  been  made  with  the
        employment of a medical officer at the Alexander Bay hospital.
      • Follow up on the  promulgation processes of Alexander Bay including
         o Identifying the responsible institution for promulgating phases
         o  Phase  1  projects  and  progress  made  by  the   implementing
           organization - either Alexkor or the Richtersveld CPA - and
         o Phase 2 projects and progress.
      • Investigate housing in Alexander Bay
         o Who is currently in command of the houses in Alexander Bay
         o The evictions by  Alexkor, and who are being allocated houses at
           present and on what basis are these houses allocated
         o What is the remaining term of the agreements for  renting  these
           houses
         o What happens to the amount of R45 million, paid  by  Alexkor  as
           rental; who is the recipient of the money and what is  happening
           to the funds.
      • Complete the investigation of the Small-Scale marine and land mining
        industry considering:
         o The current position of  Alexkor  and  the  secret  transactions
           after Alexkor obtained diamonds from miners;
         o Rehabilitation plan for small-scale miners;
         o Revising the royalty rates to Alexkor paid by  the  small  scale
           marine miners;
         o Investigating historically  royalty  payments  for  the  past  5
           years;
         o Revising the  payment  ratio  between  Alexkor  and  small-scale
           marine miners;
         o Legal framework adjustments;
         o Follow up on the timelines of the Richtersveld Settlement  Claim
           and the transfer of the mine to the people;
      • Follow up on the  promulgation processes of Kleinzee  including  the
        project delivery commitments and timelines;
      • Investigate the Richtersveld Community Projects in regard to:
         o Agriculture
         o Mariculture
         o Conservation / Game Reserve
         o Rehabilitation


                           FRIDAY, 20 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill [B 27 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 33478 of 20 August 2010.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
              Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
     a) Report of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public
        Office Bearers for 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2009.

                           TUESDAY, 24 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (1)    Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second
         Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of Finance.
         Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance.

2.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (a)      Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77)


             Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 77) and
             referral to the Standing Committee on Finance of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 24
             August 2010.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


         (b)      Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second
             Amendment Bill [B 29 – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 33476 of 20
             August 2010].


             Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 75) and
             referral to the Standing Committee on Finance of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 24
             August 2010.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled
    1) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Security
       and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        a) Report of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of
           Public Office Bearers for 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
     a) Submission of Policy Directives issued in terms of section 79(13)
        of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977) as amended
        by section 10 (b) of the Judicial Matters Amendment Act, 2008 (Act
        No 66 of 2008).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     National Policy Framework on Child Justice, drafted and
        submitted for tabling in terms of section 93 of the Child Justice
        Act, 2008 (No 75 of 2008).
        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development for consideration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Social
    Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5B - 2010] (National Assembly – sec 76),
    dated 24 August 2010:

        The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
        subject of the Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5B - 2010]
        (National Assembly – sec 76) referred to it and classified by the
        JTM as a section 76 Bill, reports the bill without amendments.


    Report to be considered
                          WEDNESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Acting Minister of Energy

    (a)     Amendments to Articles VI and XIV.A of the Statute of the
        International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendments to Articles VI and
        XIV.A of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency
        (IAEA).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the South African
    Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2010] (National Assembly - section
    75), dated 25 August 2010:


       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
       South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010] (National
       Assembly – section 75), referred to it and classified by the JTM as
       a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendments.

      Report to be considered.


