---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 16 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2010-03-16
---

                           TUESDAY, 16 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

    DEBATE ON HUMAN RIGHTS DAY: FROM OPPRESSION TO A HUMAN-RIGHTS-CENTRED
                         NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, distinguished members of
this House, I thought I would address you today on entrenching democracy
and the culture of human and peoples’ rights, because this year marks the
fiftieth anniversary of the unprovoked and merciless massacre of
defenceless young activists, children and elderly men and women in
Sharpeville and in several other African townships, such as Soweto, Langa,
Boipatong and Bisho, by the apartheid police force, under the instruction
of the callous minority regime.

Their crime was to dare rise up against the brutal, repressive system of
apartheid which had for many years, pre- and post- this fateful and dark
moment in our history, sought to deprive, and succeeded in depriving, the
majority of African and black people of their basic human rights and a
decent living.

Former ANC president O R Tambo once observed that, and I quote:

   Persistent contravention of human rights is a recipe for violent
   conflicts and war.

The people of Sharpeville, Soweto, Langa, Boipatong and Bisho had had
enough, and waged a courageous war against the infamous system, in order to
win freedom, democracy and peace.

Five decades since that tragic period that shocked the world and stripped
naked the cruelty of apartheid for the whole world to see, we are sitting
here today as a free people, with the capability and resources to determine
and fulfil the kind of future that generations of our militant and brave
martyrs dreamt about and fought for.

Today, as Parliament hosts this significant debate to talk about the human
rights of the people of the democratic South Africa, we must pay tribute to
the South African patriots who paid the supreme price, both inside and
outside our borders, so that we can talk freely of this important subject,
without any fear of arrest, torture or murder.

We must also salute the resilient strength and determination of the
political formations under which these heroes and heroines of our struggle
fought to bring about the constitutional democracy in which the rights of
all people are respected and protected. I am referring here particularly to
the militant and revolutionary organisations of the calibre of the ANC, the
SACP, Cosatu, the United Democratic Front, the Pan-Africanist Congress of
Azania, and the Azanian People’s Organisation – organisations which, for
many years, steered our country to the democratic dispensation it is today.

Parliament’s hosting of the debate on human rights – which takes place just
a few days before we come together to celebrate Human Rights Day on 21
March, exactly 50 years since the brutal massacre of our people –
necessitates that, as a nation united in our diversity, we shun that which
threatens our hard-won freedoms and defend, with an uncompromising
fierceness, the myriad freedoms that are the fruit of our liberation.

As we celebrate Human Rights Day, we must remind ourselves that the
democratic breakthrough of 1994, and the human rights that we enjoy today,
are not manna from heaven; they were borne out of the struggles of our
people in which thousands lost their lives and limbs.
The opening paragraph of our Constitution therefore correctly honours the
freedom fighters who dedicated their lives to the struggle for the
liberation of our country and people. Besides, it honours the victims of
apartheid and colonialism and the workers who built the economy.

Moreover, and perhaps more importantly, the opening paragraph enjoins the
democratic state to develop the full potential of every human being, which
is the essential element of the humanity of all.

Our Constitution recognises human rights – that is, individual,
socioeconomic and peoples’ rights, respectively known as first-, second-
and third-generation rights. The democratic breakthrough of 1994 restored
our right to self-determination and individual rights, and created space
for the realisation of our economic and people’s rights.

The overwhelming majority of our people elected the ANC, which campaigned
on the platform of five priorities, which include: The creation of decent
jobs; the provision of quality education and health care services; security
of person and property; and food security.

The ANC realised and acknowledged that the recovery of the full humanity of
all South Africans, both black and white, can only be achieved through the
realisation of these socioeconomic rights, which are also found in our
historical documents, such as the Africans’ Claims of 1943, the Women’s
Charter of 1954 and the Freedom Charter of 1955.

The five priorities of the ANC-led government are designed for the
realisation of our socioeconomic rights. In his state of the nation
address, President Jacob Zuma outlined practical steps for the realisation
of these rights, and left the details to the Ministers.

The service delivery protests that we witnessed recently are an indication
that our people did not fight for individual – that is, political – rights
only; they wanted to use the political space created by the achievement of
political rights for the progressive realisation of their socioeconomic and
peoples’ rights.

Notwithstanding these service delivery protests, there is no doubt that the
overwhelming majority of South Africans still support the ANC and will vote
for it again in the 2011 local government elections. [Applause.]

The message that the residents are sending to us through these service
delivery protests is that they want to see faster change. That is why the
President of the Republic, hon Jacob Zuma, defined 2010 as the year of
action, and called on us to work harder, faster and smarter, for the
realisation of the five priorities of government.
We are aware that some service delivery protests are caused by the
nonperformance of public representatives and officials, by corrupt
contractors who do not fulfil their contractual obligations, and by a lack
of accountability on the part of some public representatives.

We want to assure all communities, especially the historically
disadvantaged, that service delivery protests and damage to public and
private property will not improve our quality of life. This Parliament is
their appeal board against the local and provincial government public
representatives and officials that are incompetent, corrupt or
unaccountable. This Parliament is an activist appeal board that exists
within communities in the form of Parliamentary Constituency Offices that
operate as one-stop centres.

Our offices do not require the permission of members of the executive –
whether at the national, provincial or local level – to do our oversight
work. We cannot and will not ask for permission from the executive branch
of government to carry out our oversight work. [Applause.]

Our jurisdiction extends to all parts of the country, rural and urban. We
call on all communities who are facing challenges of service delivery,
local development issues and a lack of accountability on the part of their
public representatives, such as MPs, MPLs and councillors, to report to our
one-stop centre parliamentary offices, rather than embark on destructive
service delivery protests, which delay rather than speed up service
delivery.

The ANC has committed itself to addressing the problems of incompetence,
corruption, local development issues and the accountability or lack thereof
of public representatives. It will do so by engaging communities through
community-based constituency local forums and door-to-door work to
establish the challenges facing our people, especially women, children and
people living with disability.

Our oversight visit to Orange Farm, amongst others, revealed that the
people are not against the ANC, but are against corruption, poor service
delivery, laziness and lack of accountability on the part of some public
representatives. [Applause.]

As we did in Khayelitsha, we shall not hesitate to request state agencies
to investigate and take corrective measures where we suspect, on reasonable
grounds, that poor service delivery resulted from corruption and
nonfulfilment of contractual obligations.

In responding to the grievances of our people, the ANC will be guided by
the wise words of our icon, Nelson Mandela, who told the US Congress on 26
June 1990 that, and I quote:

   It should never be that the anger of the poor should be the finger of
   accusation pointed at all of us, because we failed to respond to the
   cries of the people for shelter, for dignity of the individual.

Kheabarangwe Nelson Mandela observed that the problem of the African in the
twenty-first century is poverty when he said:

   In this new century, millions of people in the world’s poorest countries
   remain imprisoned, enslaved and in chains. They are trapped in the prison
   of poverty. It is time to set them free.

The ANC has committed itself to engage and work with all communities to
find lasting solutions to the challenges facing them. This activist
Parliament is your tribunal, you the people. It is ready and able to listen
to you and to hold the executive at all levels accountable for the delivery
of adequate and affordable services. Do not despair.

In discharging this responsibility, we are always informed by the wisdom of
Chief Albert Luthuli, who said:

   If we truly respect fundamental human rights and noble divine concepts of
   man, the dignity of man and the worth of an individual, the brotherhood
   of man, we must come all out in defence of these values as they are being
   seriously threatened by evil forces in our land. We should remember that
   Providence has ordained it that a people who refuse to meet such a
   challenge deservingly suffer moral degeneration and degradation.

In our statement of 8 January 2010, we said that human development has both
spiritual and material aspects and we committed ourselves to work with the
National Interfaith Leaders Council to build cohesive, caring and
sustainable communities. The religious sector in our land has undoubtedly
identified their role in our developmental state. They have resolved to
become not only advocacy, but also developmental, institutions.

The conference on moral regeneration for social development, co-hosted by
the SABC, the National Interfaith Leaders Council and the Parliamentary
Interfaith Council from 18 to 19 March 2010, bears testimony to this. The
formal establishment of the Parliamentary Interfaith Council will enhance
our collaboration with the religious sector in our quest to build a value-
centred and value-driven society. It will awaken us to the critical
contribution that cultural, religious and language groups can and do make
to holistic – that is, spiritual and material – human development. Thus,
the ANC will work together with religious and other sectors for holistic
human development.

The 1969 ANC national conference held in Morogoro, Tanzania, noted that,
and I quote:
   As far as languages are concerned, only Afrikaans and English have
   official status in the bodies of state such as Parliament or provincial
   councils, and in the courts, schools and the administration.

   The culture of the African, Indian and Coloured people is barely
   tolerated. In fact everything is done to smash and obliterate the genuine
   cultural heritage of our people. If there is reference to culture by the
   oppressors it is for the purpose of using it as an instrument to maintain
   our people in backwardness and ignorance.


However, the ANC did not seek to reverse the situation and turn the tables,
but went on to build a new South African nation in which equality reigns
supreme and all its diverse cultures enjoy the same prominence and status
in all facets of society.

The ANC’s response to the inhumane system of apartheid is encapsulated in
our reconciliation policy and revolutionary morality described in the 2007
ANC strategy and tactics document, which says, and I quote:

   The liberation struggle by oppressed communities developed moral values
   of human compassion and solidarity far beyond the narrow confines of its
   opposition to the apartheid social system. It represented something good,
   not just something better than apartheid. It asserted the humaneness of
   the human spirit, the search of societies at peace with and among
   themselves.

Our progressive approach demanded that our nation-building projects should
be based on co-operation with cultural, religious and linguistic
communities.

To that end our Constitution enshrines a Bill of Rights which, inter alia,
provides that, and I quote:

   Persons belonging to a cultural, religious or linguistic community may
   not be denied the right, with other members of the community, to enjoy
   their culture, practise their religion and use their language.

The ANC regards our cultural, religious and linguistic diversity as a
strength, not a threat to national unity and social cohesion. That is why
we frown upon any one or more groups that seek to impose their culture,
religion or language on others. [Applause.] All cultural, religious and
linguistic communities should work together to develop understanding and
tolerance for one another. Such understanding and tolerance cannot be
decreed. It can only be developed through a national dialogue on our
diversity and the need for an overarching value system that transcends
race, class and gender.

It is in this sense that the ANC supports President Zuma’s call for a
national dialogue on a moral code. The desired code should be an integral
part of our national efforts to build a united nonracial, nonsexist and
prosperous South Africa in which the value of every citizen is based on our
common humanity – on people’s rights.

Newly independent African countries were aware that the bills of rights
imposed by the colonial masters sought to entrench white rights and
privileges. Thus, soon after independence they developed the African
concepts of the rule of law and human and peoples’ rights, which led to the
adoption of, for instance, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights.

One of the main peoples’ rights is the right to a clean and healthy
environment. Benjamin Franklin said, in this regard, that if we can create
an environment where we feel good and care for each other, everything else
falls into place. To this end ... [Time expired.] I thank you, hon Speaker,
for the opportunity. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Mrs H Zille): Thank you very much indeed,
Speaker. It is a privilege for me to be participating in this debate to
mark Human Rights Day, one of the most important commemorative days on our
calendar.

I speak on behalf of those in this House who strive for the vision of an
open-opportunity society for all. Those five words summarise centuries of
political evolution and are captured in our Constitution, that historic
compact that represents our country’s best hope for a rights-based
democracy and a growing economy.

In the open-opportunity society the state has three equally important
functions. The first is to protect people’s rights and freedoms. The second
is to extend their opportunities. The third is to do those things for
people that they cannot be expected to do for themselves.

This formula sounds simple, but it is in fact extremely difficult to
achieve. And sometimes there is a tension between these three imperatives.

Now that we in the DA are a party of government, at local and provincial
level, we must seek to get this balance right within the competencies of
each specific sphere. This is how we make human rights real as we progress
towards our goal.

Often we get it right. But sometimes we get it wrong, and when we do we
must reflect on our actions and correct our course. For example, when we
negotiate service delivery that encourages community involvement in
development, there may be unintended consequences that infringe on people’s
rights.

This happened recently in the saga of the toilets without walls. It is an
episode that we greatly regret, and from which we have learnt. We now know
that an agreement, even when it is negotiated with a community for the
purpose of maximising service delivery and stretching the available budget
- and even if it works for 95% of families who agree to build their own
enclosures so that they can each get a toilet, rather than share one toilet
among five families - may not work for everyone. In this case the plan
ended up unintentionally affronting the human dignity and rights of the 5%
who did not or could not contribute their share.

Our commitment to human rights enjoins us to learn from these events and to
adapt. We have now reverted back to the national guidelines for upgrading
unserviced informal settlements, which provides for one toilet for every
five families, rather than one toilet per family, even if they agree to
enclose them themselves. We cannot risk the unintended consequence of even
a single person facing the indignity of having to relieve themselves in
public.

This Sunday, 21 March, is Human Rights Day, previously known as Sharpeville
Day. It is the fiftieth anniversary of a tragedy that became a turning
point in the struggle for a democratic South Africa. On Sunday, we in the
city and the province will unveil a memorial in Langa, commemorating the
great march of 30 000 people in 1960, led by the then teenaged Philip
Kgosana, to protest the pass laws. Philip Kgosana will be there. We will
also remember Eulalie Stott, a member of the former Liberal Party and
founder member of the Black Sash, who played such a pivotal role in
preventing violence and bloodshed during that march, but who, sadly, died
just before the commemoration she was so looking forward to.

The DA-led government of the city and the province will commemorate these
great South Africans, because we recognise that many people from different
perspectives played a role in creating the new South Africa. Such
recognition is part of celebrating an open-opportunity society for all. We
do not airbrush the contributions of others out of history to suit our own
closed version of events. [Applause.] We heard the hon Chief Whip giving a
list of people he said contributed to the struggle: Well, let me say, that
was a closed list. It was a selective list. We include everybody who made
contributions on our list. [Applause.]

This brings me to the “national democratic society”, the theme of today’s
debate. This is supposedly the culmination of the ANC’s so-called national
democratic revolution. These are seductive words – a classic example of
what George Orwell called “doublethink”. This involves holding two
contradictory ideas in one’s head at exactly the same time and believing in
both of them. Doublethink involves distorting history and reality, and then
denying that distortion to yourself so that you can believe your own
propaganda – and we heard a very good example of that right here and now.

The ANC exemplifies doublethink. Our President, for example, urges people
to take personal responsibility in the fight against HIV and Aids, while
personally doing the opposite. He proclaims zero tolerance in the fight
against corruption, and then fails to declare his assets. He proclaims
allegiance to the Constitution, but destroys its independent institutions.
He claims to champion the poor, but adopts empowerment policies that enrich
only the small, politically connected elite.

That is doublethink. And doublethinking governments destroy people’s
rights, limit their freedoms and undermine their opportunities – even as
their leaders claim to promote the people’s interests. This is what happens
in the closed, crony society for comrades only. It is the culmination of
the doublethink inherent in the ANC’s national democratic revolution. It is
the very opposite of the open-opportunity society for all.

Take Julius Malema propagating the nationalisation of the mines ...
[Interjections.] ... even as he brokers lucrative private mining deals to
enrich himself ... [Applause.] ... or his advice to the youth of South
Africa. Only a year ago, Julius Malema said, and I quote:

  You must never role-model a rich person who can’t explain how he got
  rich. In the ANC we must not have corrupt people as role models.
  Corruption means a simple thing: you can’t explain the big amount in your
  bank account. In less than a year, you have got everything. Yesterday you
  were down and out, but today you have everything, which shows in your
  fancy dress code.

The irony, of course, was lost on him, with his Breitling watch, his Armani
jeans, his various multimillion-rand homes and his top-of-the-range
vehicles. This contradiction was also lost on the hon the Chief Whip, Mr
Motshekga, in his speech. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, allow the speaker to be heard.

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Mrs H Zille): Thank you. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: What is your point of order, hon member?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Speaker, is it parliamentary for the Leader of the DA to be
raising Julius Malema the whole year without rest? [Interjections.] Is it
parliamentary?

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that is not a point of order. [Interjections.]
Continue, hon member.

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Mrs H Zille): That just shows you,
Speaker, how much this doublethink contradiction is lost on the ANC,
because we have just seen the hon Chief Whip, Mr Motshekga, assuring the
voters of their oversight, their concern to end corruption, but then the
party continues to protect Malema. How do you explain that? They call on
the icon Nelson Mandela, but what did President Mandela do when Peter
Mokaba sang “Kill the farmer, kill the boer”? President Mandela rebuked
him, and told him it was against the project of nation-building, so stop
calling on the icon Nelson Mandela and then abusing his memory and
protecting Malema. [Applause.]

You see, this kind of contradiction is the inevitable outcome of the
doublethink of the national democratic revolution. It inevitably leads to
cronyism, to corruption and to the criminal state. It is a party professing
to advance people’s rights even as it erodes them - and the Chief Whip says
that the ANC is a party against corruption! That is doublethink to end all
doublethink, because we see it as a party promoting and covering up
corruption at all times. [Interjections.] And this is the great tragedy of
the new South Africa that we need to focus on on Human Rights Day: this
contradiction, this doublethink, of the ANC.

The best metaphor for South Africa today is George Orwell’s famous
allegory, Animal Farm, which describes how a noble struggle is perverted,
how it becomes a reflection of the very oppression it sought to change.

The hon Chief Whip talks about understanding and tolerance for other groups
from this platform. When is he going to stand up and condemn, with his
President, the song “Kill the farmer, kill the boer”? When is he going to
stop that kind of contradiction?

There is still time to prevent a tragedy in South Africa. Let us be honest
with ourselves and stop doublethink and doublespeak this Human Rights Day.
The values of the open-opportunity society that were victorious in our
Constitution are more vulnerable today than at any time in the past 16
years. That is partly because people won’t vote against the ANC, but we
will teach them. They are learning their rights, and more and more are,
which is why the DA is becoming a party of government and not just a party
of opposition. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Let us hold up a mirror, acknowledge our mistakes, learn from them and
change course. That is the key to progress. Let us all, including the
governing party, turn that key today. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Rev H M DANDALA: Speaker and hon members, Dr Martin Luther King Jr once
said that “our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things
that matter”.

The erosion of the respect for a human rights culture in South Africa is a
matter that all South Africans, regardless of political persuasion, must
never be silent about. The growing and disturbing disregard for the human
rights culture in our country cannot be the best way of honouring those
heroes and heroines who died for our freedom in massacres, such as in
Sharpeville in 1960 and KwaLanga in Uitenhage in 1985. Their commemoration
should always be marked by the visible promotion of human rights by all
South Africans. Yet, it is precisely here that we are falling every day.

One of the classic examples of this is the alarming slide of our policing,
from being a community-friendly service to becoming a hostile force. Crime
must be fought, but in the process we should never accept the compromise
and sacrifice of even one innocent life. We must vehemently reject the
shoot-to-kill policing philosophy. Since this call was made, innocent lives
have been caught in the crossfire. South Africans should not accept this as
unavoidable. The untimely deaths of Olga Kekana and Ibrahim Ganchi, caught
in the crossfire of shoot-to-kill, are bad indicators of where we are going
as a nation. They must haunt us; they must haunt our collective psyche.

Central to the erosion of a human rights culture in our country is the
total debasing of Chapter 9 institutions. Cope believes that we need to
strengthen the Chapter 9 institutions, by ensuring that those who head up
these institutions are not deployees of any political party, but rather
that they are selected in the same way that judges are selected. These
institutions are the last line of defence for our hard-won Bill of Rights.

As often observed by civil rights organisations, it is not always in the
interests of governments for the citizens to be informed. It is the task of
government and civil society to keep the citizens conscious of what is at
stake, if our human rights culture is not to be eroded. This assertion is
underpinned by what Boutros Boutros-Ghali said back in 1992, that, and I
quote:

   ... an essential element for protecting human rights is widespread
   knowledge amongst the population of what their rights are and how these
   can be defended.

A focused drive for heightened literacy among our people is a primary
requirement for raising human rights consciousness.

Speaker, unless Parliament takes it upon itself to inform and educate the
citizens about their human rights and also seeks to inculcate and promote
the culture of rights with responsibility, communities will continue to
burn down public facilities, drive out people with different sexual
orientation or nationality from their localities, and prohibit meetings of
people of different political persuasion. Cope believes that our activist
Parliament must prioritise the intensification of public campaigns of
education for a human rights consciousness.
It is disturbing to hear more and more about some of our people being
refused treatments such as dialysis from state hospitals because of
poverty. The right to life is important for all our people. Let me again
gratefully acknowledge hon Minister Motsoaledi’s response last week to my
question in this regard. Cope wishes to urge the Minister to look at the
need for interdepartmental responses to the crisis of the poor in this
regard. Failure to do so will heighten the sense and perception that human
rights are a preserve of the privileged and not all citizens.

While we honour the clinicians for the sterling service they render to the
poorest of the poor in the public health institutions, it is disturbing
that some cannot receive dialysis because they live in informal
settlements, without basic services such as running water. Recently Busiswa
Danxa, according to public reports, was refused treatment because of this
reason. Whilst it may be beyond the means of the clinicians to do something
about her social situation, it certainly is not beyond the means of the
government.

It is at the level of each citizen that the sincerity of our Constitution
is tested and the government’s commitment to human rights is expressed.

One of the fundamental tenets of human rights is free speech. The
protection of this right means that we must tolerate the things said by
others, even those that we absolutely deplore. On the other hand, we have
to call for responsibility from the citizens. Words can destroy, as much as
they can build. Cope, whilst acknowledging words that formed part of our
struggle as part of our history, cautions that not all the words used to
liberate us are of equal value for the building of our future. We need
words that will help us affirm each other’s right to life and dignity. It
is with this in mind that at this stage of our national development, we
reject the usage of slogans such as “Kill the boer, Kill the farmer”.

History moves on. [Interjections.] Today is the day to find slogans that
bind us together as a nation, slogans ... [Applause.] ... that propel us to
a future of a shared destiny and a prosperity for all South Africans, built
on the unshakeable foundation of human rights for all. [Time expired.] I
thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Mr Speaker, hon members, in recognition of the
indivisibility of the fundamental rights of peoples everywhere, I beg for
your indulgence, as well as that of the House, to take you back to where
the journey began.

We lived in an L-shaped corrugated-iron house, both well and spaciously
built by my father, who worked as a deliverer and furniture polisher at a
furnisher in Vereeniging. He did this with my grandfather, who was a
commendable carpenter in our locality. Vukuzenzele, popularly known as
Vuka, was a newly established extension of Sharpeville township. It was an
area designated for black families who were forcefully removed from top
locations where they held the title deeds for commercial enterprises and
residential areas for white people.

Both my father and my grandfather, in my presence, frequently indulged in
politics. I often observed consistent gatherings at the nearby blacksmith
where my grandfather and the blacksmith, Mr Phakathi, would be reading and,
at the same time, interpreting the daily political bulletins to their
audience of coal merchants and vehicle owners, who had come to give their
horses new shoes and their vehicles renewed sets of spring shock absorbers.
The question that often triggered the excitement amongst them was, “Uthini
uVerwoerd namhlanje?” [What is Verwoerd saying today?], followed by “Kodwa
um-Afrika yena uthini?”, which means, “But the African is saying this.” The
political discussion usually took the greatest part of the day.

This was one of the many formative occasions when I learned about Dr
Verwoerd and his people, and that they were largely responsible for the
laws that made the African people - men, women and children - suffer. I
must say that at the age of 13, I was being initiated in the collective
historical consciousness of African political thinking. The afternoon and
night of 20 March 1960 revealed nothing suspicious for me. Moreover, at
that tender age I could not clearly have imagined, let alone predicted, the
political fortunes of a township about to be engulfed by human tragedy,
characterised by dead and maimed people, tears, fears and rage.

The dark early hours of the morning of 21 March saw widespread calls
through loudhailers and thousands of pamphlets in the streets urging the
people of Sharpeville not to go to work on that day but to converge at the
central police station to protest against the carrying of passes and, if
need be, burn them in full glare of the authorities. Obviously, school
teachers were not going to teach that day, so schoolchildren took that
opportunity to give themselves a break from school.

Later that morning, some of us joined our old folk at the Sharpeville
central police station. As the day progressed, the protesting crowd around
the police station began to swell enormously in number and, with thumbs
raised high, a resemblance of the shape of the African continent chanted
loudly, “Africa Mayibuye”.

From where I stood, I could spot the occasional movement of the African
negotiators in and out of the front of the police station, and every time
they made appearances, they would raise their thumbs high, shouting
“Africa”, and the crowd would echo, “Mayibuye”.

By that time, a heavily armed contingent of police was prowling inside the
station yard and more were arriving in police trucks and Saracens.
Meanwhile the attempts by the people’s negotiators, led by the late Nyakane
Tsolo, whom I had the pleasure of meeting before he died, continued as
previously, followed by the chant of ”Mayibuye”.

It was past the lunch hour when rumblings did the rounds that police
officers wanted people to move away from the police station and gather at
the nearby sportsfield, now known as George Thabe stadium, 2km away. The
people made no movement in that direction and what happened next made me
believe that had the people moved towards that sportsfield, many more
people would have been killed.

First, there was the shattering sound of one shot, then silence. The
chanting stopped abruptly and was immediately followed by rapid gunfire.
Waves of protesters stampeded away from the fence and gates of the police
station, as the firing became fierce. This time it sounded more like a
combination of rifles and machine-gun fire. I could not see exactly what
was happening behind me because, like everybody else, I was running away
from the police station as fast as I could. The gunfire was both
frightening and confusing, and there was an instant where I rushed through
a gate into a yard, frantically looking for sanctuary, only to jump over
the fence back into the street again, where droves of people were running
away.

I remember vividly the image of a man running past me, his hand clutching
his left shoulder, as if preventing his whole arm from falling off. The man
had been shot. Frightened as I was, I heard him say, ironically ...
Ngiyitholile i-Afrika yami. [I have found my Africa.]

I have found my Africa. It did not take long to reach home, where I became
more frightened when I did not see my father or grandfather. When the
shooting stopped, it began to rain hard - perhaps God’s way of washing away
the blood and tears of his fallen people behind me.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I regret to inform you that your time has expired.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Can I just finish this? Can I conclude, Mr Speaker?

The SPEAKER: Yes, if it is going to be done in the next couple of seconds.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Yes.

The SPEAKER: Go ahead.

Mr M B SKOSANA: My folks came back unharmed, but without the car, which was
fetched later from the police station. It was later discovered that the
bullet that went through the right mudguard of my father’s car shattered
the hipbone of the woman who was standing next to it.

This also serves as a plea from my party, the IFP, to the President of the
Republic, that the constant failure to deliver the basic rights timeously
to the deserving majority is a reflection of the defective manner in which
we have governed, and we need a radical reappraisal of this.

To neglect the plight of Sharpeville will be seen as the ultimate betrayal
of the embodiment of the long struggle of the African people for true
freedom and independence. The freedom struggle of the black people in South
Africa marshalled ample cosmic companions ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I thought you were concluding. [Laughter.] Thank
you, hon member. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, hon
members, I quote:

   The commission finds that the police deliberately opened fire on an
   unarmed crowd that had gathered peacefully at Sharpeville on 21 March
   1960 to protest against the pass laws.


   The commission finds further that the South African Police failed to give
   the crowd an order to disperse before they began firing and that they
   continued to fire upon the fleeing crowd, resulting in hundreds of people
   being shot in the back. As a result of the excessive force used, 69
   people were killed and more than 300 injured.


   The commission finds further that the police failed to facilitate access
   to medical and/or other assistance to those who were wounded immediately
   after the march.


   The commission finds that many of the participants in the march were
   apolitical, women and unarmed, and had attended the march because they
   were opposed to the pass laws. The commission finds, therefore, that many
   of the people fired upon and injured in the march were not politicised
   members of any political party, but merely persons opposed to carrying a
   pass.


   The commission finds that many of those injured in the march were placed
   under police guard in hospital as if they were convicted criminals and,
   upon release from hospital, were detained for long periods in prison
   before being formally charged. In the majority of instances when persons
   so detained appeared in court, the charges were withdrawn.


   The commission finds the former state and the Minister of Police directly
   responsible for the commission of gross human rights violations in that
   excessive force was unnecessarily used to stop a gathering of unarmed
   people. Police failed to give an order to disperse and/or adequate time
   to disperse, relied on live ammunition rather than alternative methods of
   crowd dispersal, and fired in a sustained manner into the back of the
   crowd, resulting in the death of 69 people and the injury of more than
   300.

These were the findings of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
regarding the Sharpeville massacre 50 years ago on 21 March 1960.

Today we commemorate this day as Human Rights Day. The world commemorates
this day, by decision of the United Nations General Assembly, as the
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.

Sharpeville in many ways represents a painful reminder of where we come
from, what we have achieved, but also how much yet remains to be done. Many
lines of our history, both painful as well as hopeful, intersect at
Sharpeville.

We are told that Sharpeville was named after John Lillie Sharpe who came to
South Africa from Glasgow, Scotland, as secretary of Stewarts and Lloyds.
Sharpe was elected to the Vereeniging Town Council in 1932 and held the
position of mayor from 1934 to 1937.

The main reason for the establishment of Sharpeville was the relocation of
people from “Top Location” to an area away from Vereeniging, because it was
felt black people were too close to Vereeniging for comfort. Unfortunately,
because the project was only intended to relocate residents of “Top
Location”, and not to house additional people, it did not alleviate the
housing shortage. What was planned as a five-year resettlement project,
beginning in 1935, in fact took 20 years. In 1941, 16 000 people lived in
“Top Location”. The building of houses only started in 1942.

A subeconomic housing scheme was used for Sharpeville. Water was free but
14 houses shared one tap and there were two bathing complexes in the
township. By 1946 some of the houses had their own taps and bathrooms. The
township was first called “Sharpe Native Township” but it changed to
“Sharpeville” in the 1950s.

With the implementation of the apartheid government’s Group Areas Act, it
was estimated that over 3,5 million South Africans were forcibly removed
between 1960 and 1982. Of the “Top Location” residents, blacks were removed
to Sharpeville, coloureds to Rust—ter—Vaal and Indians to Roshnee. Indians
were the last ethnic group to leave “Top Location”, the last residents
being removed to Roshnee in 1974.

In 2004, the people of “Top Location” were compensated for the loss of
their properties and land, and an amount of R60 000 per house was paid to
all former residents or dependants.

The other line of our history that runs through Sharpeville is the signing
of the Treaty of Vereeniging, commonly referred to as the Peace of
Vereeniging, on 31 May 1902. This peace treaty ended the South African War
between the Boer Republics and the British Empire. This treaty laid the
foundation for the Union of South Africa, created on 31 May 1910. This is
another milestone in our history, the centenary of which we mark this year.

I mention this because the creation of the Union of South Africa
represented the legal constitutional basis for colonialism of a special
type, or internal colonialism. It was the act of union that united and
included whites as citizens and excluded Africans.

Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe has remarked that, and I quote:

   The Union Act of 1910 establishing the Union of South Africa finally
   disenfranchised our people from ever claiming a right to land or
   participation in the affairs of the government. Thus the birth of the ANC
   on 8 January 1912 was a direct reaction to these countless grievances and
   complaints. Pixley ka Isaka Seme summed it up this way: “We are one
   people. These divisions, these jealousies, are the cause of all our woes
   and of all our backwardness and ignorance today.”

   He continued to state that, ”The white people of this country have formed
   what is known as the Union of South Africa, a union in which we have no
   voice in the making of laws and no part in their administration.”
   This was a call to unity of a new type on African soil. This was an
   anticolonial unity. This was the birth, not only of the ANC but of a new
   nation deep in the womb of a colonial setup. Right from the beginning the
   ANC was assigned to lead the creation of a new loyalty under changed
   conditions of struggle.

It is this struggle that we don’t need to be confused about because the
facts of history are stubborn things. There is no doublethink; there is no
doublespeak in the national democratic struggle. [Applause.] There is no
contradiction in national democratic struggle; rather, national democratic
struggle is meant to solve the contradictions of our painful history.
[Applause.]

An open-opportunity society, on the other hand, if one looks at it, studies
it, interrogates it carefully and looks at its application in the Western
Cape, is designed to perpetuate those contradictions. [Applause.]

The commitment of the ANC to nonracialism has been written in the blood of
our struggle. In 1960, when Sharpeville happened, the ANC did not turn
around and call for indiscriminate violence and attacks against any
national group. Neither did it do so in 1976, when our country was on fire.
Neither did it do so in the mid-1980s, when we lived under a virtually
continuous state of emergency and thousands of people were detained and
killed. [Applause.] Neither did it do so in the early 90s, when untold
state-sponsored violence was unleashed against our people. [Applause.]
Never at one moment in that long and proud history of struggle did the ANC
ever waver from its commitment to that principle. That principle has been
... [Interjections.] Others, who today ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, let’s give the member
a hearing, please.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Those who
are today great peacetime heroes need only look at their history. It is not
a consistent history. It is this struggle that led to a more hopeful line
in our history, also passing through Sharpeville. It is here that former
President Nelson Mandela signed the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa 14 years ago, on 10 December 1996.

This Constitution represents the antithesis of everything that the Union of
South Africa and the Sharpeville massacre represent. It bears testimony to
the fact that the liberation struggle by the oppressed communities, even in
the midst of bitter confrontation, developed moral values of human
compassion and solidarity far beyond the narrow confines of its opposition
to the apartheid system. It represented something good, not just something
better than apartheid. It asserted the humanness of the human spirit and
the search for societies at peace within and among themselves.

Unfortunately, there is a lot more that I would like to say, but the time
is running out. [Interjections.] Therefore, I would like to read an extract
from the poem “Die kind wat dood geskiet is deur soldate by Nyanga”, by
Ingrid Jonker, which was quoted by former President Mandela during his
first state of the nation address:

   Die kind is nie dood nie
   nòg by Langa nòg by Nyanga
   nòg by Orlando nòg by Sharpeville
   nòg by die polisiestasie in Philippi
   waar hy lê met ŉ koeël deur sy kop


   Die kind is die skaduwee van die soldate
   op wag met gewere sarasene en knuppels
   die kind is teenwoordig by alle vergaderings en wetgewings
   die kind loer deur die vensters van huise en in die harte van moeders
   die kind wat net wou speel in die son by Nyanga is orals
   die kind wat ŉ man geword het trek deur die ganse Afrika
   die kind wat ŉ reus geword het reis deur die hele wêreld


   Sonder ŉ pas


Let us on this occasion, collectively, as the elected representatives of
our people, rededicate ourselves to work together with everyone in our
society to ensure that the Constitution, the child that we collectively
gave birth to and collectively are responsible for nurturing, continues to
grow into a giant that will live in Nyanga, Sharpeville, Philippi and all
corners of our nation and continue to inspire people around the world.
[Time expired.] I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms P DE LILLE: Chairperson, I’m sure all of us in this House agree that an
event such as Sharpeville must never, ever happen again in our history. We
believe that indeed we have made some progress in terms of the attainment
of human rights for our people. However, most of this progress happened in
the short period immediately after freedom in 1994.

Currently, the situation is very different in that our Constitution is
under tremendous pressure. Enforcement, protection and observance of our
Constitution must occur at all levels of government. It is not only the
duty of our courts to ensure that South Africans enjoy their constitutional
rights. As Parliament - we ourselves present here today - through our
conduct and through the laws that we make, we must ensure that we protect
human rights.

Section 8 of the Constitution says, and I quote:

   The Bill of Rights ... binds the legislature, the executive, the
   judiciary and all organs of state.

The courts are only the final arbiters in the enforcement of human rights.
They only come in where there has been a lack of enforcement. Of all the
arms of government, the executive arm has been the most ineffective when it
comes to fulfilling human rights. A good example of the fallout from this
inefficiency is the service delivery protests around our country.
Parliament made the laws, such as the Municipal Structures Act, which the
municipalities are failing to implement because of the lack of leadership
from the executive.

The Grootboom case is another example. When the Constitutional Court made a
ruling that the late Mrs Grootboom be provided with a house, the other arms
of government failed her and she died in 2008 without a house. The other
case worth mentioning is when the Constitutional Court ruled that
antiretrovirals, ARVs, must be provided to HIV-positive people, it took
years for the executive arm to implement that decision. If everyone in the
executive did his or her job properly, we would not have had so many court
cases. Also, we would have had more taxpayers’ money to spend on the poor.

Meanwhile, section 28 of the Constitution provides children with second-
generation human rights, which means that government must provide. This
right of our children has been very poorly observed by the executive. For
example, a child has a right to basic education. But the reality is that
many of our children are on the street.

The ID feels very strongly that since the courts are achieving more than
the executive in our country, we should focus more resources on the courts
by introducing the Indian model whereby any person can write a letter to
the courts. Upon receipt of the letter, the courts will investigate and
then make a ruling on that particular matter. This will tremendously help
our poor people who don’t have access to the courts. This will also ensure
that the courts become more proactive. Therefore the Minister of Justice
and Constitutional Development should be aware that we need more resources
for our courts so that they may become more proactive and assist us with
human rights abuses.

Regarding how far we have come since 1994, the ID will give this government
five out of 10 for human rights – that’s all. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Mr Speaker and hon members, we are gathered here today to
debate Human Rights Day. As always, we must commemorate the fateful events
that took place in Sharpeville. But allow me to look at those events from
the perspective of the here and now.

When we remember the crowds in Sharpeville fleeing before the police and
their guns, we must also ask why we are confronted with similar images
across our country daily. Why is it that in our hard-earned democracy
legitimate protests must be met with excessive force by the police? Why is
it that a young man at the side of the road can be arrested by marauding
VIP police officers on trumped-up offences that don’t even exist in law?
[Interjections.] What does it say about a human rights culture that such
official thuggery can continue for 24 hours of unlawful arrest, including
the extraction of a coerced apology as well as the ransacking of a private
citizen’s home?

Perhaps most telling of all, why is this matter seemingly beyond official
interrogation by Members of Parliament? Human rights and the freedoms that
underpin our democratic society depend on a culture of tolerance and
protection by the authorities and the ruling elite. When the authorities
and the ruling elite find excuses and justifications for disrespecting or
undermining those rights, then we are on a slippery slope towards tyranny.
It is a sad reflection on the leaders, in whose name such gross misdeeds
are committed, when they fail to condemn these transgressions.

In the broader context, we must remember that respect for human rights does
not only impact on the rights of the individual, but plays a pivotal role
in nation-building. We seem to be living at a time when some members of the
ruling elite do not believe in nation-building and the reconciliation that
allowed us to achieve a peaceful end to apartheid. The callous public
insults and hate speech practised by some prominent individuals undermine
nation-building and make a mockery of our efforts to build a human rights
culture.
It would do all of us good to recall that all human rights stem from the
principles of respect and the inherent dignity of all people. It means that
our conduct - especially when we are figures who command public platforms -
must be respectful of other people, even our political opponents. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Mr Chairman, if
one reads the Afrikaans and English newspapers of the past weeks, the
Sowetan and the City Press, it is clear how our society has become
polarised and how totally differently we view issues in South Africa. When
I follow internet debates, I read white racism and black racism in the
majority of the debates.

In probably his most famous quote, Nelson Mandela said at his trial:

   I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all
   persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities.

The Bill of Rights in the Constitution - I quote section 7:

   ... enshrines the rights of all people in our country and affirms the
   democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom.

And then section 16 states that –

   Everyone has the right to freedom of expression ... [This] right ... does
   not extend to ... advocacy of hatred that is based on race, ethnicity,
   gender or religion, and that constitutes incitement to cause harm.

Sir, in 2003 the FF Plus laid a complaint with the Human Rights Commission
about the singing of the song “Kill the Boer, Kill the Farmer”. The ANC
argued that it was an innocent struggle song. The Human Rights Commission
found that it was definitely hate speech and prohibited it. The context
within which such a song is sung has to be taken into account, the
commission found.

Mr Julius Malema comes from the Limpopo province. What is the context in
Limpopo within which Mr Malema sings it? In the past month, close to
Hoedspruit, Mr van Staden was shot dead while watching TV. Mr Booysen and
his wife were stoned to death near Mokopane. Mr Cammaerts, a Belgian
citizen, had his throat slit in Lephalale; nothing was stolen. Mr Paul
Dunne from Tzaneen and Mr Ron Smit from Bela-Bela were shot to death.

Three farm murders took place this past weekend. Mr Danie Nortje was shot
in the back through his bedroom window, while his curtains were drawn.
Nothing was stolen. The previous weekend two farmers were murdered in cold
blood. These murders come directly after Mr Julius Malema - on his birthday
and at a meeting at the University of Johannesburg – sang the song “Shoot
the Boere, they are all rapists”. The ANC says it is an innocent struggle
song.

Mr Malema was nine years old when Mr Mandela was released. What does he
know of teargas, of Casspirs, and about the struggle? [Interjections.] He
sings this song in the context of 2010 in Limpopo, where suddenly every
week farmers are being murdered, murdered by young people who also know
very little about the struggle. They hear the song in today’s context.

Robert F Kennedy once said, and I quote:

   What is objectionable, what is dangerous about extremists is not that
   they are extreme, but that they are intolerant. The evil is not what they
   say about their cause, but what they say about their opponents.

I ask myself what Mr Mandela would have said about this. I say, Malema is
an ill-disciplined, rude and conflict-seeking juvenile. Not only is he an
embarrassment to the ANC and to all of us in South Africa, but he is
mocking each one of you sitting here and all of us. What does the ANC do?
Why don’t they act? Are they afraid of him? Please have the guts to call
him to order for the benefit of all of us in South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP believes that it is appropriate that we
reflect today on how far we have come as a nation, from the tragedy of
Sharpeville to those momentous events leading to the release of former
President Nelson Mandela 20 years ago and to negotiations culminating in
peaceful elections and a new Constitution.

Let us remember the words of the interim Constitution that stated that it
provided, and I quote:

   ... a historic bridge between the past of a deeply divided society
   characterised by strife, conflict, untold suffering and injustice, and a
   future founded on the recognition of human rights, democracy and peaceful
   coexistence and development opportunities for all South Africans,
   irrespective of colour, race, class, belief or sex.

It is crucial to remember that it was a solemn pact that was agreed upon,
recorded in the constitutional principles which formed the basis of the new
Constitution. We need to remind ourselves of this and to uphold that solemn
pact.

We are very aware that the main thrust of the Bill of Rights relates to
first-generation rights, civil and political rights, the right to life, the
right to vote, to a fair trial and to freedom of speech. Much has been
achieved in this regard.
South Africa also included second- and third-generation rights,
socioeconomic rights, as enforceable human rights. These rights include the
right to adequate housing, health care, food, social security and
education. Disadvantaged and vulnerable groups are intended to be the main
beneficiaries of these rights. Generally, these are people who are most
affected by poverty and experience a number of barriers that block access
to resources, opportunities and services in society.

By including these rights, South Africans said that no person should be
without the basic necessities of life. Regrettably, hon members, there is a
wide gap between the caring values of these socioeconomic rights and the
reality of grinding poverty in South Africa.

The prospect for ending poverty depends critically on two factors: firstly,
the rate of economic growth, provided it is undertaken in a shared and
sustainable way, and secondly, the level of resources devoted to poverty
programmes and the quality of such programmes.

Economic development encompasses the reduction or elimination of poverty,
inequality and unemployment within the context of a growing economy.
Economic growth is dependent upon education, skills development,
productivity and entrepreneurship, access to capital and markets.

As we live in a global village, it is also dependent upon investor
sentiment, which is particularly jittery with regard to emergent markets.
Irresponsible calls to nationalise mines and productive farms do not do our
cause any good, to say nothing about songs such as “Kill the Farmer, kill
the Boer”.

Whilst we may have one of the most progressive constitutions in the world,
we still have a long way to go before the full realisation of socioeconomic
rights is achieved. One need only look at the widespread service delivery
protests to understand that the very fabric of our constitutional
dispensation is under threat, as promises are unfulfilled in the eyes of
the poor and the marginalised. Therein lies the challenge for each of us as
we prepare to celebrate this Human Rights Day. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K S MUBU: Chairperson, when we attained a democratic dispensation in
1994 South Africa was praised as one of the last hopes for respect for
human rights and the rule of law.

Our Constitution has been lauded as one of the best in the world because of
these important principles. When our foreign policy was crafted, it was
deliberately designed to reflect these fundamental principles. However,
questions are now being raised as to whether we still stand by those
important principles.

This is exemplified in our perceived support for some of the most brutal
regimes, not only in Africa, but also in other parts of the world. Our
failure to loudly condemn human rights abuses in Myanmar, Zimbabwe and
China are but a few examples that question our commitment to the rule of
law.

Here at home we have witnessed, in the past few weeks, a serious departure
from that principle. We have noted the dangerous expression of hate speech
from the ANC Youth League leader, Julius Malema. [Interjections.] He has
called for the extermination of a section of our population, something
tantamount to calling for murder, racial cleansing and genocide against a
certain group within our population.

I want to remind this House that history has shown repeatedly that hate
speech has always been a prelude to very serious human rights abuses in the
world. The genocide in Rwanda in 1994 was the result of hate preached
against one ethnic group by another. Last week we witnessed in Nigeria the
killing of Christians by Muslims, which was preceded by the preaching of
hate by one religious group against another. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon members!

Mr K S MUBU: The most disturbing factor is that since Malema made these
dangerous remarks the senior leadership of the ANC has been stonily silent
and has not admonished him for his statements. In my view this goes to show
that the ANC wholeheartedly supports and agrees with Malema that whites
must be eliminated in this country. [Interjections.]

What message does this send to the outside world when we are about to host
one of the most important events, the Fifa World Cup? Are we saying that we
will welcome whites from outside this country when we want to kill our own
whites? [Interjections.]

President Zuma is on record as endorsing Malema as a leader with excellent
leadership qualities. God help us if that day ever comes. If anything,
Malema is exhibiting qualities of an Idi Amin or a Robert Mugabe in the
making.

Malema’s views on racial harmony in this country go directly against this
year’s theme, which says, “From oppression to a human-rights-centred
national democratic society”. Instead he is calling for the perpetuation of
the polarisation of the races in this country. This is doublespeak. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs N RASMENI: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP and distinguished guests, ever
since its founding in 1912, the ANC has dedicated itself to the historic
mission of uniting our people in the struggle for the liberation of the
oppressed black majority in general, and of Africans in particular. South
African revolutionaries have been fighting, generation after generation, to
fulfil this vision. Countless patriots sacrificed their lives, inspired by
this ideal. Today, ANC members continue on this mission.

Apartheid deprived our people of ownership and control of wealth in such a
manner that our communities were deliberately impoverished and turned into
reservoirs of cheap labour. For the ANC, fundamental to the transformation
of the economy is the need to eradicate apartheid production relations and
to bring about a more equitable ownership and distribution of wealth and
income. The most pressing challenges we face are those of unemployment,
poverty and inequality.

To address these challenges and underdevelopment, we have placed the
creation of decent work at the centre of our efforts, and all government
policies and programmes are meant to speak to this goal. Within the context
of scarce resources, we have put in place programmes to absorb the
unemployed through the use of labour-intensive programmes, linked to
infrastructure expansion and to meeting social needs.

The Bill of Rights we have today enshrines the rights of all people in our
country and affirms the democratic values of human dignity, equality and
freedom. The Bill says clearly that the state must respect, protect,
promote and fulfil these rights, which include the right to life, equality,
property, human dignity, freedom of religion and opinion; freedom of
assembly, association and expression; political and citizenship rights; the
right to a safe and healthy environment; and socioeconomic rights.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states, in Article 22, that
everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is
entitled to the realisation of the economic, social and cultural rights
indispensable for his or her dignity and the free development of his or her
personality. Article 23 states that everyone has the right to work, to free
choice of employment, and to just and favourable conditions of work and
remuneration that ensure him and his family an existence worthy of human
dignity. In terms of Articles 25 and 26, everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself and his
family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care.

Our Constitution, and the Bill of Rights specifically, give expression to
socioeconomic rights. Central to this is the ANC’s programme on decent work
and job creation, which has helped to shape the character of the New
Economic Growth Path, so as to ensure growth and development.

The January 8th statement of the ANC outlines how to pursue sustained
economic development based on an inclusive growth path. In this regard, the
2009 ANC Manifesto commits to ensuring that state-led industrial policy
leads to the transformation of the economy. It further states that a state-
led industrial policy programme will direct public and private investment
to support decent work outcomes. This programme will target labour-
intensive production sectors and encourage activities that have high
employment effects.

The policy levers of the New Growth Path include: reducing youth
unemployment, including targeted wage subsidies aimed at lowering the costs
and risks of hiring inexperienced workseekers; supporting labour-intensive
industries through industrial policy interventions, skills development,
infrastructure investment and public employment programmes, including the
rural development strategy; and improving the performance and effectiveness
of the state, especially the provision of quality education and training at
all levels. Decent work is one of the foundations of human rights, and the
fight against poverty and inequality and its promotion is the cornerstone
of all our efforts.

Again, the Bill of Rights speaks specifically to everyone having access to
health care services. As part of its responsibility under the Constitution
and the Bill of Rights, the ANC government has historically progressively
implemented programmes to achieve these rights. Historically, the
restructuring of health functions to the point of delivery was introduced
so as to ensure the most effective form of service delivery of health
services.

Over the past 15 years, the ANC has embarked on a programme to transform
the health care system, and it has been able to change the health paradigm
significantly. Let me mention a few of the issues this programme has
succeeded in addressing: redressing the harmful effects of apartheid health
care services; encouraging and developing comprehensive health care
practices; respect for human rights and accountability to the users of
health facilities and the public at large; and reducing the burden and risk
of disease affecting the health of all South Africans.

Consistent with what is contained in the National Health Plan of 1994, the
ANC made the following commitments in its 2009 Election Manifesto: To
introduce the National Health Insurance System, which will be phased in
over the next years; and to improve the quality standards for both the
public and the private sectors. The ANC acknowledges the fact that there
have been many achievements in the health care system. It is also conscious
of the amount of work that still needs to be done to ensure quality health
care for all South Africans and to achieve better health results true to
the spirit of equality in health care provision.

Turning to the rural areas: People living in rural areas continue to face
the harshest conditions of poverty, lack of access to land and to basic
services. The ANC is committed to a comprehensive and clear rural
development strategy that is linked to land and agrarian reform, to the
improvement of the conditions of farm workers and farm dwellers, and that
builds the potential for sustainable rural livelihoods. With this in mind,
government has introduced various measures to enhance household- and
community-based food production, primarily for consumption, but also to
generate income from the sale of surplus food.

Education is a means of promoting good citizenship, as well as preparing
our people for the needs of a modern economy and a democratic society.
Building on the achievements in education, the ANC government aims to
ensure the progressive realisation of universal schooling, improving
quality education and eliminating disparities. Some of the achievements
that I can mention are that there were 8 million learners, approximately 19
933 of whom participated in the no-fee schools, and 130 000 students who
were assisted through the National Student Financial Aid Scheme. The future
plans for advancing education include: broadening access to post-secondary
school and improving higher education; distributing enough workbooks to all
Grade R to Grade 6 learners, accompanied by teacher manuals; and expanding
access to quality early-childhood opportunities, especially for poor
communities.

Our human settlements are not just about building houses. We are committed
to transforming our cities and towns, improving the quality of life of our
people, and building stronger, better planned and sustainable communities
with easier access to work and social amenities, including sports and
recreational facilities. In this regard, the Housing Development Agency has
been established to assist provinces and municipalities with the
acquisition of appropriate land for human settlement development.

Our social security system, such as the provision of social grants, is
aimed at empowering our people to take active part in the social and
economic life of our country, and at enhancing their dignity. We are all in
agreement that the right to human dignity becomes more meaningful with the
effective provision of services to our people, designed to continuously
improve the quality of their lives.

The ANC is committed to transforming the state in a manner that benefits
our people. We expect those who are in charge of the public sector to do
more to speed up effective service to the people. To be a public sector
official means service to the people and a caring attitude in dealing with
citizens. Effective and efficient service to the people is dependent upon
the commitment, strength and competence of public servants, who are charged
with the conversion of state developmental goals into coherent programmes.

It is for this reason that the new ANC administration is placing particular
emphasis on the need to strengthen public institutions, to reinforce a
culture of service and to improve the efficiency and responsiveness of all
state officials. The ANC is committed to a culture of service and will
manage the economy in a manner that ensures that South Africa continues to
grow.
The ANC-led government’s medium-term strategy goals therefore give effect
to the Constitution and consolidate efforts at enhancing human rights by
targeting and strengthening investment and job creation; reducing poverty
and supporting vulnerable groups, education and skills development;
creating sustainable communities; and enhancing service delivery.

In his acceptance speech at the Nobel Peace Prize awards ceremony in 1993,
the then president of the ANC, Comrade Nelson Mandela, spoke of human
dignity, oppression and repression, liberty, human rights, poverty and
freedom from want, and of common human decency. He spoke of those who
suffered in the name of all humanity when they sacrificed everything for
liberty, peace, human dignity and human fulfilment. He also spoke of the
great masses who had turned their backs on the grave insult to human
dignity which described some as masters and others as servants.

He said that this must be a world of democracy and respect for human
rights, a world freed from the horrors of poverty, hunger, deprivation and
ignorance, and that we must devote our lives to demonstrate, in practice,
that the normal condition for human existence is democracy, justice, peace,
nonracism, nonsexism, prosperity for everybody, a healthy environment, and
equality and solidarity among the peoples.

Lastly, clearly there is still a lot more that needs to be done. The ANC
remains part of the progressive forces for change, working internationally
to promote transformation. [Time expired.] Thank you very much.
Ndiyabulela. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms M N MATLADI: Hon Chairperson, it is fitting that as we discuss Human
Rights Day, we look at the history of human rights. It is sad, and almost a
shame, to note that it always takes a catastrophe for the people of the
world to realise that they need to change how they treat themselves and
their fellow human beings.

The Universal Declaration on Human Rights proclamation was in 1948, a few
years after the Second World War, which caused tremendous and irreparable
damage and loss of human life and shook the whole planet. The rest of the
world started commemorating World Human Rights Day in 1950, with us – South
Africa – and many other countries as exceptions.

Coming back home, the events of 21 March 1960 in Sharpeville are events we
could label as evil, except that they were the actions of humans against
humans. These are events which we should keep on talking about, lest we
forget.

In 2001, the government marked 21 March by unveiling the Sharpeville Human
Rights Memorial on the site outside the police station where 69 black men,
women and children were shot, most of them in the back, for not carrying a
dompas.

Today we speak of human rights, sometimes as if they fell from the sky, yet
history testifies that blood was shed, not only in our country but
everywhere in the world, before people could appreciate that they had human
rights and that they had a responsibility to ensure the protection of these
rights.

Today it is of critical importance that we not only commemorate Human
Rights Day and just reflect on the past, but that we should also stand at a
place where we critically evaluate how much ground we have covered in
ensuring that all our people know and understand that they have human
rights. Beyond knowledge and understanding, are our people able to enforce
these rights when they are being violated, particularly by authorities? Do
they have meaningful access to these rights?

South Africa made great and remarkable strides with the Bill of Rights
enshrined in the Constitution. It is comprehensive and laudable. It starts
by saying that the Bill of Rights is the cornerstone of democracy in South
Africa. It enshrines the rights of all people in our country and affirms
the democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. Do we all
experience these? Are we really equal or are some of us more equal than
others? What has the state done to respect, protect, promote and fulfil our
rights, as it is required by the Constitution to do?

It is important also to look at the provisions of section 36 of the
Constitution, which states that the rights contained in the Bill of Rights
may be limited in terms of law where such limitation is reasonable and
justifiable in an open and democratic state.

Much as South Africa has been applauded for the comprehensive Bill of
Rights, the masses continue to experience limitations of these rights. Such
limitations are not reasonable, fair or justifiable, and include
unemployment, poverty, violence against women, and lack of or poor service
delivery. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: Deputy Speaker, Chair, Deputy Chair of the NCOP, and
Ministers, I am privileged to take part in this very important debate that
commemorates the lives of our compatriots and narrates our nation’s
inspirational and profound journey to a free, democratic South Africa. As a
veteran of the struggle for the liberation of our people, I feel even more
honoured to narrate the journey that our nation travelled with conviction
to see the liberation of our people from the shackles of apartheid and the
brutality of its forces.

I was told that I would take part in this debate to pay tribute and homage
to the outstanding compatriots of our people who performed selfless acts of
bravery for the liberation of our people on the brink of giant thoughts and
faulty memories. I am reminded of the journey travelled to a free,
nonracial, nonsexist and democratic South Africa.

Allow me to borrow the words of wisdom of a 19th century USA poet, Walt
Whitman, who wrote the poem, A child said, What is the grass?, and I quote:


   I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,
   And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken soon out
   of their laps.

He then answered himself by saying:

   They are alive and well somewhere;
   The smallest sprouts show there is really no death ...

There is really no death for those who showed signs of bravery. Perhaps
today I have no choice but to translate, in the context of our current
realities, the hints about our dead young men and women of Sharpeville,
Langa and Nyanga, and the hints about old men and mothers and the offspring
taken out of their laps.

Hon Speaker, we hold this important debate to pay tribute to the martyrs of
our freedom who, 50 years ago, were brutally massacred and murdered on 21
March 1960 in Sharpeville, Langa, Nyanga and Vanderbijlpark. It was on this
day that the apartheid regime ordered its forces to shoot and kill
compatriots of our nation who were peacefully marching to protest against
the apartheid laws. By the end of 21 March 1960, 69 black people were
killed and over 300 women, men and children were injured in Sharpeville,
Langa, Nyanga and Vanderbijlpark.

The savage massacre of African patriots at Sharpeville, Langa, Nyanga and
Vanderbijlpark on 21 March 1960 is of paramount significance in the
struggle against apartheid. It was a tragic day which unquestionably marked
a turning point in the struggle for the liberation of our country. Over the
years, this day became a source of inspiration and a platform for
mobilising our people in schools, at workplaces and in the very same
communities that were ravaged by apartheid neglect. This day carries a
formidable memory that rejuvenates the spirit of our people to rise and
fight for their freedom. Consequently, it was this day that highlighted our
plight, as we waged a concerted fight against apartheid which drew the
attention and solidarity of the international community.

In 1973, the General Assembly of the United Nations took one of the most
profound decisions and declared apartheid a crime against humanity.
Similarly, the global community intensified their support for our quest for
a democratic South Africa through sanctions and the withdrawal of their
diplomatic and business ties with South Africa.

This day, which has since been enacted as South Africa’s Human Rights Day,
is also used to highlight South Africa’s quest to dismantle a divisive past
that was characterised by human rights violation and abuse. It is also used
to highlight South Africa’s Bill of Rights, contained in the Freedom
Charter, as a formidable commitment to a South Africa that values the
rights of all its citizens, regardless of race, gender and geographic
location. This day also celebrates the launch of the SA Human Rights
Commission - one of the premier institutions for the protection of human
rights - on 21 March 1996, 35 years after the fatal events of 21 March
1960.

It is this selfless act of bravery of the people of Sharpeville, Langa,
Nyanga and Vanderbijlpark that enriched the doctrine of human rights in the
ANC. This great liberation movement of our people has a history of gallant
struggle and selfless sacrifice that led to the banishment and maiming of
its leaders. It is through this quest for a democratic South Africa that
today our nation is united in a common journey towards prosperity.

Hon Deputy Speaker, as a veteran of the ANC, with 61 years of unbroken
service to the ANC ... [Applause.] ... I have lived to pay testimony to and
narrate the stories of the courage of people in the fight against
apartheid. I live to narrate the story of a liberation movement that has
demonstrated its profound commitment to building a peaceful, nonracial and
nonsexist democratic South Africa.

When we took up the fight against apartheid, we understood that the
darkness was only momentary and that the sun would return to bathe the
earth with light. Such was our optimism that we were inspired to take to
the streets and face the might of apartheid and its armed forces with only
one conviction.

In 1955, our nation took the fight against apartheid further when we
adopted the Freedom Charter. The adoption of the Freedom Charter was a
milestone that articulated our vision for South Africa. It is this
important document that clearly articulated our fight for human rights and
the dignity of all our people when we said: “All shall enjoy equal human
rights.”

During the 1950s, the ANC and women structures fought intense struggles
against the pass laws and other discriminatory laws. The Anti-Apartheid
Campaign of 1952 clearly demonstrated the plight of those who were denied
rights, particularly the black people. The adoption of the Freedom Charter
produced a concrete programme for economic and political liberation. By
this time, both men and women were united in a common struggle for the
right to vote, equality before the law and human dignity.
Building on the Freedom Charter, the negotiation approach of the ANC
reflected the necessity for reference to all rights contained in the
charter. During 1989, the ANC presented a document called “Constitutional
Guidelines for a Democratic South Africa”.

In 1991, the ANC adopted the Constitutional Principles for a Democratic
South Africa on the eve of the April constitutional negotiations. The
Constitutional Principles for a Democratic South Africa reflected the will
of the majority of the people by guaranteeing our people’s fundamental
human rights, which are clearly ascribed in the Bill of Rights.

The ANC guidelines further articulated that the courts should have a
primary role in ensuring that the Bill of Rights is operative, and created
the Constitutional Court that enjoys the support of the people and serves
all South Africans in an independent and accountable manner. It further
articulated that the Human Rights Commission should ensure that human
rights violations are investigated. This process led to the 1993 Interim
Constitution and resulted in the 1996 Constitution.

We are indeed proud of our Constitution, which is the supreme law of the
Republic and seeks to protect the human rights of our people. It is a
profound framework that guides our people in building a democratic South
Africa and that says: “Never shall we go back to our terrible divided
past.”
The Constitution guarantees human rights for all, including human dignity;
the right to privacy; the right to freedom of expression and association;
the right to vote; regular multiparty elections or democracy; the right to
a fair trial; and the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty by
a court of law; and an independent judiciary.

There is no doubt that the adoption of the Constitution represents a
decisive break with the repressive past that divided our nation’s shared
future. Indeed, our Constitution remains a useful instrument to guide our
quest to dismantle the pillars of apartheid and build a better life for all
our people.

We are indeed proud that since the beginning of the political
transformation in the early 1990s, our government has made concerted
efforts to build a South Africa that respects and values the rights of its
citizens. We have moved decisively to dismantle all apartheid legislation
that sought to divide our people on the basis of their race, gender, social
status and location. We have decisively moved to redress the social
imbalances that were created by apartheid.

We are aware that we have a long way to go and that some of our people are
still battling with some of the most inhuman conditions. We are aware that
some of our people still face poverty, have no access to services, and have
no employment. But, steadily, the dark clouds of despair are lifting,
giving way to our season of hope. Our country, which for centuries has bled
from a thousand wounds, is progressing towards its healing. We are a nation
at work to build a better life for all our people.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up, hon member.

Mr G G MOKGORO: Thank you, Speaker. Let me just finish this last paragraph.
[Interjections.] We are indeed proud that the ANC remains a bold beacon of
hope and an instrument for the continued liberation of our people from the
trappings of poverty, unemployment, poor health and underdevelopment. Thank
you, Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Deputy Speaker, the MF strongly condemns the incidents that
led to the Sharpeville massacre.

After a long period of subjugation, we can boast of having an excellent
human rights chapter. The Bill of Rights contained in the Constitution is
the cornerstone of democracy in South Africa. Our Constitution further
provides for the establishment of the SA Human Rights Commission. But the
question we can ask is: Is it really worth the paper it is written on? Have
individuals easy and free access to the equality court, to our magistrates’
courts and our high court?

We have fair administrative justice in respect of our human rights. We have
legislation dealing with administrative justice and what we have to fight
against is arrogance, people drunk with power, corruption and
tenderpreneurship. These are the things in respect of which the citizens
are questioning whether the jettisoning of apartheid was replaced with
another form of apartheid.

What are we doing in the name of black economic empowerment? What are we
doing in the name of affirmative action? The shame of Msunduzi, of Ithala
Bank, of KZN Growth Fund cling to the face of the ruling party like mud
that doesn’t fall away. Are we fair to the ordinary citizens of our
country? Do human rights mean people in power enriching themselves?
Apartheid is gone, but what you are creating amongst the broad masses is
not caste apartheid - which the whites had - but class apartheid.

There is a beautiful Zulu proverb that says, “Umuntu umuntu ngabantu”,
meaning those who are in power should not forget that they have been
elevated by ordinary citizens. It is therefore absolutely imperative to
promote respect for human rights. Poverty does not see face or race, and it
attacks almost anyone who comes in front of it.

Mahatma Gandhi once said that we must not lose hope in humanity. Humanity
is an ocean, and if a few dirty drops fall in the ocean, it doesn’t mean
that the entire ocean is dirty. It is high time the ruling party returned
to the values and principles of its founding fathers and the values and
principles of the great icon, Madiba. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr O DE BEER: Deputy Speaker, Cope and all our citizens have a right to be
proud of what we have achieved as South Africans. Behind us is a period of
ugly oppression. Now, thankfully, at this very moment in time we live in a
time of guaranteed human rights.

However, the question I need to pose is whether these rights are indeed
guaranteed.

Sal Chumani Maxwele saamstem dat die President se veiligheidsamptenare
menseregte in ag neem? Sal Suid-Afrikaners gemaklik rus in die wete dat die
polisie besig is om die apartheidsera se militêre rangstelsel terug te
bring? En nog belangriker: Wat van die nuwe “skiet om dood te skiet”
houding van die regering? Ironies genoeg het Popcru vandag ’n optog gehou
teen die feit dat die rangstelsel ingestel word. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Will Chumani Maxwele agree that the President’s security officials take
human rights into consideration? Will South Africans rest at peace in the
knowledge that the police are bringing back the military rank system of the
apartheid era? And even more importantly: What about the Government’s new
“shoot-to-kill” attitude? Ironically, Popcru held a protest march today
against the introduction of the rank system.]

Anyone who has read George Orwell’s book Animal Farm will know how the
gains of democracy are reserved. Sixteen years ago all the gates were
thrown open, and we were free. Now, little by little, a few gates are being
closed here and there. The Chief Whip of the Majority Party in the National
Assembly, for instance, tried to stop committees from summoning Ministers
to their meetings. In the National Assembly, a member is asked to withdraw
a statement, not because it is unparliamentary, but because it is critical
of the President. Thankfully the caucus of the ruling party opened the gate
again.

Sommige amptenare wat korrupsie teengestaan het in Mpumalanga is òf
doodgemaak òf gedreig. In die Noordwes word beweer dat die regering
departementele kontrakte weggee aan maatskappye wat nie hul
belastingnakomingsertifikate verskaf nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Some officials who opposed corruption in Mpumalanga have been either
killed or threatened. In the Northwest it is claimed that the government
gives departmental contracts to companies that fail to submit tax clearance
certificates.]

Somehow, the more things change, the more they remain the same. Thousands
of Reconstruction and Development Programme houses are going to be
demolished, because they were so badly built. This will see billions of
rands going down the drain.
What South Africa needs is a democracy with legs. Our present state of
democracy has people lying on their backs. Our present state of democracy
can find R5 million to take Parliament to the People for four days but not
for enough beds in hospitals.

Baie van ons in hierdie Huis was saam in die stryd vir vryheid. Dit is nou
die tyd om terug te kyk en weer eens beginsels voor ons persoonlike winste
te sit. Soweto, Sharpeville, Orange Farm en baie ander plekke in Suid-
Afrika skree duidelik vir ons dat hierdie demokrasie nie werk nie. Ons
skuld dit aan hulle en hulle nageslagte om te kyk wat fout is in ons
regering. Ons moet terselfdertyd nie terugkeer na die ou apartheidmaniere
nie. Die verlede moet nie swaarder weeg as die toekoms nie. Baie dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Many of us in this House were together in the struggle for freedom. Now is
the time to look back and once again put principles above personal gain.
Soweto, Sharpeville, Orange Farm and many other places in South Africa
shout it from the rooftops that this democracy is not working. We owe it to
them and their descendants to look at what is wrong in our government. At
the same time we must not return to the old apartheid ways. The past should
not count for more than the future. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr A T FRITZ: Madam Deputy Speaker, today marks the historic occasion in
1960, when 69 people were killed in Sharpeville, protesting against
carrying the dreadful dompas. It was this document that made the life of
every black African man and woman a living hell. It was also the most
graphic illustration of one group’s oppression over another on racial
grounds. Throughout the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, we witnessed many more
occasions where people revolted against a system of brutal oppression and
paid with their lives for the liberation of all.

Today, we are in a free South Africa, where every citizen has the right to
vote and choose who their government will be. [Interjections.] We have a
South Africa with a Constitution that guarantees every citizen the right to
equality, the right to life, the right to dignity, the right to freedom and
security of person, as well as many other rights.

Sadly, we have seen how many of these rights have not been diligently
defended by the very government that is supposed to protect them. In the
criminal justice system, we have a Police Service that claims to be tough
on crime and in the process arrests suspects on the basis of reasonable
suspicion or belief that they have committed an offence. In most cases, the
reasonableness criteria are not adhered to, and it later transpires that
there has been no prima facie evidence justifying the subsequent conviction
in a court of law. This is disgusting, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Interjections.] This means that innocent citizens are being jailed
wrongfully, in a direct contravention of the Constitution and their right
not to be deprived of freedom without just cause.

The Constitution provides that the object of the Police Service is to
prevent, combat and investigate crime, to maintain public order, to protect
and secure inhabitants of the Republic and their property, and to uphold
and enforce the law. Yet, for the 2008-09 financial year, the number of
murders reported to police was 18 148. For that year, the police had a 27%
detection rate and a conviction rate for murder as low as 14%. This is
indicative of poor quality investigations and upholding of the law.

The total case intake by the Independent Complaints Directorate for death
in police custody or as a result of police action, for the same period, was
915 people, almost worse than what happened in the apartheid years, which
translates to a 15% increase annually. [Interjections.] What happened to
the human rights of South Africans?

The Correctional Services Act requires that prisoners must be detained
under conditions of human dignity. Overcrowding in many of our correctional
centres makes this impossible. Some centres have occupancy levels of over
200%. In 2008-09 the Department of Correctional Services told us that they
had incurred legal liabilities of almost R1 billion, as a result of bodily
injury and assault. This amount constitutes 74% of the total legal claims
against the department. This clearly illustrates that the department fails
to ensure safe custody of inmates. How many houses could we have built with
that money?

We owe it to the legacy of the people who died at Sharpeville; we owe it to
the legacy of people such as Helen Joseph, Helen Suzman, Robert Sobukwe,
Steve Biko, Lillian Ngoyi, Aunty Lizzie Abrahams, Ray Alexander, and many
more. We owe it to their legacy to defend the Constitution, to protect the
rights of all, especially the vulnerable and the poor. The problem with the
ANC is that they have become more bourgeois than the bourgeoisie. That is
the problem. [Applause.]

Unless we do that, we will be judged by history, and not your version of
history, Madam Deputy Speaker, the history with many versions, that we have
violated the legacy of those who made the ultimate sacrifice for our
freedom. What we cannot allow is that our beautiful country takes the road
of economic destruction, political shambles and social disintegration. Let
us not go down the road of Zimbabwe. This we owe to our children. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is
important to begin by informing the hon members sitting to the left that it
is nonsensical to seek to portray the history of an organisation of 98
years of age, a movement represented by people who led a noble struggle for
the freedom of the people of our country, as represented by a young man who
is not even 35 years old. That can never erase the history of our noble
struggle and the contribution of our movement to the achievement of the
freedom. [Applause.]

It is our struggle that has led to us having the opportunity to denigrate
our movement in this House today, nothing else. The contribution came from
this movement. Those who seek to extol this young man are clearly persons
who are devoid of any vision, any ideal, any new notion, any idea of where
our country must go. [Applause.] Their consistent attachment to this young
man merely illustrates their inability to offer a new and fresh vision to
South Africa. [Applause.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, the contributions of several of the hon members who
have spoken here today have merely exhibited their inability to rise to the
occasion and debate the key challenges of transforming our country.

For example, you would believe, if you listened to the hon leader of the
DA, who is fortunate to be in this Joint Sitting because of the
Constitution we adopted, allowing for the Houses to sit as they do ...
[Applause.] Had you listened to that hon member carefully, you would
believe that the DA, the party she leads, has not made any changes to
officials in the Public Service in the province or the city. You would
believe that if you listened to her. If you had listened to her very
carefully and believed each word, you would believe that the health system
run by the DA is so effective that there isn’t a measles outbreak in this
very province. [Interjections.]

You would believe, if you had listened to her very carefully, that in this
very province we do not have a TB profile of such proportions that it is
among the worst in this country. [Interjections.]

If you had listened to her with a notion to believe her, you would have
believed that her condemnation of negative sexual conduct stretches equally
to DA MECs, and does not become a private matter where they are affected.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

You would have believed, had you listened carefully, that doublespeak and
doublethink do not include rejection of freedom songs but acceptance of De
La Rey. [Applause.]

The assertions in this debate have gone even wilder. Hon member Mubu of the
DA claims that the ANC wants to kill whites. I find this quite an
incredible assertion. Hon members, shame on you for not standing up to
protest that racist statement! There is no such intention. It is the
leadership of this organisation that stood up and pushed our people back
when Comrade Chris Hani was murdered. No other leaders! [Applause.]

Hon members, shame on you for something further: You allowed the hon De
Lille to stand here, in a representative House of elected members, elected
by the people exercising their democratic right in terms of our
Constitution, and get away with saying that judges must run our country!
Shocking! [Laughter.]

Ms P DE LILLE: No, no, you must listen. Point of order, Chairperson.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: And I am hopeful, hon member ...

Ms P DE LILLE: On a point of order: I did not say that! [Interjections.]
Don’t think I am the leader of the DA that you can come and insult here! I
didn’t say that! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Of course, we all know what the
judges said about hon De Lille and the victims of Aids who were not dealt
with very well. The courts made a statement about that. So we will say no.
[Interjections.]

Ms P DE LILLE: I accepted the judgment! Not like you! You don’t implement
that now. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member!

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: We also, hon members, despite
members of the executive having spoken in this House and clearly indicating
that this idea of shoot-to-kill is a figment of the imagination of the
media, allow constant repetition in the House of this statement. This is
not a policy position of the ANC. [Applause.]

Now, we also have an unfortunate situation. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, can I ask a
question?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Pandor, I think there is a point of order. Is that
a point of order?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: No, I am rising to ask if the hon
Minister will take a question.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: He should have asked his leader a
question. Since he didn’t, I will not agree.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I am asking if you will take a question.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon member. Sit down, please.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: I agree with the hon Deputy
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries that indeed our country
must express its concern and pain at the murders that we see in South
Africa. We have repeated this several times in this House. But it is
concern over all who are murdered in our country and not a portion of our
society. All murders must be objected to and spoken against by hon members.
[Applause.]

We have done something that is excellent, Madam Deputy Speaker, as the
members of this House, by agreeing that indeed we should stand up and
debate this matter of the rights that our people must enjoy in our country
as the outcome of a constitutional democracy.

Given the centrality of human rights to the exercise of freedom, it is
absolutely necessary for Parliament to dedicate time to reviewing our
progress.

The Human Rights Commission, as we all know and as the hon Dandala hinted,
has not been able to execute fully its mandate of promoting awareness and
full knowledge of the rights each person should have access
to.Nevertheless, we must acknowledge that the Human Rights Commission has
done commendable work in a context that is constantly challenging.

Madam Deputy Speaker, despite many difficult obstacles, our post-apartheid
democracy has made positive progress in advancing the rights and status of
women in South Africa. The five key priorities of the government promise
increased opportunity for even more significant advances to be made.

In the area of education, girls have equal access to boys in school and are
performing at improved levels in many subjects. And many more children are
in school in South Africa than in India, in percentage terms, than the
reference made by the hon member. [Applause.] In higher education women are
more than 50% of the student body, and while we all want to see more of
them in scarce disciplines, we are proud of their progress.

Health is a sector in which women have received support from government
since the advent of democracy. The historic announcement by President
Mandela of access to free health services for pregnant women was a
significant endorsement of the progressive ambitions of the Freedom
Charter. The blight of the HIV and Aids pandemic has eroded some of our
advances and women are bearing an oppressive burden in this regard. Infant
mortality and women’s mortality during childbirth are also challenges that
we must give more attention to.
The ten-point health plan announced by President Zuma in his first state of
the nation address is a direct response to these and other health needs
that confront women.

In the political sphere and other public institutions, our democracy has
achieved worldwide praise for our notable advances. Our cabinet and
legislatures are among the top ten most representative parliaments of the
world.

Our desire as the ANC is to advance the achievement of a national
democratic society. This implies that all the facets that constitute such a
society must be securely in place, and that all the components that make it
up must receive attention. The concept “national” draws us all in - race,
gender, ethnicity, class, disability, sexual orientation and political
affiliation.

We are all potential beneficiaries and guardians of the Bill of Rights in
our Constitution. Each one of us must advance the rights of all – it is not
only the duty of the ANC – each Member of Parliament, each party, every
leader has a duty to advance a human-rights culture in South Africa.

One of our more intractable tasks in this regard is that of ensuring that
all women, whatever their status and location, enjoy full access to the
rights enshrined in our Constitution.

This task makes our priority of rural development immensely important for
women. Millions of women in rural communities bear the brunt of poverty and
oppression that draws its roots from a patriarchal interpretation of
culture and tradition. We as Parliament need to uphold the right to
culture, while firmly indicating that the right to culture and other
traditional norms and mores have a companion called equality that must be
respected. [Applause.]

The evidence of continuing gender inequality in the public and private
sectors, in the domestic spaces we occupy, and in some of our key
institutions of governance clearly indicates that a great deal more has to
be done in South Africa to ensure that women practically feel safe and
respected as equal citizens of our country.

Our Parliament, our legislatures, our municipalities, our courts must
protect and empower women.

Much more needs to be done to ensure that the socialisation of males and of
females inculcates respect for the human dignity of all.

Violence against women, rape, murder and other physical, verbal and
psychological evils that women experience daily mean that we as Members of
Parliament should strive to ensure that government’s priority of a safer,
caring society includes a concerted focus on women’s safety and protection.

Our Constitution contains these protections already. We have to make them a
lived reality through the laws we pass and the programmes and budgets we
approve.

In fact, it is probably in the Public Service that we continue to see
progressive change for women. The social sphere of our homes, our
recreation places and our social clubs needs increased attention to ensure
that women and girls do benefit from democracy. The private sector in our
country also needs to be monitored and to do much more. [Applause.]

Any society that advocates radical democratic transformation, as we do in
the ANC, takes on the important duty of ensuring increased human security
for all who live in that society.

We have done a great deal in South Africa, but the pain of disappearing
children, sexual abuse of babies and limited protection by our courts
offend against these principles. All of these point to the need to devote
much more attention to the equality of girls and women in our society.
[Applause.] Men’s organisations and others who have taken on these
challenges should be supported and congratulated. [Applause.]

We in government must focus our programmes more effectively and directly on
this task of equality and empowerment. The existence of a new Ministry and
department does not absolve the government in its entirety of the
responsibility to ensure equality.

The record of the past 16 years suggests that with focus and effective
strategising we can build on the advances we have made. Many of the members
who spoke here today have acknowledged this in their contributions. The hon
R M Rasmeni has pointed out the opportunities afforded by the comprehensive
rural development strategy. There is the opportunity available through Kha
Ri Gude, our literacy programme, and ensuring, as Rev Dandala called for,
increased access to literacy for women. Clearly much is being done and of
course, with the ANC in the saddle, clearly advancing the human rights of
all the people of our country, much more will be done. [Applause.]

Hon members, the reason that our people continue to have faith in this
organisation is because it is the organisation that brought to the fore the
possibility that these rights should be available, not to a group, not to a
gender, but to all people. [Applause.] It was the ANC.

When the ANC spoke of the right to vote, it never categorised classes,
ownership of property, professional status or any category it would
exclude. Unlike many organisations that spoke at the time, the ANC
advocated the view that the right to the franchise was one that belonged to
all adult persons ... [Applause.] ... and we continue to hold that belief.

When many argued against socioeconomic rights and their inclusion in the
Constitution, it was the ANC that asserted that these must and will be
present and will be acted upon. Very few societies of our economic status
and ability are doing what this government is doing, in terms of the houses
we have provided, the access to health care and the access to education.

Be honest, be against us, certainly fight with us, but fight on the
platform of acknowledgement of the truth and facts. [Applause.] The facts
are: Change has come. Change has happened. Our people not only see it, not
only feel it, but they experience it as well.

As hon members on this side of this House have said, clearly much more must
be done. We have never said we have done it all as yet. We’ve always said
that there is a record, there are achievements and there is progress, but
the challenges, given the imprint of apartheid, remain great. They can
never be solved in the time we have had. But solved they will be; addressed
they will be.

We will not turn away our attention from addressing the needs of the people
of our country and ensuring the implementation of the principles we have
advocated in the Constitution, particularly in the vision contained in the
preamble at the beginning of our Constitution, of a society that has waged
a struggle, that has come through it as one, that recognises that diversity
is strength, that unity in diversity is a strength, a society that will
ensure that all our people enjoy human rights and feel secure and
protected, a society that empowers all our people by ensuring that those
opportunities that were denied are increasingly available to them. I thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I would like to take this opportunity to
recognise and thank, hon Peter van Loan, Minister of International Trade of
Canada, and the delegation in the gallery. [Applause.]

Let me also thank, in the same spirit, community members in the gallery.
Thank you very much for sharing with us our very, very vibrant Human Rights
Day debate. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at
16:17.


