---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-12
---

THURSDAY, 12 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                   ______

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr N J VAN DEN BERG: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House —

      1) debates the state of governance in the Department of Communications
         considering that, in a recent briefing to the portfolio committee,
         the acting director-general of the department described the
         department as a “sinking ship”; and


      2) comes up with solutions as to how to improve the state of affairs
         within this department.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the moral and human rights implications of climate
   change and whether the current mitigation and adaptation responses of the
   developed and developing countries suitably address these issues.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House debates the ongoing crisis with regard to our wastewater
   treatment system countrywide. With billions of rands needed to fix the
   system and with less than 45% of the systems performing at acceptable
   standards, this sector is in complete disrepair and on the verge of
   collapse.

Prof B TUROK: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the new economic Growth Path.

Mr P D MBHELE: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House –

      1) debates the impact that the sharp rise in prices of grain, on
         account of a world-wide shortage, will have on the lives of South
         Africans, especially the poor, as bread is a staple food for the
         largest portion of our population; and


      2) calls on government to take decisive and proactive measures to
         ensure adequate supplies of wheat and stable prices so that the
         poor in our country are not adversely affected by the anticipated
         surge in wheat prices.

Mrs J C MOLOI-MOROPA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates an integrated Public Service.

Ms H N MAKHUBA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House —


      1) debates the critical lack of sports development initiatives at
         primary and high schools nationwide; and


      2) further debates how we can implement and increase the use of sport-
         based programmes to improve children’s lives and strengthen
         communities.

Mr E J MARAIS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House —

      1) debates, in light of mining company Lonmin being prohibited from
         selling the by-products from its platinum production, whether the
         Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, in its current
         form, is creating uncertainty in the mining sector; and


      2) comes up with proposals on how this Act should change in order to
         encourage investment in this sector.

Ms S K MOLAO: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House —

      1) debates the issue of the culture of burning, torching or tyre
         necklacing of victims of attacks, more lately xenophobic attacks;
         and


      2) calls on government to stem the tide of impunity, cruelty and mob
         rule that threaten to degenerate into a state of lawlessness
         through poor policing, failed investigation and lack of arrests of
         perpetrators.

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the transformation of the judiciary.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates the scourge of human trafficking that involves
   some 30 million vulnerable persons world-wide.

Mr E M SULLIMAN: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the proposed National Health Insurance.

                           INTERNATIONAL YOUTH DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes that in December 2009 the United Nations General Assembly
        adopted a resolution proclaiming 12 August as International Youth
        Day;


     2) further notes that, in line with the theme for the International
        Year of Youth, the theme for this year’s International Youth Day is
        “Dialogue and Mutual Understanding”, and the choice of this theme
        reflects the General Assembly’s appreciation of the value of
        dialogue among youth from different cultures as well as among
        different generations;


     3) recognises that International Youth Day will be celebrated at
        United Nations headquarters in New York with the global launch
        event of the International Year of Youth which will be a
        celebration of young peoples’ energy, imagination and initiatives
        and will recognise their crucial contributions to enhancing peace
        and development; and


     4) further recognises that International Youth Day is an opportunity
        to demonstrate the government’s commitment to the youth.

Agreed to.

                     BAFANA BAFANA VICTORY AGAINST GHANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that on 11 August 2010 Bafana Bafana defeated Ghana's Black
        Stars 1-0 in a friendly soccer match played at the FNB Stadium in
        Johannesburg;

     2) further notes that Katlego Mphela scored the winning goal in the
        47th minute of the match to secure victory for Bafana Bafana;

     3) recognises that a victory over the 23rd-best soccer team in the
        world is the perfect morale booster for the team as it commences
        its preparations for its Africa Cup of Nations qualifier match
        against Niger in September;


     4) congratulates the team and its management upon an excellent
        victory; and

     5) calls upon all South Africans to continue to fly the flag for
        Bafana Bafana and help the team to build upon this momentum going
        into its Africa Cup of Nations qualifier match against Niger in
        September.

Agreed to.

         INAUGURATION OF BRONISŁAW KOMOROWSKI AS PRESIDENT OF POLAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes the inauguration of Bronisław Komorowski as the new President
        of the Republic of Poland on 6 August 2010, following the death of
        former President Lech Kaczynski and 96 others in a plane crash in
        western Russia in April;
     2) congratulates President Komorowski on his newly elected position as
        head of state; and


     3) wishes him well during his tenure as President of the Republic of
        Poland.

Agreed to.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO UCT AND SASOL PARTNERSHIP ON INVENTION OF MAGNETOMETER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that a partnership between Sasol and the University of Cape
        Town’s Centre for Catalysis Research has yielded the invention of a
        device called a magnetometer;


     2) further notes that the fully computer-controlled device is the
        first of its kind in the world and will add great value to research
        in a variety of fields, including nanotechnology, as it enables
        scientists to examine ferro-metallic catalysts to discover the
        physical changes that catalysts undergo during process situations
        such as in the production of fuels;


     3) acknowledges that the team has filed a joint international
        application to patent this product which has already produced a
        number of significant scientific conclusions; and


     4) congratulates the research team, Michael Claeys and Eric van Steen
        of UCT, and Jan van de Loosdrecht and Kobus Visagie of Sasol
        Technology, part of the long-standing collaboration between Sasol
        and UCT in the field of catalysis research, which has brought
        honour to the nation.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                      (The late Ms Louisa Phumela Zama)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —
     1) notes that Louisa Phumela Zama, aged 27, collapsed and died in
        Parliament on 4 August 2010;


     2) further notes that Zama was one of three people in a delegation
        representing a KwaZulu-Natal Reserve Force unit, the Durban Light
        Infantry, and was halfway through her submission on the Defence
        Amendment Bill when she collapsed;


     3) appreciates the attempts by the Chairperson and members of the
        Portfolio Committee on Defence, and the Parliamentary nurse, who
        unsuccessfully tried to resuscitate her until the paramedics
        arrived; and

     4) conveys its heartfelt condolences to her family, friends and the
        Durban Light Infantry.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                       (The late Mrs Cheryl Gillwald)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move the
draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes with great sadness the news of the passing of Mrs Cheryl
         Gillwald on 27 July 2010 at the age of 53 from cancer;

   (2)      further notes that Gillwald was born in Welkom in the Free State
         on 13    December 1956, matriculated in 1974 at Roedean in
         Johannesburg and that, after one year at Washington High School in
         Wisconsin as an American Field Service exchange student, she
         completed a Bachelor of Commerce degree at the University of the
         Free State;

   (3)      recognises the  community  work  she  did  in  the  township  of
         Intabazwe as  a  young  woman,  that  she  also  helped  start  the
         Fundisanani Community Trust which,  among  other  things,  built  a
         centre for street children, and also organised winter schools where
         she lined up student teachers from the University of the Free State
         to help township matric students with their maths and science;

   (4)      further recognises that she joined the African National Congress
         when it was unbanned and in 1994 was called to Parliament to serve
         in the Senate and then the National Council of Provinces, which
         replaced it, and that she was appointed as Deputy Minister of
         Justice in 1999 and of Correctional Services in 2004;
   (5)      remembers that Gillwald was extremely hardworking, efficient and
         conscientious and produced a regular and informative newsletter for
         her constituents in Intabazwe; and

   (6)      conveys its heartfelt condolences to her husband, son, family,
         friends and comrades in the African National Congress, the Women’s
         League, the Alliance and the community of Intabazwe she served and
         loved.


Mr J SELFE: Madam Deputy Speaker, we in the DA associate ourselves with the
sentiments that are expressed in the motion that appears on the Order
Paper.

The late Cheryl Gillwald and I became members of the Senate together in
1994. Those of us who were fortunate to be Senators will attest to the fact
that it was a place in which close personal friendships developed despite
political differences. The Deputy Minister of Basic Education, hon Musa
Zondi, hon Bishop Tolo and many other people in this House and, indeed,
people outside of this House – like Jackson Mthembu – were members of that
club.

Cheryl Gillwald was a member of that club, and she and I shared many common
interests. We were both social reformers. Our children were the same age,
and we shared notes on the trials and tribulations of raising teenagers. We
loved the breathtaking beauty of the Eastern Free State.
Cheryl was a very passionate person, and I remember having intense
arguments with her about how the legacies of apartheid could be most
effectively overcome. We debated the role of the state, the responsibility
of citizenship and the balance between them. We debated the distinction
between reforming society and transforming society. Now, were these debates
held in the hallowed precincts of the Senate? I regret to say, no. Rather,
they were held in the members’ bar over drinks and far too many cigarettes.
Nevertheless, they cemented our relationship and our friendship.

In 1999, Cheryl was appointed as Deputy Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development and in 2004 as Deputy Minister of Correctional
Services, where we again had the opportunity to work closely together.
Again, the debates raged on about how best to rehabilitate offenders and
break the cycle of offending, about how to promote a system of alternative
sentencing, to keep young offenders, in particular, out of prison, about
how best to manage correctional centres so as to conform to the principles
of the White Paper on Corrections. Again, the passion that Cheryl had for
life and for fixing what is wrong came to the fore. But in the end, even
she became dispirited, particularly at the high levels of corruption in
that department and the seeming inability to overcome them.

So, when the opportunity arose to retire from politics, she took it and
went to live abroad with her husband. But the spirit of her vitality, her
vivaciousness and her passion will live forever in our memories. She died
much too soon and much too young.

We extend our deepest sympathy to her husband, Charles Cousins, and to her
son, Dane, as well as to her many friends in the ANC. Rest in peace.
[Applause.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Deputy Speaker, let me, on behalf of Cope, take this
opportunity to join the members of the governing party and the family and
friends of the late Cheryl Gillwald in mourning the passing of one of the
struggle’s stalwarts.

The late Cheryl Gillwald was a very brave woman indeed. All who knew her
would freely attest to this. Sadly, she died at the very young age of 53.
Even so, she led a distinguished life and has left behind an enduring
legacy, as I shall point out. She was a member of this august House from
1994 to 2006. From 1999 to 2004 she served as a Deputy Minister, first in
Justice and then in Correctional Services.

What made her unique amongst politicians was the manner in which she kept
her focus intact. She did not see herself above the people she served, and
she did not seek to use power to shield politicians like herself. She was
for the people and for the preservation of their rights and freedom.
Everyone acknowledges her role in making the 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence Against Women and Children, in partnership with civil society, the
great success that it was.
Even more telling was her strongly held view, expressed in 2005, that there
was a strong case to scrap the criminal records of young offenders under
the age of 30, so that they did not have to battle the stigma of a criminal
record when trying to find work after being released from prison. She dared
to say what other politicians would not even have dared to think.

The late Cheryl Gillwald also campaigned vigorously for real change in the
lives of women. The Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters)
Amendment Act, No 32 of 2007, which was passed a year after she left
Parliament, will remain part of her legacy.

Our admiration for her comes from the strength of commitment to
constitutionality. She held the belief that the independence of the
judiciary is a principle most of us would die for. It is a very important
component of a proper justice system but yes, I do believe that we need to
be very careful about the way we protect victims.

Finally, I wish to use this opportunity to quote the following statement by
her:

   I keep thinking if we can get our boy children to think it very cool to
   be men of peace, to be men that accord dignity to all persons,
   particularly vulnerable people, then that would be our success story.

She lived and worked for a dream, for constitutionality, for peace and for
justice. She is gone from amongst us, but let us step into the breach. Let
all who valued her as a colleague remain true to her ideals, especially now
as dark clouds gather on the horizon to threaten the freedom for which she,
and all those who were in the trenches, fought and sacrificed their lives.

We extend our deepest condolences to the ruling party and to her friends
and family. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP joins the DA and Cope,
and all other members, in expressing its condolences to the bereaved family
and friends of our dear former colleague Cheryl Gillwald. As a member of
the justice committee, I had the privilege of working alongside her in
Parliament for some years.

I vividly remember Cheryl as a charming person whose doors were always open
to her colleagues. She had a beautiful smile and a warm personality. The
tragedy is that she can no longer continue making the contributions she
offered in respect of development, human rights and the ongoing struggle
for social justice, and the eradication of poverty.

However, as we mourn her passing, we must also remember with gratitude the
achievements she did attain within the time allotted to her. We remember
Mrs Gillwald as playing a leading role in the mission to create a human
rights culture in South Africa. We remember her for the work she did to
improve the lives of ordinary South Africans. We remember her passion for
the rights of women and children. We remember her contribution to
governance and development. Throughout her political career, Mrs Gillwald
displayed an outstanding work ethic, and we were impressed by her skills
and leadership capacities.

Death is a particularly difficult, but totally unavoidable, bridge to
cross, and we all have to face that final moment. I, myself, sometimes feel
so unprepared for death, as death could take any of us at any time. The
lesson we are to take to heart today is that we should all meditate more
about our own approaching final moments.

May Cheryl rest in peace.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Deputy Speaker and hon members, we gather here today to
pay tribute to the late Cheryl Gillwald. On behalf of the UDM, allow me to
express our deepest condolences to her family, friends and colleagues. Our
thoughts and prayers are with you during this time of bereavement. The late
Mrs Gillwald had a long and illustrious career with a list of achievements
that far outweigh the number of years she was among us. I was privileged to
work with her in her capacity as Deputy Minister. She was a really
dedicated politician.

Of all her achievements, we will best remember her for her unrelenting
battle against gender-based violence. It is poignant that we should be
bidding her farewell so soon after national Women’s Day. She conceived of
the No Violence Against Women and Children campaign when other senior
members of government were prone to dismissing the severity of rape and
domestic violence. In so doing she demonstrated not only vision and wisdom,
but also the courage to speak up. Her passion for this important cause
never wavered, and thus the campaign has become an annual event.

To her family, we can say without hesitation that she was a democrat and a
nation-builder, and her legacy will live on. Perhaps it is far more
difficult to be a hero in a time of peace - she certainly proved herself a
heroine to every abused woman. We hope that you can take some measure of
consolation in that.

We believe that she has sown the seeds of liberty with her dedication to
gender equality and that, in the years to come, ten thousand Cheryls will
blossom to stand up against those who abuse women. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Adjunkspeaker, dit is goeie gebruik en dit is gepas dat ons
in die Parlement van tyd tot tyd die geleentheid gebruik om hulde te bring
aan kollegas wat afgesterf het. Ons doen dit ook vandag. Kollegas wat voor
my gepraat het, het reeds verwys na die politieke hoogtepunte uit ons
kollega se lewe, en dit word ook volledig vervat in die mosie wat op die
oomblik voor die Huis dien.

Soos u weet, het Cheryl Gillwald van 1994 af, vir 12 jaar lank, tot 2006 in
die Parlement gedien. Twee tydperke daarvan was as Adjunkminister, eers van
Justisie, en later van Korrektiewe Dienste, waar sy bydraes gemaak het. In
2006 het sy uitgetree en waarskynlik gedink en gehoop dat sy ’n rustige
aftrede saam met haar man gaan hê waar hulle hulself in die buiteland
gevestig het.

In Januarie van hierdie jaar, ’n paar maande gelede, is sy gediagnoseer met
kanker, en is oorlede – baie vroeg, op ’n baie vroëe leeftyd. Waar hierdie
mosie vir ons waarskynlik vandag vertel van haar politieke wêreld en haar
politieke lewe, vertel dit ons nie van haar persoonlike lewe, haar
persoonlike gesinsomstandighede en haar gesin wat agterbly nie.

Namens die VF Plus wil ek graag ons opregte meelewing betuig met haar
naasbestaandes, haar party en kollegas. Baie dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Deputy Speaker, it is good practice and fitting that we in
Parliament, from time to time, make use of the opportunity to pay tribute
to colleagues who have passed away. We are also doing so today. Colleagues
who have spoken before me have already referred to highlights from our
colleague’s life, and this has also been comprehensively included in the
motion that is before the House at this very moment.

As you know, Cheryl Gillwald served in this Parliament for 12 years, from
1994 to 2006. For two periods she was a Deputy Minister, first of Justice
and Constitutional Development and later of Correctional Services, where
she made many contributions. In 2006 she retired and probably thought and
hoped that she could look forward to a peaceful retirement with her husband
after they settled down abroad.

In January this year, a few months ago, she was diagnosed with cancer. She
passed away very early, at a very young age. Whereas this motion probably
tells us about her political world and her political life, it does not tell
us about her personal life, her personal family situation and her family
who remain behind.

On behalf of the Freedom Front Plus I would like to convey our sincere
sympathies to her relatives, her party and colleagues. Thank you very
much.]

Mr S N SWART: Madame Deputy Speaker, the ACDP wishes to join the other
parties in expressing our condolences to the family and friends of Cheryl
Gillwald today. It is clear from the tributes that Cheryl was devoted to
her country and her fellow men and women. It is particularly regrettable
that Cheryl passed away in her early 50s. I was shocked to learn that she
died of cancer at the end of July at a very young age.

I had the honour of getting to know Cheryl when I served on the Justice and
Constitutional Development and the Correctional Services portfolio
committees when she was the Deputy Minister. She was firm and resolute in
her attempts to bring about order to the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development and the Department of Correctional Services at a
time when the Jali Commission of Inquiry had issued a scathing report on
the department.

But she was also very gracious in responding to my parliamentary questions
on both departments. She was very unassuming as well. I remember seeing her
at the airport one day awaiting a family member, alone, with no entourage,
and it was wonderful to engage her on an informal basis.

The ACDP acknowledges the major contribution she has made, both as a Deputy
Minister and through her efforts to improve the lives of women and
children. She has been credited with being responsible for the 16 Days of
Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children. I looked up her speech
on 16 November 2005 when she launched her campaign. She stated:

   We need to unify across race, class and gender, across political, urban
   and rural divide to fight the scourge of violence against women and
   children.

It is significant that she already, at that stage, challenged us to turn
the event into a 365-day event.

That is why words of condolences and comfort to her family and friends
today are necessary. I have no doubt that she would have preferred that we
as MPs rise to the challenge of fighting violence against women and
children, not only for 16 days, but for the full 365 days of the year. Let
us do that in her remembrance, particularly as we embark on Women’s Month
this week. Our prayers and thoughts are with her family and friends during
this time of mourning. I thank you.

Mrs M N MATLADI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the UCDP would like to pass its
heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Cheryl Gillwald. Her
contribution to this democracy will always be missed. Her death comes
during the month of women, indicating a great loss to South Africa. The
country is once more robbed of a most dedicated, hardworking daughter of
the soil. We shall miss her contribution to the development of our country.

Re le ba lekoko la UCDP ra re a ba lelapa, ditsala le badiri ka ene ba
tshidisege. [As the UCDP we would like to convey our condolences to the
family, friends and colleagues.]

I thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members and the family of the late
Comrade Gillwald, the death of Ms Gillwald came as a shock to some of us,
especially because we had not heard about her illness. She was still so
young and had the potential to make further valuable contributions to our
society.

She was an accomplished patriot whose work and track record shine for all
to see. Her work caught the public eye during her term as the Deputy
Minister of both the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
and the Department of Correctional Services. Her dedication to serve our
country, especially women, shone through in her work.

This was particularly prominent in her illustrious leadership of the 16
Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children campaign. She
gave the campaign the prominence it deserved and gave her all to create
awareness in the public consciousness. Azapo salutes this gallant daughter
of the soil and expresses its condolences to her family and her political
organisation, the ANC. May her soul rest in peace. Thank you.
Mme N P KHUNOU: Motlatsammusakgotla, Maloko a Palamente a a tlotlegang,
balosika ba ba fano, ke le dumedisa botlhe. Ke le tsholetse mantswe a a
mmalwanyana a kgomotso. A re gopoleng mogaka ono ka tsotlhe tse a di
dirileng fa a ntse a tshela. A re mo gopoleng ka lerato le a neng a na le
lona mo baaging ba Aforika Borwa. Re ntse gape re gopola ka nako e a neng a
le ditlhabing ka ntlha ya bolwetse ba kankere; re mo lebile a sotlega, a re
tlhomola pelo. A re mo leseng a ikhutse botlhoko ba a neng a le mo go bona.


Re ne re le letlhogonolo go nathogana le ena botshelo jwa gagwe le losika
lwa gagwe. Ka nako e e bokeke e, ba ba neng ba le gaufi le ena thata, re
tlhoka go itshepela mowa o o galelelang o re neng ra o tlogelelwa ke Morena
Jesu fa a tlhatlhogela legodimong. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms N P KHUNOU: Deputy Speaker, hon Members of Parliament, family members
present, I greet you all. I have few words of condolences for you. Let us
remember this heroine for all she has done. Let us remember her for the
love she had for the citizens of South Africa. Let us not forget the time
she was in pain as a result of cancer. We watched her suffer, we pitied
her. Let her rest and be relieved from the pain.

We are fortunate to have shared her life together with her family. During
these trying times, we need to trust in the Holy Spirit that was left by
Jesus Christ when He ascended to heaven.]
Comrade Gillwald was born in Welkom in the Free State on 13 December 1956.
She matriculated in 1974 at Roedean High School in Johannesburg. Thereafter
she became an American Field Service exchange student for a year at
Washington High School in Wisconsin.

She completed her Bachelor of Commerce degree at the University of the Free
State. Comrade Gillwald was a community worker and did a lot of work in
Intabazwe township as a young woman. She also helped to start the
Fundisanani Community Trust which, amongst other things, built a centre for
street children. She organised winter schools with the help of student
teachers, and through her interaction with the University of the Free
State, she employed student teachers to help township matric students with
mathematics and physical science.

Comrade Gillwald was a member of the ANC. In 1994 she was deployed to serve
in the then Senate, which is now called the National Council of Provinces.
She became the Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development in
1999 and thereafter the Deputy Minister of Correctional Services in 2004.
She became instrumental in improving the lives of women in prison and, as
we heard from all members who spoke here, she was always fighting for
gender equality and against violence against women and children. She
retired from an active political career to pursue her studies and to play a
more active role in her family.

She will always be remembered for being a hard worker. Wherever she was
deployed, she really devoted her time and made a significant difference.
She was committed to transformation, and the significance was seen in both
departments she served in. She was efficient in creating a political and
public awareness in her constituency in Intabazwe by producing a regular
and informative newsletter.

We express our heartfelt condolences to her husband, son, family, friends
and comrades in the African National Congress, Women’s League, the alliance
and the community of Intabazwe that she served and loved. May her soul rest
in peace. I thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That concludes the speakers’ list on this matter. I
take it there are no objections to the motion being adopted. The presiding
officers associate themselves with the motion. The condolences of the House
will be conveyed to the Gillwald family, her organisation the ANC, the ANC
Women’s League, alliance partners and the community of Intabazwe. Thank
you, hon members.

Motion agreed to.

         BEHAVIOUR OF INMATES INCARCERATED AT NEW KIMBERLEY FACILITY

                                 (Statement)
The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, hon members, first
allow me to once more extend my condolences, and those of government, to
the family of our late former Deputy Minister, Comrade Cheryl Gillwald, a
former member of the House and a dedicated servant of our people, who
served with distinction and selflessness. We fittingly pay tribute to her,
particularly at this time when our country observes the national Women’s
Month. This is in recognition of her role in the struggle for the
empowerment of women and her sterling work in the leadership of the
campaign for the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and
Children. May her soul rest in peace.

We thank the National Assembly, the parties and presiding officers for
granting us our request to make a statement in this House relating to the
reported incident of violence at our new correctional centre in Kimberley
last week. Normally, we would not have brought this matter before the House
here, but given some of the media reports relating to the level of severity
of the violence, we thought it necessary to set the record straight —
provide clarity on the actual events, the response of government and
further actions to be taken in this regard. I also wanted to use this
opportunity to re-emphasise matters of policy relating to some of the
issues that gave rise to dissatisfaction amongst offenders.

I was in China on 30 August when I received a report that some of the
inmates in the K11 unit of our Kimberley Correctional Centre were rioting
and had taken officials hostage at the centre. This was as a result of
complaints they had raised about the fact that they felt that management at
centre level was not paying attention to their grievances.

From the preliminary reports that were received, the following were their
grievances, and I will deal with the context of each one of these later:
Firstly, the main grievance is about transfers and the fact that offenders
are far away from their families; secondly, they complain about the
provision of medical care; and thirdly, they complain about a shortage of
materials provided for development of skills and training.

Before dealing with these issues, let me indicate that about a month prior
to this incident, on 29 June, the Deputy Minister, the National
Commissioner and I visited the Kimberley Correctional Centre as part of our
scheduled visits to regions. During this visit, some of the offenders
raised those and other concerns. The concerns were responded to and action
has been taken to address some of them.

Firstly, it has to be noted that because it is a new centre, only
commissioned in March this year, operations at the Kimberley facility are
being implemented through a phased-in approach that is ramping it up to
full capacity. Currently the facility has occupancy of 2 543 inmates, and
its full capacity is supposed to be 3 000. Most of the offenders have been
transferred from other regions to alleviate overcrowding.

Secondly, the facility has been designed and designated as a medium
security facility. However, we received reports in June this year that due
to overcrowding in some of our larger centres, some of our regions have
been transferring some maximum security offenders to this centre, and some
of these offenders were being irregularly reclassified.

On the grievances, first starting with the transfers, I have on several
occasions indicated that it will not be possible for us to consider
applications for transfers based on the reason that an offender is far away
from their home and family. If we were to do this, it would make it
difficult for us to manage overcrowding in all of our centres.

This does not suggest that the department does not apply a policy of
transfers. Such applications are considered on merit, but what we are
certainly weary of are situations where the only reason given is that of
distance from an offender’s family. I have, however, already directed that
the department make arrangements to assist families to visit offenders,
either on a monthly or quarterly basis, depending on the necessary
economics and availability of funds.

After our visit we had directed that, in the meantime, telephone booths
should be installed in all units of the centre. This has been done,
although they have now been damaged, at least in the unit where the rioting
took place.

On the issue of medical care, during our visit we had directed that the
process of the filling of medical care vacancies be fast-tracked and
finalised. At the time of the visit, nine general nursing and 15 clinical
posts had already been advertised and were in the process of being
finalised.

You have heard that there’s a complaint about workshops and the development
of skills. Procurement of material for the workshop has also been
prioritised and will be delivered to the centre.

Lastly, let me indicate that it is true that during the riots there has
been burning of mattresses and other equipment in unit K13. This has
resulted in some officials and offenders requiring treatment for smoke
inhalation. However, I want to make it clear that no offender or official
died during the riots, as has been erroneously reported in the media.
Fortunately the riots also coincided with the scheduled visit by the
portfolio committee of this department. The situation at the centre
returned to normal two hours after the start of the incident and has
remained calm ever since. We have, however, continued to monitor the
process closely.

I want to take the opportunity and thank members of the portfolio committee
for the oversight visit at that critical moment, for their support but also
for their refusal to interact with the group of inmates who were involved
in leading this rebellion.

I must also report that investigation into the conduct of both offenders
and officials continue. Our investigation covers all suspected causes of
these incidents, including incitement and collusion. We continue to be
faced with serious levels of ill discipline amongst officials, leading to
collusion with offenders in the destabilisation of the department. During
the past few months we’ve also shown decisiveness in dealing with cases of
ill discipline and flagrant disregard for protocols and procedures. We have
dispatched a team from the head office to handle the transfer of more
experienced officials from other centres to the Kimberley Correctional
Centre, as most of the officials there are still new and directly from the
training college.

It is my hope that this account that we have given before the House will
clarify the understanding of the members and the South African public about
what exactly transpired at the centre. I also want to take the opportunity
to thank the correctional officers who have declared, for now, that they
will not be part of the strike that is currently going on in the country.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr A T FRITZ: Madam Deputy Speaker, the riot and hostage drama that played
itself out at the new Kimberley Correctional Centre on Tuesday, 3 August
2010 - almost costing six young male and female correctional officials
their lives - is a textbook illustration of a failed management model. For
that the Department of Correctional Services should take full
responsibility.

Allow me to point out the fundamental flaws which are a culmination of a
mixture of bad planning and a weak and visionless management team at the
centre. The original estimated budget, which was R281,5 million in
September 2004, was escalated to a phenomenal R824,1 million by February
2010. On top of the escalation in costs to the taxpayer was a 12-month
backlog.

As we speak, only 11 of the 12 housing units are fully occupied by
offenders. This is so because after the construction of this correctional
centre, the Department of Correctional Services had no idea where they
would find inmates to fill the facility.

The department then went on a wild hunt to find offenders to fill the
centre. A large part of the population came from provinces such as the
Eastern Cape, Western Cape, Limpopo, Gauteng and Free State. This is in
direct contradiction with the provisions of the White Paper. Very few
inmates are from the Northern Cape and North West provinces. This seems to
be a big contributor to the high levels of frustration among inmates, and
this was observed by portfolio committee members from both Public Works and
Correctional Services during our oversight visit to the centre last week.

In the new centre you will, on the one hand, find inmates who have
committed murder, rape and serious assault serving sentences ranging from
twenty years to three life sentences and, on the other hand, inmates
serving very short sentences such as two to five years. Yet all of them are
located in the same centre and mixed together in the same units. I can
understand what the Minister is saying about the wrongful reclassification
of maximum security inmates.

No one can tell you whether the centre is a medium-classified centre or a
maximum centre. Some inmates who were hurriedly reclassified to medium-
offender status have no clue as to what their security classification is.
Most of the inmates reported that they are locked up for 23 hours a day. On
certain days they are not afforded the right to one hour of exercise. The
lack of rehabilitation and education programmes is compounded by the fact
that very few inmates are involved in prison labour. This increases the
space for them to get involved in gangsterism and illegal activities.

An effective complaints mechanism that records inmates’ complaints and
provide proper feedback to them will go a long way in lessening the
frustration of inmates at this centre. The above also explains why, in the
last six months, expensive and state-of-the-art kitchen and laundry
equipment was deliberately damaged by inmates – obliterating the valid
warranties relating to them. This gives you an indication of systemic
problems at this prison.

Eighty percent of the officials appointed at the centre have less than two
years’ experience in offender management. Yet the centre houses seasoned
inmates with very long sentences. This is worrying. This is a recipe for
disaster, as most of these young men and women can so easily be manipulated
by these experienced convicted criminals.

One can thus clearly see that bad planning plus poor management and
inexperienced staff, as well as hardened and convicted criminals, are a
recipe for disaster. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms B C BLAAI: Madam Speaker, we have two very serious problems in our
country. Firstly, as the chairperson of the portfolio committee has
correctly pointed out, there is a serious lack of capacity and competency
on the part of the Department of Correctional Services staff at the new
Kimberley correctional facility. As elsewhere in the Public Service,
incompetency becomes the mother of all problems and destructive behaviour.

To us in Cope, it is very clear that we need to look at the incompetency of
staff as the starting point of the unacceptable behaviour of inmates. Lack
of respect for officials set into motion a whole chain of unfortunate and
even tragic actions and reactions. The Minister and the department must
seriously address this incompetency problem as a principle problem. The
portfolio committee accepts that it is so, and so does everyone else.

The second problem relates to a widespread culture of vandalism that
prevails in the South African society. Wherever there are protests –
legitimate protests – they degenerate into wanton vandalism. It is not only
with the inmates at Kimberley; it is a South African phenomenon.

While there seems to be an acceptance that inmates were frustrated, the
holding of six officials as hostages and the burning of some of the units
at the new facility on Tuesday afternoon are totally unacceptable.
Government has to actively solicit the support of all communities to ensure
that this culture of vandalism, lawlessness and hooliganism end.

An assurance from government that it has the capacity to listen to people’s
grievances and act on them will go a long way in curbing this behaviour.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, this sad incident only occurred
a few days ago and it is, therefore, too soon to take a final stand on
this. But serious allegations such as those contained in the speech made by
the hon Fritz, the complaints which were apparently ignored, transfers away
from families, medical treatment and — as the Minister admitted — the very
serious levels of ill discipline amongst the officials, are alarming. I’m
glad that the Minister has played open cards and told us these things.

Therefore, in our view, we think it’s best to await the report of the
investigators before we take a final stand on this. But I think the
Minister should, when the opportunity comes, reply to the various serious
allegations by my colleague Mr Fritz.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunkspeaker, ons is nou al gewoond daaraan dat die
agb Minister minstens die inligting kom deel met die Parlement, en ons
verwelkom dit. Ek wil, in die beperkte tyd wat ek het, vir die agb Minister
sê dat daar twee aspekte is waaraan die agb Minister moet aandag gee.

U moet aandag gee aan hoe dit moontlik is dat ’n
maksimumsekuriteitgevangene kan verander in ’n mediumsekuriteitgevangene.
Dit is nie aanvaarbaar nie. U identifiseer dit as ’n probleem. U moet
vasstel hoekom daardie probleme ontstaan.

Daar is ’n ander aspek wat ek onder u aandag wil bring. U het netnou gehoor
dat R857 miljoen van die belastingbetaler bestee is aan hierdie tronk. Dit
word ook beskryf as die hotel van tronke. Ek wil u vra dat daardie
toerusting wat vernietig is deur die gevangenes nie vervang sal word nie.
As hulle hul televisieskerms breek en vernietig en as hulle die telefone
breek en vernietig, moet hulle ’n les geleer word. Hulle moet leer dat die
belastingbetaler nie elke keer daarvoor gaan opdok nie. As hulle dit nie
wil gebruik nie, gaan hulle dit nie kry nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, we are now used to the fact that the
hon Minister comes to Parliament and at least shares the information with
us; we welcome it. I want to say to the hon Minister in the limited time at
my disposal that there are two issues she should focus on.

You must investigate as to how it is possible for a maximum security
prisoner to be transformed into a medium security prisoner. It is
unacceptable. You identify this as a problem. You must determine why those
problems arise.

There is another aspect I want to bring to your attention. Earlier on you
heard that R857 million of taxpayers’ money have been spent on this prison.
This prison has also been described as the hotel among prisons. I want to
ask you that the equipment that the prisoners destroyed must not be
replaced. If they break and destroy their television screens and their
telephones, then they must be taught a lesson. They must learn that the
taxpayer will not foot the bill every time. If they do not want to use
them, they will not receive them. I thank you.]
Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, there are existing channels to deal
with grievances, and if grievances are not attended to by prison
authorities, complaints can be laid with the Judicial Inspectorate for
Correctional Services. The ACDP therefore believes that it is unacceptable
that prison warders should be held hostage and that prison facilities be
set alight. This can never be justified. Quite rightly the Police Force was
called in to contain the riot and to secure the release of hostages.

The question arises who prisoners obtained a cigarette lighter from. Was
this indeed smuggled into the prison by a warder, as alleged in the media?
The issue of warders colluding with prisoners to obtain contraband goods
for payment remains a very serious problem, as admitted by the Minister,
and must be addressed.

The ACDP looks forward to the findings of the internal investigation and
trusts that the Ministry and the department will take all steps necessary
to ensure that such lawlessness and riotous behaviour do not occur again in
any of our facilities. We can be thankful that the riot was contained
quickly and that there was no serious injury or loss of life in what was a
very serious and life-threatening situation. Clearly one needs to look into
management and prison classification issues, as alluded to by the hon
Fritz. I thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members. Hon
Minister, when I heard that you were coming to brief us, I exclaimed, “not
again!” Hon Minister, how does it happen that maximum security offenders
are being irregularly reclassified? Please investigate and inform this
House, also about what has been done about those who effected the so-called
reclassification.

Hon Minister, you came here last time about Harrismith, and I guess this
House would appreciate an update on what the findings were. Thank you.

Mr V G SMITH: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, as you indicated earlier, on 5
August the portfolio committee visited the Kimberley Correctional Centre
where we had an opportunity to interact with the centre management, the
four officials that were held hostage and a cross-section of inmates.

At this point, Minister, let us also agree with most of what our colleagues
in the various political parties have said - including what you have said.
We agree with all of that. There is one issue that Mr Groenewald raised
which I will come back to later.

It is important at this point to indicate that the portfolio committee as a
whole is united in the condemnation of those that participated in the
hostage taking and in the burning of the facility. There can be no
justification at all, hon members. We want to reiterate it: There can be no
justification for the taking of hostages and for placing people’s lives in
danger, whether they are inmates or officials. Notwithstanding what Mr
Fritz and others have said about the shortcomings, there can be no
justification for taking hostages.

Having said that, we have a few concerns or observations that we’d like to
raise, and they have been raised previously. We did observe as a committee,
that the facility houses hardened offenders together with first-time, young
offenders in the same cells. We are of the view that this will be a problem
in terms of rehabilitation.

Firstly, we’ve been arguing for a while that at some point we will have to
find a way of separating the first-time offenders from those that are
hardened in order to speed up the rehabilitation. This is one area,
Minister, which we think needs to be looked at.

Secondly, and you also alluded to this, Minister, we need to relook the
deployment of our staff. You are correct, Minister, in that the four
hostages or the four officials that were taken hostage were very young
ladies with very little or no experience whatsoever in dealing with the
nature of the inmates that were there. We have to look at how we deploy
officials to our facilities. I am glad that you have, in fact, raised that,
Minister.

Thirdly, another problem that we have picked up on is that there seems to
have been very poor planning in, one, populating the facility — and we’ve
spoken about the mixture of inmates — but two, also in the speed in which
it was done. It seems to be the norm that it takes about six months
roughly, so that the planning can be done, but in this particular case, in
less than two months we filled 80% to 90% of it. I think that is an area
that we need to look into.

Fourthly, hon members from both sides of the House spoke about the need to
clarify and to reclassify inmates in the facility. I don’t think that it
would be helpful to have inmates in Kimberley that are maximum security
inmates when we are led to believe that Kimberley is a medium centre
facility. Surely some of the inmates that we saw there could quite easily
qualify as maximum security inmates. We think that there is a need to
classify the status of the facility, so that once we have clarified it,
those that do not belong there can be sent to the appropriate facilities.

Fifthly, Madam Deputy Speaker, chairperson and Minister, it is our view -
and you have alluded to it as well - that there is a need to urgently
review senior management at that facility. We think that some of the senior
management personnel are neither capable nor competent to run a facility of
that nature. That is the view of the portfolio committee, and we think that
it’s an area that you need to look at.

One of my colleagues spoke about how the lighter or matches got into the
facility. It is an area of concern for us that in some facilities of
correctional services there is a no-smoking policy, like in Kokstad. In
other facilities there’s a smoking policy. We think that there must be a
standard policy in terms of smoking or no smoking in a correctional centre.


My own view, and a view shared by many of my colleagues, is that a
correctional centre is a public facility. Public facilities generally are
no-smoking areas, and it might sound harsh but I am of the view that all
correctional centres should be no-smoking areas. That’s my personal view.
[Applause.] I want to turn next to what Mr Groenewald said.

Meneer, ek kan nie met u saamstem dat hulle ’n les geleer moet word as daar
iets verkeerd gedoen is in die fasiliteit nie. Korrektiewe Dienste gaan nie
oor lesse leer vir mense nie. Dit gaan oor rehabilitasie. Ek kan dus nie
met u saamstem nie. Ek dink wat ons moet doen, is om hulle wat betrokke was
by hierdie tipe goed te stuur na plekke waar hulle gerehabiliteer kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Sir, I cannot agree with you that they must be taught a lesson if they do
something wrong in the facility. Correctional Services is not about
teaching people lessons. It is about rehabilitation. Therefore, I cannot
agree with you. I think what we should do is to send those who were
involved in these things to places where they can be rehabilitated.]

A facility such as Kimberley, which should be a flagship, should be used
for rehabilitation. I agree with you that those who are guilty must be sent
for serious rehabilitation, but it can’t be that we say inmates “... moet
’n les geleer word”. [must be taught a lesson.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunkspeaker, is die agb lid bereid om ’n vraag te
neem? Sê u ja? [Tussenwerpsels.] Verstaan ek die agb lid korrek? Sê die agb
lid dat rehabilitasie insluit dat belastingbetalers se geld maar elke keer
net aangewend kan word as hulle luukshede soos televisies en telefone
vernietig? Dit is wat ek gesê het. Ek het gesê dat dit belastingbetalers se
geld is. U sê dat hulle dit maar elke keer kan breek en die
belastingbetaler moet maar elke keer betaal daarvoor totdat hulle
gerehabiliteer is. Is dit wat u sê? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, is the hon member prepared to take a
question? Are you saying “yes”? [Interjections.] Am I understanding the hon
member correctly? Are you saying that rehabilitation means that taxpayers’
money can be used every time they break luxury items such as televisions
and telephones? That is what I said. I said that it is taxpayers’ money.
You are saying that they can break it every time and that the taxpayers
must just foot the bill until they have been rehabilitated. Is that what
you are saying?]

Mr V G SMITH: Let me rather speak in my mother tongue. Let me speak in my
mother language so that you can understand. No, I am not saying that every
time that it’s done we must pay for it. However, Mr Groenewald, we must
accept that all these people who we are talking about, at some point in
their lives, are going to re-enter society.

If we adopt the attitude that you are adopting, of being harsh to them,
then all we are achieving is to see them return to our facilities as
hardened criminals, and that’s the offset that we must balance. I am
arguing that we have them as a captive audience at the facilities.

Our focus should be rehabilitating them because within the next couple of
years they are going to re-enter society. We should rather have them
rehabilitated than have them the other way where they are hardened. That’s
all I’m saying. I am not arguing and am not going take another question — I
am not! No, no, I’m not! We’ll do it off the record. All I am saying is I
can’t agree that it must be retributive. That’s all I am saying.
[Interjections.] Thank you, sir. Let us agree.

Consequently, Minister, the committee and the ANC think that the department
must urgently — and it was raised by others — investigate the causes of
this action with the view of identifying those that led it, reclassifying
those that led it, and sending them to facilities that are more
appropriate. That’s the first action that I think we should take speedily.

Lastly, Minister, we think, and we have raised it earlier, that both the
Ministry and the department must intervene with the aim of strengthening
the management at Kimberley, so that similar instances or occurrences never
take place in the future. And it’s only with the strengthening of the
facility in terms of the management of that facility that we could be
ensured that this type of matter doesn’t reoccur. Thank you very much,
Minister. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

Debate concluded.

        CONDOLENCES ON DEATHS OF POLICE OFFICERS IN HELICOPTER CRASH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Deputy Speaker, on Friday 22 July five members of
the National Intervention Unit, including its commander, and two members of
the SA Police Service Air Wing paid the ultimate price in the fight against
crime.

The horrific helicopter accident is a stark reminder of the danger that
involves the work of our policemen and women in blue. They were dedicated
officers. Fighting crime was their passion, and they did so with
distinction. Right to the end, these men stayed true to the motto of the
police: To protect and to serve. According to eye witnesses, the pilot, a
decorated hero, attempted to keep the helicopter in the air to avoid
crashing into surrounding houses, thereby avoiding an even bigger tragedy.

It is important that these heroes do not simply become part of statistics.
They were somebody’s son, husband, brother and father. Their memory should
be honoured, not only in remembering them for the service that they did for
our country and her people, but it should live on in the honour and
commitment with which every man and woman in blue and every law-abiding
citizen should stand up and join hands together to stop those who dishonour
our country and its history through criminal activities.

We would like to pay tribute to each of these fallen heroes. They were an
elite group of officers drafted into the positions that they were because
of their dedication, commitment and passion. They were in life and memory,
an example to all. We would like to pay our condolences to the family
members and friends of these officers, their police colleagues and the SAPS
family as a whole.

We know that your loss cannot be described and that words cannot fill the
emptiness that they leave. The best way for us to honour their memory is to
continue the fight against crime with distinction. May their souls rest in
peace. I thank you.

                DA RESPONSE TO BRIBERY ALLEGATIONS BY THE ANC

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Deputy Speaker, on Tuesday the ANC’s Chief Whip
suggested that the DA was trying to trick MPs into voting against the
Protection of Information Bill using, amongst other things, cash parcels.
This is nonsense. To suggest that a political party would bribe other
Members of Parliament to further its interests is a serious accusation.
This accusation is without foundation.

It is helpful that the Chief Whip made that statement because it allows us
to deduce several facts about the ANC. It tells us that the ANC is
disingenuous, panicked about the Bill, unsure that it can master enough
support to ensure its success and that it is hypocritical. Remember that
this is the same party that has deployed a former premier, accused of
paying off journalists, as an ambassador.

This is a party in serious moral decline, but do not quote me on that. The
ANC’s own policy discussion document describes a party mired in corruption,
which has lost its moral compass, abused its position and forgotten the
poor and the marginalised. Who would expect anything else from such a
leadership? It is not possible for a party without a moral compass to act
in a morally admirable manner.
The DA offers the ANC its sympathies. Unfortunately, we think the diagnosis
is terminal. [Applause.]

                        IRREGULAR APPOINTMENT AT SABC

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J D KILIAN (Cope): Deputy Speaker, the SABC, as public broadcaster, is
once again turning into an embarrassment for the country as a result of the
Minister’s relationship with the chairman of the board and the group chief
executive officer of the organisation.

This explains the shock resignation of two board members, Mrs Barbara
Masekela and Mr Magatho Mello, with more resignations to follow. Between
the Minister, the group chief executive officer and the board chairman,
they are trying to manage the irregular appointment of the head of News, Mr
Phil Molefe, who now, of course, owes the Minister a favour in return.

This is the only way that the SABC’s news bulletins of this morning can be
explained, which indicated that the Minister was found to be squeaky clean
by the Public Protector. Contrary to what the SABC — his master’s voice –
reported, the Public Protector actually found that the Minister contravened
the Code of Ethics contained in the Executive Members’ Ethics Act.
In fact, she called on the President to take appropriate action to censor
the Minister. The Public Protector also called on Minister Barbara Hogan to
finalise the inquiry into the irregularity in the awarding of a R55 million
Transnet freight rail contract that was awarded to Minister Nyanda’s
security firm. If it was not irregular, we would like to know why Mr Gama
and other people were dismissed. Money should be recovered from this firm.

                   EMPOWERMENT OF AUXILIARY SOCIAL WORKERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs H H MALGAS (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC government is living up to
its commitment to step up a massive programme on expanded public works.
Linked to infrastructure and meeting social needs with home-based care,
crèches and school cleaning, over 400 auxiliary social workers have
reported for duty at the social services’ point offices in North West on 2
August 2010 after they completed a 12-month training programme in the
social services sector.
The workers were recruited through the government’s Expanded Public Works
Programme, EPWP, from deprived communities across the provinces. Some work
as caregivers in early childhood centres as well as assistants for social
workers, where they complement and support social workers in all focus
areas with services to individuals, families, groups and communities.

An amount of R40 million was set aside this financial year for the
absorption of 409 social auxiliary workers as permanent employees of the
department. A percentage of the allocation of the annual social work
bursaries will also be dedicated to serve as an exit opportunity for
community caregivers, within projects funded by the department, who meet
university entry requirements.

Through this programme the department is creating job opportunities while
building capacity through accredited training and, ultimately, introducing
EPWP beneficiaries to formal employment. This initiative strengthens the
ANC government’s resolve to continue training and employing 15 000 trainees
per annum. Thank you. [Applause.]

                       POOR STATE OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs H S MSWELI (IFP): Deputy Speaker, my recent visit to the Free State as
part of the Portfolio Committee on Health’s oversight visit to the
province’s public hospitals was a shocking revelation.

One of the most shocking problems that we noticed was a lack of staff at
most hospitals. Hospitals lacked the professional services of doctors,
nurses and medical staff to run the day-to-day operations. In addition, it
was clear that these public hospitals lacked basic equipment, and in some
instances the broken medical equipment had not been replaced. The
infrastructure of most of these hospitals had not been replaced and is in a
state of disrepair.

Most of the hospitals visited were overcrowded, which meant that patients
could not be accommodated. On 19 November last year the Minister of Health
told hospital chief executives and managers to shape up or they will be
removed. He said: “I don’t think it will be an exaggeration to say that
some of our hospitals are death traps in terms of infection.”

Unfortunately, almost a year later I don’t think it is an exaggeration to
say that our hospitals are still death traps. The IFP believes that we need
urgent intervention from the Minister of Health and his department before
our entire public health system collapses. Thank you.

              PROPOSAL TO ENHANCE LEGACY OF 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S Z NTAPANE (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM welcomes the success of the
World Cup and the legacy it has left behind. However, it is a pity that
this infrastructure is only in the First World part of this country.

In this day and age we must be very wary of being accused of following the
same trend of the apartheid regime, where all the resources of this country
were concentrated in the First World parts whilst the areas where the
masses lived were marginalised. If one looks at where the vast majority of
the most host cities are, it will be a mammoth task to prove such
accusations otherwise.

The UDM therefore suggests that we must enhance the legacy to the benefit
of all South Africans. We need to sit down and see how we can integrate the
proceeds of the World Cup to all the corners of South Africa. It will be
very unfortunate if people living in the townships and rural areas cannot
benefit from the proceeds. For example, there is no reason why there is no
railway line in KwaZulu-Natal from KwaNongoma to Durban. In the Eastern
Cape, there is no reason why there is no railway line from Kokstad to
Mthatha and Queenstown. I am making an example of these two provinces.

This continued bias towards the big cities eats at the very heart of our
democracy. Thank you.
                            NATIONAL SCIENCE WEEK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E N N NGCOBO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the National Science Week is
an initiative of the Department of Science and Technology. It is a
countrywide celebration of science and took place from 2-7 August. The
National Science Week was celebrated in all nine provinces simultaneously
at multiple sites per province. The South African Agency for Science and
Technology Advancement, known as Saasta, a business unit of the National
Research Foundation, is the national project manager for the National
Science Week 2010.

The National Science Week is intended to expose the public educators and
learners to science-based careers, particularly disadvantaged sections of
the population. We need to ensure that our children make informed decisions
about the subjects they choose at school. It is our duty as parents,
guardians, caregivers and teachers to foster an interest in maths and
science in our learners.

The ANC urges all educators involved in teaching science and maths to make
use of the booklets distributed annually by the Department of Science and
Technology on science, engineering and technology careers. Let’s prepare
our children for the ever-changing job market by giving them tools and
knowledge. Together, we can do more. Thank you. [Applause.]
                       PROTECTION OF INFORMATION BILL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K J DIKOBO (Azapo): Madam Deputy Speaker, South Africa is abuzz with
discussions relating to the issue of the Protection of Information Bill and
the Media Tribunal. The atmosphere generated by the debate around media
freedom and the proposed Media Tribunal has brought restlessness to some of
us. The arrest of the journalist Mzilikazi wa Afrika did not help the
situation.

There has been general unpleasantness and an outcry from journalists and
organisations of civil society, including the South African National
Editors’ Forum, Sanef, and the Law Society. In a supposedly free society
like ours, we cannot afford to have the media being under the control of
anybody, least of all Parliament. Which information do you want to protect
and why? Just on the idea of protecting information, it flies on the face
of some of the principles that we have held here as a country — openness,
transparency and accountability. The prospect of having journalists jailed
or paying hefty fines leaves a bitter taste in one’s mouth.

I remember in one country to the north of us, a journalist was arrested for
“spreading falsehoods against the head of state”. We do not accept the
explanation that at present there is no recourse for those who are victims
of bad reporting. We have heard of individuals who have successfully
brought lawsuits against certain newspapers.

We also do not accept the explanation that the Press Ombudsman is toothless
and we challenge those who raise this argument to bring statistics to
support it. Was it Comrade Zwelinzima Vavi who said when a dictatorship
comes, it does not announce its arrival like drum majorettes? Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]
        EFFECT OF TERMINATION OF PEBBLE BED MODULAR REACTOR PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Deputy Speaker, with regard to the Pebble Bed Modular
Reactor Programme as the IFP we would like to know whether the Minister has
taken into account the human capital invested into this programme and the
amount of unemployment that will be created by the project’s sudden
termination or not. At its inception it was projected that 57 000 people
would be employed in this programme. The Ministry of Energy, the state and
the country for that matter, can ill afford such turnarounds in policy
decisions, especially when we are already so far down the road.

Besides the unemployment that is going to be created by this decision, the
loss of money, taxpayers’ money — yours and mine — is going to be enormous.
As recently as October 2007 the then Minister of Finance hon Trevor Manuel
brought before this House a Special Adjustments Appropriation Bill which
was approved. Herein an additional amount of R1,8 billion was transferred
to the PBMR project for operational expenses, bringing the total to R8,8
billion being spent on this project by government since 1999.
Notwithstanding these calamities, we are further burdened by the prospect
of no direction now in terms of our future energy sources.

We urge the Minister and her department to be absolutely certain before
they commit to the next energy route that this country is going to follow,
lest we have a similar situation on our hands in the future. Finally, Madam
Deputy Speaker, this House deserves a full report on government’s direction
in this regard. I thank you. [Applause.]

 Graduation of South African Medical Doctors THROUGH COLLABORATION with cUBA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T E KENYE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC government is working
tirelessly to address the many challenges confronting the public sector in
our country. We have started with the vigorous implementation of our 10-
point plan, which is geared towards overhauling the system through human
resource development and quality of care, amongst other things. Therefore
the ANC is proud to celebrate the achievement of 40 medical graduates,
which is part of its collaboration with Cuba. This was held on 7 July 2010
at the University of Cape Town. Moreover, in July last year 63 more medical
students graduated at a ceremony at the University of Limpopo, Medunsa,
through this programme. This proves that the programme is continuing to
produce results.

The candidates for the programme are drawn from the underprivileged areas
of our country, giving some of our young people an opportunity to realise
their dreams of practising medicine. We are encouraged by the fact that
since its inception, this programme has produced 246 medical doctors who
are providing health care to our people, especially in the rural outlying
areas.

Our collaboration with the Republic of Cuba, through their Ministry of
Public Health, is one of the initiatives aimed at boosting the provision of
human resources for health in our country. The ANC government will continue
to work together with the Ministry of Public Health of the Republic of Cuba
and our academic partners here at home to achieve this goal. Together we
can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

  INCREASE IN PURCHASES FROM HISTORICALLY DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS BY CITY
                                OF CAPE TOWN

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA-led City of Cape Town has
since 2006 significantly increased purchases from historically
disadvantaged individuals and small and medium enterprises compared to the
previous ANC-run administration.

We know that all state procurement is governed by the Preferential
Procurement Policy Framework Act, which states that the historically
disadvantaged companies must be awarded additional points for their status
when tendering.

The ANC had previously added additional BEE requirements in the City of
Cape Town, which DA Deputy Mayor Ian Neilson has argued were illegal and
had the adverse effect of excluding many companies from doing business with
the city. The city administration, under the DA-led government,
subsequently relaxed the requirements for doing business with the city to
bring it in line with the national legislation.

The effect has been to expand opportunities, as is the goal of the DA.
During 2006 the city procured about 40% of its supplies from historically
disadvantaged individuals and small, medium and micro enterprises, SMMEs.
This has immediately risen to around 60% and reached a height of 80% in the
fourth quarter of last year.

The City has also expanded the number of vendors from which it procures
from around 10 000 in 2007 to more than 15 000 at the beginning of this
year, 2010. This shows that the DA ... [Time expired.]

                  KILLING of Illegal miners at aurora mine

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P D DEXTER (Cope): Madam Deputy Speaker, it has been reported that
approximately 20 illegal miners have been shot and possibly executed by
security guards at Aurora Mine in Springs, Ekurhuleni, on Monday, 9 August
2010.

This is an issue about which South Africans must be told the truth. The
fact that the mine is owned on the one hand by the nephew of the President
of our country and by the grandson of Nelson Mandela makes it doubly
important that the truth be told. A team of journalists from the Sowetan
went underground in the mine on Wednesday and claim that they have
discovered four bodies with gunshot wounds. It is alleged that 16 more
people were executed underground. A full investigation must be carried out
in a transparent manner so that it is clear to everyone that the police are
not colluding with the alleged executioners.

Sworn statements should be taken from the security company and from those
miners who have been rescued from underground at the time. They should
specifically ask whether the Aurora Gold East Rand Ndlovu Shaft was used to
retrieve any bodies.

The South African mining industry is increasingly acquiring a reputation of
bad decisions, poor corporate governance and a terrible health and safety
record. A few weeks ago our country was basking in the glory of the 2010
Fifa World Cup. Now, once again, we are under intense scrutiny for all the
wrong reasons. Cope demands that the truth be ascertained in this regard.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for keeping to the time.

              GRANT FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A C MASHISHI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, an early childhood development
initiative in Mpumalanga, Daantjie Trust, near Nelspruit, has received a
much-needed boost of R400 000. The money, which was given to the Ntataise
Lowveld Trust during a function at the Sacred Heart Preschool, forms part
of Absa Bank’s initiative to uplift the communities in which it operates.

This grant is aimed at empowering and equipping women in the community with
the knowledge and skills needed to ensure that they provide the best
foundation to the children in their care.
About 50 early childhood development practitioners, who reach more than 2
500 children, will benefit from this contribution because the money will be
used to train them through the Ntataise Lowveld Trust. Upon completion of
the training the practitioners will receive a national certificate which
will enable them to run their centres as small businesses. This programme
complements the ANC government’s resolve to train and employ 15 000
trainers per annum and strengthen support for crèches and preschools in
rural villages and urban centres, and it should be emulated in other areas.

The ANC-led government is committed to introducing a sustainable early
childhood education system that spans both the public and private sectors
and gives children a head start in numeracy and literacy. I thank you.

  INVESTIGATION INTO ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION IN RELATION TO THE ARMS DEAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J C PRETORIUS (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, President Zuma said on
numerous occasions that the government is committed to clean administration
and zero tolerance for corruption. It is therefore a huge irony that
allegations of corruption in relation to the arms procurement deal,
spanning more than ten years, have never been fully investigated.
The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, at the time did its
utmost but achieved very little, mainly as a result of government
resistance to any attempt to get to the truth. The only investigation was a
superficial joint investigation by the Public Protector, the Auditor-
General and the National Prosecuting Authority in 2001.

Former ANC and Scopa member Andrew Feinstein in his book After the Party
said of this report, and I quote:

  It was a major disappointment. It was contradictory and avoided the key
  issues. In essence, the report asked as many questions as it answered. As
  far as the ANC and government were concerned, the matter was at an end.

Madam Deputy Speaker, reading the history of the arms deal, one is struck
by the constant actions of the Mbeki government to frustrate any attempt to
get to the bottom of what transpired. In fact, every trick in the book has
been used to avoid a full inquiry.

Since the 2001 investigation important new evidence has emerged, and Scopa
will soon consider this evidence. The DA calls on the ANC to afford its
members on Scopa all the opportunity and support to consider the new
evidence objectively. The Third Parliament has failed to get to the truth
in this matter – let us in no way stand in the way of the Fourth Parliament
to close this unfortunate chapter in the short history of our democracy.
[Applause.]

                  CONTINUATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMMES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G OLIPHANT (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the ANC welcomes
the announcement by President Zuma to commit government to further partner
with the private sector in order to deliver faster and smarter services to
our people. President Zuma said the recent World Cup did not mark the end
of South Africa’s infrastructure programme; rather a massive build-up
programme in energy, telecommunications and water infrastructure was under
way.

The recent World Cup has taught us to implement new ways of doing things.
The ANC-led government will therefore work with the construction industry
to ensure that the state meets some of the country’s infrastructure
development needs by 2013. Working in partnership will ensure that we
achieve our objectives.

The country’s infrastructure programme has seen an initial investment of
R420 billion since 2005. The ANC therefore welcomes President Zuma’s
pronouncement that the next phase of growth in infrastructure investment
must shorten the distances people travel and reduce the cost of
transportation. Transport must bring services and economic opportunities
closer to our people.

The infrastructure development programme must also benefit our broad-based
black economic empowerment programme. This commitment is part of the ANC-
led government’s resolve to accelerate and expand its investment in public
infrastructure. This includes expanding and improving the rail networks,
public transport and broad operations in housing, dams and construction.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

                  CONTINUATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAMMES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Deputy Speaker, I welcome the statement
by hon Oliphant who has just given his statement about the importance that
government attaches to continuing our major infrastructure spend. In some
quarters it is said that the infrastructure spend has ended because the
2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup is over. It is true that the hosting of the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup provided us with an opportunity to fast-track many
infrastructure programmes. This fast-tracking of infrastructure spend was
really very important for South Africa at the time that we were hit by the
global economic crisis. It was our key stimulus package and enabled us to
weather the crisis relatively well as a country, but spending continues.

There are cases where we now need to slow down on construction and sweat
the assets that we have built. This particularly applies to the wonderful
airports that we have either refurbished or built new in our country. I
think we now have enough airports, and we need now to maximise the use of
those assets in a number of other areas, obviously with the energy build
and in terms of communication and water infrastructure. However, I would
like to talk particularly about transport.

The major infrastructure spend on transport continues, particularly on
public transport. The Gautrain is not yet complete and the major second leg
between Johannesburg and Pretoria will be completed next year. This
financial year R3,9 billion is going to the Public Transport Infrastructure
and Systems Grant to 12 key municipalities, 9 of the host cities but others
as well. I should add that it included a substantial sum that is going, for
instance, to the City of Cape Town for public transport infrastructure in
the spirit of co-operative governance. We want to see good public transport
regardless of who, politically, is in the administration.

We are also looking forward to a major spend on recapitalisation, in
freight rail, in terms of rolling stock and signalling equipment, and in
Metrorail.
So, in short, one would like to firmly endorse the spirit of hon Oliphant’s
statement, namely that government is deeply committed, along with the ANC,
to sustaining this huge infrastructure spend. Thank you.

  INCREASE IN PURCHASES FROM HISTORICALLY DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS BY CITY
                                OF CAPE TOWN

  INVESTIGATION INTO ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION IN RELATION TO THE ARMS DEAL

 Graduation of South African Medical Doctors THROUGH COLLABORATION with cUBA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias Pakolo): Deputy
Speaker, the ANC government is a responsible government that will not treat
one province differently from all others. If there are certain black
economic empowerment quotas that seek to disempower the Western Cape
province, as opposed to other provinces, I think the administration in the
Western Cape needs to approach the new board that the President has
appointed last year. I think even the Department of Trade and Industry is
prepared to take any other measures that might be suggested that would seek
to address challenges met, as and when we progress with governance.

The second issue is on the special defence package that for some strange
reason certain people in the country refer to as the “Arms Deal”; those are
the special defence packages. I remember from the time that I served on the
Portfolio Committee on Defence and as a member of the Standing Committee on
Public Accounts, Scopa, that we had made a request for the DA to come
forward with information. If there is enough evidence for the reopening of
that issue, they should provide it. A deterrent failed to provide any
information except for causing the making stupid statements here in the
House. [Interjections.] Let’s have information to allow government to
investigate.

In relation to the statement on Cuba, I think the ANC has established
relations with the Cuban government which the DA does not like very much.
They must join us to congratulate those doctors who have just graduated
from the Cuban collaboration programme. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                            NATIONAL SCIENCE WEEK

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, we certainly want
to endorse our support for the wonderful initiative by the Department of
Science and Technology in relation to the National Science Week. We have
had the benefit of sharing and launching the National Science Week with the
MEC for Education in the Northern Cape province.

Deputy Speaker, this initiative is extremely important, given the
importance of science in changing the quality of the lives of our people.
For example, in the context of the launch of the Science Week in the
Northern Cape, they were able to demonstrate the importance of science and
technology with regard to the SALT initiative, the SA Large Telescope, as
well as the Square Kilometre Array, SKA, where we are bidding for a global
first in terms of technology.

What this initiative has also done in the context of the Northern Cape and
other provinces is elevate the importance of astronomy and the huge
opportunities that present themselves to the people.

During the National Science Week, the importance of science in agriculture,
science and ICT, and science in civil and mechanical engineering is
stressed. These careers basically are introduced to learners who visit the
sites. So we would certainly want to thank the Department of Science and
Technology for the collaboration and say that this is one amongst many
other initiatives were we work collaboratively. For example, the
mathematics and science olympiads are another example of how, through a
collaborative exercise, we are able to ensure that the participation of
black learners in terms of these initiatives are increased quite
dramatically. Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

                   EMPOWERMENT OF AUXILIARY SOCIAL WORKERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Madam Deputy
Speaker, I just want to emphasise the point that has been made around the
One Goal campaign, and that is that the call which has been made by the
President needs to be supported. I think this House, all South Africans and
all nations of the world must also support education through this
particular campaign. This shows that the ANC-led government is serious by
ensuring that our children access education in that regard.

Lastly, I also want to comment on the statement made by the hon Malgas.
Indeed, the ANC-led government is serious about ensuring that services
reach our people, and we need to congratulate the Department of Social
Development in this regard for ensuring that more than 400 social auxiliary
workers report on duty and are fully trained to enhance the work that is
done by social workers. Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF AGREEMENT ON MUTUAL ACCEPTANCE OF
             OENOLOGICAL PRACTICES BY THE WORLD WINE TRADE GROUP

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF AGREEMENT ON REQUIREMENTS FOR WINE
                   LABELLING OF THE WORLD WINE TRADE GROUP

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, members, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, on 20
July 2010 the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
adopted the two agreements, namely the Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of
Oenological Practices and the Agreement on the Requirements for Wine
Labelling.

These are agreements governed by an informal World Wine Trade Group, WWTG,
of which South Africa is a member. Among others, the WWTG promotes trading,
reduces barriers in wine trade and allows sharing of information and
collaboration in trade and production. The World Wine Trade Group is
represented by both governments and industry.

At the centre of this body are the two agreements, namely the Agreement on
Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices and the Agreement on the
Requirements for Wine Labelling. All members have implemented the Mutual
Acceptance Agreement except for South Africa and Georgia, but today this
Parliament shall make way for our government to be a full participant of
this prestigious body. Also, the labelling agreement shall see us
benefiting from such agreements.

The benefits thereof are the simplification of sport and logistics and the
certainty as required by the WWTG. We look forward to meaningful changes in
the South African contribution to the production of wine, where South
Africa is currently at number eight, and also as an exporter of wine, where
South Africa is ranked at number 10 worldwide. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be approved.

Motion agreed to.

Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the World Wine
Trade Group accordingly approved.

Agreement on Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group
accordingly approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND
 TRAINING — OVERSIGHT VISIT TO UNIVERSITY OF ZULULAND, DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER
 EDUCATION AND TRAINING, TSHWANE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY AND UNIVERSITY OF
                               THE FREE STATE

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Visit to University of Zululand, Department of Higher
Education and Training, Tshwane University of Technology and University of
the Free State accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR - OVERSIGHT VISIT
              TO THE EASTERN CAPE (EAST LONDON), 9-10 MAY 2010

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Visit to the Eastern Cape (East London), 9-10 May 2010
accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
   OVERSIGHT VISITS TO RUSTENBURG, KUTAMA SINTHUMULE, DURBAN WESTVILLE AND
               EBONGWENI CORRECTIONAL CENTRES, 17-20 MAY 2010

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Visits to Rustenburg, Kutama Sinthumule, Durban
Westville and Ebongweni Correctional Centres, 17-20 May 2010, accordingly
adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM AND PORTFOLIO
     COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS - JOINT OVERSIGHT VISIT TO PORTS OF ENTRY

Mr D M GUMEDE: Chairperson, hon members and esteemed ladies and gentlemen,
the overall purpose of the visit was to check the state of readiness of
ports of entry for the 2010 Fifa World Cup and beyond. We checked the
systems as well as basic facilities such as access, signage, the capacity
to hold high volumes of tourists and travellers, the state of security
arrangements, safety of passenger belongings, tourism promotion and the
functioning of co-ordinating structures, amongst others.

We went to the O R Tambo and Cape Town International Airports, Beitbridge
in Limpopo, Caledonspoort in the Free State, Peka Bridge in the Free State,
Maseru Bridge in the Free State and Ficksburg in the same province. All of
these ports seemed largely ready, although there were many challenges.
Beyond 2010 we recommended that the Department of Home Affairs, in
conjunction with other departments like Public Works, should urgently
attend to the personnel and accommodation needs at the border posts. The
Border Control Operational Co-ordinating Committee, BCOCC, should attend to
issues of the safety of travellers at the airports and land ports. The
Department of Tourism should be represented at all levels at the ports of
entry and within the BCOCC. One-stop borders should be considered in all
ports of entry as soon as possible. The South African National Defence
Force should be deployed at the border line to secure the country. Ports of
entry which do not have scanners should all be provided with such.

The issue of security at Beitbridge and Maseru Bridge should be attended to
as a matter of urgency. More major ports of entry should be considered
between South Africa and Zimbabwe to ease congestion at Beitbridge.
Beitbridge should have designated lanes for pedestrians and vehicles. The
Department of Public Works, through its repair and maintenance programme,
should ensure that Beitbridge and Maseru Bridge are upgraded. We are,
however, proud to have delivered the greatest event on earth ever through
our 2010 performance.

Lastly, I would like to thank the co-chairperson, who is the chairperson of
Home Affairs, and his team, as well as our team members for the marvellous
co-operation amongst us all, including members of the opposition parties. I
propose that we adopt this report. Thank you.

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Joint Oversight Visit to Ports of Entry accordingly adopted.
    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE MEMBERS’ LEGISLATIVE
  PROPOSALS AND SPECIAL PETITIONS - LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL TO AMEND THE SOUTH
                         AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE ACT

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE MEMBERS’ LEGISLATIVE
     PROPOSALS AND SPECIAL PETITIONS - LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL TO AMEND THE
                      COMMISSION ON GENDER EQUALITY ACT

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE MEMBERS’ LEGISLATIVE
  PROPOSALS AND SPECIAL PETITIONS - LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL TO AMEND THE HUMAN
                            RIGHTS COMMISSION ACT

Mr S G THOBEJANE: Chairperson, the Committee on Private Members’
Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions would like to recommend to the
House not to give permission for the continuation of the proposed
legislation to the hon members. Reasons include that, after consultations
with all the stakeholders, we realised that the said proposed legislative
amendments would seem to be unconstitutional because they would cause this
Parliament to create a law that would govern the international spheres,
something for which we don’t have the competency as this particular House.

Therefore, in the light of that, we then decided that the amendments
towards the Human Rights Commission should not be granted. We are
recommending that this report be adopted by the House. I thank you.

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Declaration of vote:

Mr P J C PRETORIUS: Chairperson, we would naturally have preferred to see
these proposals proceed to the next stage. However, our opposition relates
more to the process followed, or the process required to be followed by the
Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals.

Without arguing whether it is constitutional or not to bar a member from
introducing a Bill, we believe the Rules in their present form unjustly
restrict members from submitting legislation. The practice has developed
that the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special
Petitions is seen as a hurdle rather than a clearing house for proposals,
and this is not necessarily through any fault of the committee itself. We
believe the Rules do not adequately guide the committee.

What happens in practice is that detailed discussions on legislation take
place. These discussions are often technical and specialised and often
outside the field of expertise of members of that committee. Such
discussions should take place in the portfolio committee.

Clear guidelines in the Rules to demarcate the committee’s mandate are
lacking. I would suggest the committee’s task as a screening mechanism or
clearing house should be limited to, inter alia, considerations such as: Is
the proposal frivolous in nature? Is it clearly in conflict with existing
law? Is it clearly unconstitutional? Will it involve excessive costs? Can
it be implemented?

A further factor in respect of our opposition to these three reports is
that we are not convinced that the required consultation between the
Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions
and the relevant portfolio committees has taken place as envisaged in terms
of Rule 235(2). While this Rule invites members of the portfolio committee
to sit in on a meeting of the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
Proposals, only one or two ultimately attended, and that cannot be regarded
as consultation. There should have been formal communication between the
two committees.

Chair, I submit that, if we proceed, we may be in conflict with our own
Rules. For these reasons and the reasons mentioned above, we will oppose
the Orders. Thank you.

Question put: That the reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Report on Legislative Proposal to amend the South African Police Service
Act, No 68 of 1995, accordingly adopted.

Report on Legislative Proposal to amend the Commission on Gender Equality
Act, No 39 of 1996, accordingly adopted.

Report on Legislative Proposal to amend the Human Rights Commission Act, No
54 of 1994 accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 15:59.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
        Deposits for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010.



