---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 04 June 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-06-04
---

FRIDAY, 4 JUNE 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 09:01.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, please
bear with me. I’ve got flu, so I might not come across clearly.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Hon Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council –


     1) notes that Minister Theuns Botha noted the long queues of patients
        at clinics and mostly early in the morning under unsafe and
        difficult circumstances;

     2) notes that Minister Botha therefore undertook immediate measures to
        address the safety concerns of patients at these clinics;


     3) further notes that he will explore the appointment system for
        regular patients to make reservations earlier, which is already
        being piloted at certain provincial clinics;

     4) acknowledges that he will also expand the province’s Chronic
        Dispensing Unit, which provides pre-packed chronic medication, to
        see if these packages can be delivered to people at home;

     5) believes that he is also in discussion with security firms to
        render services of safety to our people and many other plans of
        services; and


     6) supports the honourable Minister Botha in his endeavours to give a
        better service to our people in the health sector.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Tau, do you have a
problem?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chair, I was just asking aloud which
Minister he was referring to, because we don’t have a Minister Botha.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, thanks. May I
then allow the hon Ntwanambi to do the correction?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, in fact, I want to put an
amendment in that Theuns Botha is a member of the executive council,
because according to the country’s Constitution, there is only one
government and only one Minister. I think I’m following up on what the hon
Tau was saying - that’s the Constitution. Chair, I don’t think that I’m out
of order. The Constitution of this country is above any provincial
constitution.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chair, on a point of order: the Constitution of this
country is above all laws, but this Constitution also determines that
provincial governments can have their own constitution. The constitution of
the Western Cape says that those who are heads of government departments
are ministers. So, please go and read all the constitutions.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I make a proposal,
hon members. Can we leave this for now, and I will come back to you before
the end of the day with the correct answer.

Hon member, I hope you are not raising your hand to discuss the same thing
because I have just made a ruling.

Mr A G MATILA: Madam Chair, I think we need to clarify one thing. If the DA
wants to create a federal state, it will not be in this country. That’s
what needs to be clarified.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, I have made
a ruling. May we proceed? [Interjections.] Hon members, let’s not waste
time. Are there further notices of motion?

Mr Z MLENZANA: Hon Chairperson and hon members, I give notice that on the
next sitting day of the Council I shall move:

    That the Council –


      1) notes with shock that more than 5 300 firearms went missing from
         police stations and offices around the country over the past two
         years;

      2) further notes with disbelief that a total of 457 of the firearms
         that disappeared over the two-year period went missing from the
         police head office in Pretoria;


      3) therefore calls on government to take decisive action against those
         in charge, as the loss of even one single firearm from a police
         station is one too many; and


      4) in addition calls for the Minister to resign if he is unable to put
         an immediate end to the loss of firearms from any police station.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! [Interjections.]

Mr Z MLENZANA: I move, I move, I move, Deputy Chairperson. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order, members! Please!

Mr Z MLENZANA: There is one Cope. There is one Cope. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order, members! Order!

                    COURT CASE CONCERNING COPE LEADERSHIP

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D D GAMEDE: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –


      1) notes that one faction leader of Cope, things fall apart, has gone
         to court to stop another faction from being elected and that Cope
         has now become Congress of the Courts; and


      2) therefore moves that both factions, or one of them, come back home
         to the ANC, as this has already started to happen in Gauteng and
         other provinces.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is there any objection
to the motion? Okay. [Interjections.]

Can we have one person talking at a time? Otherwise, we will end up with a
mess and will not make any progress here. There was an objection. In light
of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without
notice will now become a notice of motion.

                WELCOMING OF SOCCER TEAMS AND SUPPORT GROUPS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1) wishes to welcome all participating teams and support groups to the
         Fifa World Cup in South Africa;

      2) welcomes international soccer fans and tourists to South Africa, as
         well as all African supporters;

      3) notes that South Africa is now the soccer Mecca of the moment and a
         tourist Mecca between matches; and

      4) calls on all South Africans to treat all international tourists
         with typical South African hospitality and help build on the Fifa
         World Cup legacy promoting tourism, international relations and
         economic investment in South Africa.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                            WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Deputy Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council —


      1) notes that tomorrow, 5 June 2010, marks World Environment Day,
         which is a day aimed at stimulating worldwide awareness of the
         environment and encouraging political attention and action on the
         environment;

      2) further notes that the theme for this year is “Many Species, One
         Planet, One Future”, which echoes the urgent call to conserve the
         diversity of life on our planet; and

      3) takes this opportunity to express its support to the United Nations
         and calls on the global community and the people of South Africa to
         heed this important call of protecting and preserving our natural
         resources and environment.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                      CONGRATULATIONS TO AARON MOKOENA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr W F FABER: Madam Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council —

      1) notes that Aaron Mokoena received his 100th cap playing for Bafana
         Bafana on Monday night;

      2) further notes that the coach, Carlos Alberto Perreira, only had
         praise for Aaron Mokoena and described him as a special player;

      3) also notes that Carlos Alberto Perreira also said that Mokoena’s
         impeccable record tells of a player that Bafana Bafana cannot do
         without; and

      4) congratulates Mokoena and hopes that good luck and wisdom be
         granted to him, the team and the whole management and encourages
         them all to do us proud.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       WORLD CUP GIVES ECONOMIC INJECTION INTO SOUTH AFRICA’S ECONOMY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council —

      1) notes that, while driving through the roads of Cape Town and going
         to the shops and shopping centres, one can see that hundreds of
         Bafana Bafana jerseys, flags and other merchandise are available to
         people to buy;

      2) also notes that the Cape Argus of 31 May 2010 reported that Adidas
         said that more merchandise had already been sold in South Africa
         than in the World Cup in Germany;

      3) believes that this economic injection into shops, small traders and
         informal traders is welcomed and that much more money will be
         injected into the economy nearer to 11 June 2010 and thereafter;
         and

      4) acknowledges that we as South Africans are blessed to have the 2010
         Fifa World Cup here and thanks everybody who played a role in
         giving this opportunity to South Africa.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                      BRUTAL SLAYING OF THREE BROTHERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T E CHAANE: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes the brutal slaying of three brothers, Xolisani Memela,
         Mzothiswa Memela and their younger brother Zi-khaliphele Memela,
         who were shot and killed by the police on suspicion of being
         criminals;

      2) further notes that the police claimed that they had been attacked
         by the deceased and had retaliated in self-defence;

      3) acknowledges that the case is being investigated by the Independent
         Complaints Directorate, ICD; and
      4) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
         this incident and calls on the National Police Commissioner General
         Bheki Cele and the ICD to ensure that the case is prioritised.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of this House as follows ... [Interjections.] Oh, this is
supposed to be a motion without notice. Sorry, I was making a mistake.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, if you are
still thinking about what will happen next week, could you take your seat.

Mr D V BLOEM: No, no, no, Madam. This is a motion without notice.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Mlenzana, there is
a microphone. Follow the procedures, please. Let’s not fight over trivial
matters. Respect has to be kept in this Chamber. Continue, hon Bloem.

                 ZWELENZIMA VAVI’S STAND AGAINST CORRUPTION
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with approval that Zwelinzima Vavi is taking a strong and
         determined stand against corruption in government;


      2) further notes that Vavi, on behalf of labour, is correctly asking
         the President to investigate extravagant and inappropriate
         expenditure and incorrect submission on the part of Ministers in
         Cabinet;


      3) therefore calls on the ANC to receive such criticism in the spirit
         in which it is offered, without turning on the messenger; and


      4) supports labour in its drive to achieve ethical, accountable and
         transparent conduct on the part of those entrusted with looking
         after the needs of South Africa rather than their own needs.


Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chairperson, we want to object because we want him to
start with his deputy president.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion.

I can only take one more motion without notice. And, according to the list,
I will take the hon Maine.

          REMOVAL OF CONTROVERSIAL OPEN-AIR TOILETS IN KHAYELITSHA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M C MAINE: Deputy Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


    1) notes that the City of Cape Town has completely removed the
       controversial open-air toilets in Makhaza, Khayelitsha;

      2) further notes that –

          a) the residents who were made to use the topless toilets
             covering themselves with blankets rejected them because they
             wanted the City of Cape Town to provide them with concrete
             enclosures because zinc structures often blew away in the
             wind; and


          b) in response to the residents’ discontent about the zinc
             toilets and the subsequent removal of the topless toilets, the
             Mayor of Cape Town Mr Dan Plato uttered a reckless statement
             inciting violence when he called on them to toyi-toyi and burn
             tyres; and


    3) takes this opportunity to condemn with utter disgust the racially
       motivated attack on the dignity of the community by the DA-led City
       of Cape Town and the reckless statement issued by Mayor Dan Plato.

Mr T D HARRIS: Deputy Chair, I have a point of order. Rule 47 states that
no member, while addressing the Council, may reflect upon any decision of
the Council taken in the same annual session. I believe that motion is
substantively similar to another motion that was raised. It was objected
to, but it did appear on the Order Paper below the line. Therefore, that
motion should be ruled out of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I will answer that, hon
Harris. May I be given the pleasure to answer it later? Thank you. May we
proceed? We will now come to the motion as printed on the Order Paper.

                 RATIFICATION OF DECISION OF RULES COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thanks, Deputy Chair. I thought you’d given
me half a minute.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): No, motion first. I was
left with two minutes and those were consumed by the hon member.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I move the motion ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): No, on the Order ...
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, there should be one presiding officer
in the House. Nowhere in the Rules of the NCOP does it say that a member
can ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson! Please be
exemplary. Please could you be exemplary.

Proceed, hon member.

Hon Groenewald? [Interjections.] Sorry, sorry, sorry. [Laughter.] Hon
Sinclair, could you repeat what you have just said now for everybody to
know? Then I will take a decision.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Yes, Chairperson. Firstly, I want to say that it doesn’t
mean if you are white that your surname is Groenewald. Secondly, I said:
“One Chairperson and one Chief Whip.” That is what I said.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Do me a favour: I have
just asked a senior member of this Chamber to be exemplary. From now on I
am therefore not going to accept any disobedience from anybody here.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion as printed in
my name on the Order Paper as follows:

  That the Council ratifies the decision of the Rules Committee to
  substitute Rules 14A and 14B with the newly adopted Rules 14A and 14B
  respectively.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


 YOUTH DAY: YOUNG PEOPLE AT THE FOREFRONT OF UNITING OUR PEOPLE IN THE QUEST
                 TO DISMANTLE ALL APARTHEID SOCIAL RELATIONS


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Deputy Chair, hon members, I think one
is quite privileged to be participating in a debate of this nature. This is
a very important debate because without such a debate we, as Members of
Parliament, would be negating, in fact, our own fundamental responsibility
of shaping the future of this country. Today’s debate is based on a very
important theme that reads: Youth Day: Young people at the forefront of
uniting our people in the quest to dismantle all apartheid social
relations.

Of course, in dealing with this, it would be important for us to reflect on
what Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela said when he was reflecting on the
Reconstruction and Development Programme of the country and its
implications on young people, and I quote: “The youth of our country are
valued possession of the nation. Without them, there can be no future.”

I think this particular quotation is also premised on a view expressed by
the former president of the ANC, Comrade Oliver Tambo. When Comrade Oliver
Tambo was making a point on the role of young people in shaping the future,
he expressed the notion that a country that did not take care of its young
people was a country with no future.

I think these are profound statements that, on their own, reflect that
young people are central to the development of their country. At any point,
they are located at a strategic point of directing the future of that
particular country. Therefore, when one looks at the theme, which speaks
about the dismantling of apartheid social relations, it also means that as
we participate in this debate today, we need to ask ourselves a fundamental
question, and that is: What are these social relations that we as a country
and its young people need to dismantle in moving forward and shaping a new
South Africa?

For obvious reasons, we need to look back and say that for us to be under
these constructed social relations, there is a particular origin. That
origin, which leaves us with these constructed social relations, is based
on a particular philosophy - the philosophy of H F Verwoerd. This is
because H F Verwoerd, in advancing his philosophy of apartheid, was to say
that at the centre of it there was no need to teach a black child
mathematics because there was no point, as that child would never be able
to use that particular tool.

That philosophy then laid the basis to construct a particular society. It
is through that philosophy that you then had young people being dislodged
from the mainstream of development. Without science and technical
knowledge, there was no way that young Africans in particular, and blacks
in general, would be able to participate in the development of their own
country.

In further deepening that particular philosophical posture, Verwoerd
declared that one way of further constraining these young people was to
ensure that they subject them to a particular line of thinking, which is
that of seeing themselves as subjected to white people. Verwoerd’s
philosophy of apartheid also subjected young people to a thinking that
stipulated that for them to survive, they needed to see a white person as a
superior person within society. To accomplish this, Verwoerd introduced
what we call language barriers through the introduction of Afrikaans in
schools for black people in general and Africans in particular.

This led to the resistance of 1976, when young people said, “No way, ours
is not about these social relations as constructed by the philosophy of
Verwoerd. Ours is about a country that is united, nonsexist, democratic and
takes into account the values of all those who live in it. Therefore we
shall resist the kind of systems that are being put in place to subject
ourselves to the kind of situation that we are put into.”

It is through these relations and the advancement of this particular
philosophy that even young people in the rural areas were subjected to old
laws that were brought into place even before they were born. Those laws
defined the rural areas as labour reservoirs for the mines and farmers,
with those who laboured not having any rights. This meant that young people
who were African, young people who were defined as blacks in South Africa,
had no opportunities at all. As a result of the lack of opportunities, lack
of skills, lack of knowledge and lack of empowerment they were then unable
to participate in the construction of the South Africa they lived in.

Therefore, it is important for me to say this because the theme will then
give rise to the questions: What is it that we need to do in order to
dismantle these social relations? What is it that we need to undo that was
done by the philosophy that was introduced to the African people at that
particular point?

Of course, there is a response that has been provided by the democratic
breakthrough of 1994, which, in the main, placed young people at the centre
of development. That response placed young people at the centre of the
reconstruction of our country, and at the centre of uniting this country.
Furthermore, it placed young people at the centre of ensuring that in
whatever way we democratise the country, at the centre of that process must
be the beneficiation of anything for the young people and how they should
be able to do those things. We can only find that in the Reconstruction and
Development Programme, as adopted by the government of South Africa after
1994.

That is why there is the expression that says “the youth of our country is
the valued possession of the nation. Without them, there can be no future.”
It is on the basis of this that programmes developed for the benefit of
young people over the past 16 years have seen so much progress, development
and change in the lives of young people in this country.

We have, of course, also seen government coming forth in 2009 and asking
how to begin to further place young people at the centre of development. We
have also seen, in terms of the five priorities that government has put in
place, that one of the key pillars that informed the government’s programme
was education. With regard to education, we saw government splitting the
former Department of Education into the Department of Basic Education and
the Department of Higher Education and Training.

At the heart of that was the aim to dismantle what Verwoerd did and ensure
that we reconstruct our country and the education system to respond to the
needs of our young people. Through Verwoerd’s philosophy, we could not have
had young people emerging as artisans. We could not have young people
emerging as doctors. We could not see blacks in general and Africans in
particular coming out as engineers and so forth. So the reconfiguration of
the former Department of Education is in response to that particular
philosophy. The aim is to dismantle it in order to ensure that our young
people are then channelled towards skills are geared to ensure that they
are empowered when it comes to issues related to science and technology.

Government has committed itself and money that has been set aside to
empowering, reconstructing and strengthening the capacity of further
education and training, FET, colleges. It is through these that we will be
able to then regenerate the skills of young people for them to acquire
artisan skills and so forth. This will enable young people to be self-
employed and to get into the mainstream of the economy and become
employable.

The other thing that we have talked about in terms of the five pillars is
the issue of decent jobs. If one looks at the question of decent jobs and
how these decent or indecent jobs have impacted on young people, one has to
ask oneself the following question: Who are the people that are seriously
affected by the labour brokers? It is the young people, because it is these
people who are desperate and who want to get employment and so forth.
Through the labour brokers they then get abused, enslaved and their pride
taken away.

As a result, the question about this pillar of the creation of decent jobs
and the call to revisit the constructiveness of labour brokerage is in
response to and in protection of the interests of young people.
Furthermore, it is also an instrument of dismantling the social relations
wherein Africans in particular and blacks in general were always seen as
labour providers and not as job creators and so forth.

One other pillar, which one cannot leave the podium without referring to,
is the role of young people in terms of health. Young people today are at
the forefront. We have seen the campaigns and the programmes that have been
developed by the National Youth Development Agency around healthy
lifestyles. It is these young people who understand better what a healthy
body means in relation to job creation, the development of an economy, the
sustenance of a society, and the construction and development of that
particular society.

Part of the issues that young people in this country are geared towards,
informed by this particular pillar, is the mobilisation of our people
around healthy lifestyles. This is due to the fact that they are at the
receiving end when it comes to issues relating to unhealthy lifestyles.

Deputy Chair, I can see that you are going to stop me. But let me just
state that it is these young people who have been at the centre of the
reconstruction and development of this country. The readmission of South
Africa into world sports is due to the contributions of young people. Today
we are united as a nation. We are enthusiastic and we are looking forward
with great anticipation to being World Cup winners. We could not have done
that if it were not for the young people of this particular country. As we
speak today, the final 23 who make up the World Cup squad are, in actual
fact, young people of this particular country, and they are going to make
us proud. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T D HARRIS: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, the week after next, on
Youth Day, we will remember the hundreds of students who died on June 16,
1976, in the anti-apartheid cause and many others. We owe them a debt of
gratitude that a debate like this is now possible in a free and democratic
South Africa. [Interjections.]

But once we have paused to remember, we must move on to debate the issues
facing young South Africans today.

Now, Mr Tau’s very eloquent important history lesson has comprehensively
explained the starting point for many of the problems that we face as a
country. It was apartheid. But every member of this House agrees on that.
It is impossible therefore for me to debate something we all agree on.
I could debate this government’s failures to deal with those problems in
the past 16 years, but I am not going to do that. Instead, I want to look
at the solutions going forward, specifically how the ANC’s alliance
partners are standing in the way of those solutions.

I don’t think that anybody would disagree that every other issue raised in
this House today must pale in insignificance in the face of the fact that
3,1 million young South Africans are walking our streets, unsuccessfully
trying to find work. Sixteen years later, the most lasting effect of
apartheid social relations is seen in youth unemployment.

Two out of every five people under the age of 34 are unemployed. All in
all, 3,1 million youth are without work, which is 73% of the total number
of unemployed people in our country. The job crisis in South Africa is a
crisis of the youth, not labour brokers, Mr Tau - because 3,1 million young
people dream of getting a job through a labour broker, but they cannot find
one at all.

It doesn’t have to be like this, and you will not be surprised to hear that
the DA has a policy proposal that will help to create hundreds of thousands
of jobs for South Africans. We call this policy a “wage subsidy”.

You may be surprised to hear, Deputy Chairperson, that the ANC government
agrees with this policy proposal. In this year’s state of the nation
address, President Zuma announced that his government would be introducing
it.

Then, in the Budget Speech, Pravin Gordhan gave more details on the policy.
He predicted that it would create half a million new jobs in three years.
He said that a discussion document setting out further details of what he
called a “youth wage subsidy” would be tabled at the end of March. The DA,
the economists, the academics and civil society enthusiastically welcomed
this new openness to fresh ideas to tackle youth unemployment, because a
youth wage subsidy won’t result in lower wages and provides formal and
regulated employment. Even South Africa’s second biggest trade union
federation, Fedusa, welcomed it, saying: As Fedusa, we were very impressed
with the proposed wage subsidy. We think that’s a progressive initiative by
government.

Why then, if we have a new policy that will help fight youth unemployment
that government, the opposition, civil society and Fedusa agree on, has
Treasury still not published the document as they said they were going to
two months ago?

The unfortunate answer is: because the ANC government tripartite alliance
partners are involved in a power struggle for control of economic policy
and political influence. They oppose the wage subsidy simply because it
does not come from the Minister that is from their side of the Cabinet.

Their opposition is political, because they simply reject the idea out of
hand by saying they have always objected to the wage subsidy. They are not
even willing to engage it on its merits or drawbacks.

So, Deputy Chairperson, the National Treasury’s Youth Wage Subsidy Policy
is now the victim of a fight for political influence between Cosatu and
their leftist Ministers, with the ANC and their centrist Ministers. And
while they fight, 3,1 million young South Africans remain unemployed. Based
on the Finance Minister’s projections, the implementation of a youth wage
subsidy would create around 17 000 new jobs per month. Every week it is
delayed, it costs us 4 000 job opportunities.

Ninety years ago, William Butler Yeats wrote:


  Turning and turning in the widening gyre
  The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
  Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold.

The alliance partners cannot ask 3 million young South Africans to wait
while they squabble - the centre cannot hold. They cannot hold up policies
that will create jobs for the youth. The pressure will become too much. If
Cosatu continues to block the youth wage subsidy, the centre cannot hold.

Earlier this week, my colleague Lindiwe Mazibuko and I wrote to the
President asking him to intervene in this policy deadlock. While we
sincerely hope he does, we doubt he will because he seems compromised by
the fact that Cosatu helped him reach the Presidency. [Interjections.]

Further on in the same poem I quoted earlier, Yeats wrote:

  The best lack all conviction, while the worst
  Are full of passionate intensity.

President Zuma cannot allow Cosatu’s passionate intensity to continue to
undermine Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan’s conviction to implement this
progressive policy. If he does, the centre will surely not hold, and the
alliance will split.

However, Deputy Chairperson, the day it does will be a happy day for
unemployed South Africans. On that day, the ANC will be free to implement
universally accepted policies, such as the youth wage subsidies that will
help to create thousands of jobs for young South Africans. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M C MAINE: Chair, before I start with what I want to speak about, I want
to respond to some of the issues raised by the hon Harris. It is a myth
that Cosatu helped the President of the country to become the President,
because the ANC was elected by more than 10 million South Africans, and
Cosatu has only 2 million members.

So 60% of the South African population has confidence in the ANC, and it
can’t be true that the centre is not holding. Maybe the centre is not
holding in the Western Cape, because the premier is unable to give clear
figures as to how many millions were given to people whose contracts they
terminated before their actual timeframes ended.

Hon Harris has nothing to say, because this issue of the wage subsidy has
been adequately responded to by the Deputy President of the country in this
House, when he said it was work in progress. The document is with Cabinet,
because the Deputy President ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Harris, you’re very
quick to refer to the Rules. Could you just give the person at the podium
time, please. And if you want to say anything, could you go through the
correct channels. Do me a favour: Sit down and be attentive. Continue, hon
member.

Mr M C MAINE: Thank you, Chair. Lastly, it is again a myth to suggest and
to mislead the people of South Africa that the tripartite alliance is
engaged in squabbles. In the tripartite alliance we believe in engagement.
We are busy debating and engaging with each other, unlike in the DA, where
only the leader of the party can say what is going to happen. So, the
alliance engages. There are a lot of us with different ideologies in the
alliance. So it is not one person, as in the DA: Madam Helen Zille –
whatever she says goes. Now, in the ANC and the alliance, we engage.
[Interjections.]

Madam Chair and hon members, every year on 16 June South Africans celebrate
Youth Day. This year the theme for our Youth Day is “Young people at the
forefront of uniting our people in the quest to dismantle all apartheid
social relations”. Whereas June is an important month on the calendar of
our country, a day for the commemoration of the blood of young people lost
in the struggle against apartheid, whose blood glorifies the tree of
freedom we are enjoying today, it is also a day to celebrate the progress
made by the generations of young people who followed the 1976 generation:
their efforts and strides to build a united, nonracial and nonsexist South
Africa ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Just hold on. Hon
Mlenzana, do you have a point of order?

Mr Z MLENZANA: No.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): What is it?

Mr Z MLENZANA: ... [Inaudible.] ... if the hon member is ready to take a
question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Not now. Do me a
favour: Sit down. [Interjections.] Are you prepared to take a question, hon
member?

Mr M C MAINE: No, Chair. I want to finish my speech. I won’t take a
question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): That’s the response.
Continue, hon member.

Mr M C MAINE: ... their efforts and strides to build a united, nonracial
and nonsexist South Africa and dismantle all apartheid social relations.
Thus, I will confine myself to the post-1994 social relations and
programmes by young people to unite our people, which underpin the work by
the youth in various formations across the religious, political and
cultural spectrums. Foremost, it must be noted that understanding the
apartheid social structure and the current challenges facing the youth in
South Africa will give credence to the efforts that ordinary young South
Africans have taken to create a nonsexist, nonracial and democratic
society.

The situation was comprehensively explained by Dr Blade Nzimande during the
Jobs for Youth Summit, organised by the Young Communist League of SA, and I
quote:


  Ironically, the very problems facing our youth are exploited by other
  forces to create further problems and constraints. For instance, our
  youth today is a target of drugs, exploited by labour brokers, given
  false hopes and corrupted by tenderpreneurs and a target of decadent
  American values and cultural onslaught. Therefore sustained youth
  programmes by all youth formations are necessary to counter these
  problems. A key dimension of this is a sustained struggle to cultivate
  positive values among our young people: that it is good to be educated,
  service to one’s country and social solidarity, and to defeat ideas of
  dog eat dog.

We therefore support the National Youth Development Agency as a vehicle to
unite further the young people of our country, and we further call upon the
government to increase funding for this vehicle of youth development.

Following the recent racial outbursts and misunderstandings after the death
of Mr Eugene Terre’Blanche and the singing of particular revolutionary
songs, our country has taken positive steps, which have fostered social
cohesion and national unity such as the hosting of Super 14 rugby matches
in Soweto and the showing of support for Bafana Bafana by all our people,
especially the youth.

Furthermore, one noteworthy development was a constructive meeting of the
ANC and FF Plus held three weeks ago, at which it was agreed that there
would be a follow-up meeting to take forward matters that were raised by
the FF Plus.

The FF Plus raised the following issues: name changes in the country, use
of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction in our education system, safety and
security of farmers, issues of amnesty, self-determination, poverty and
affirmative action. It is against this background that we urge all young
people across the political spectrum to engage in debates inside their
political organisations and youth organisations alike to give impetus to
these debates about the aforementioned issues.

However, we should also emphasise that the concepts of nonracialism, social
cohesion and nation-building should not take precedence over the genuine
transformation in sport and recreation, in the economy of our country,
including in factors of representation, selection on merit and resource
allocation.

The Constitution of the Republic in its preamble persuades us, amongst
other things, to recognise the injustices of our past, heal the divisions
of the past and establish a society based on democratic values, social
justice and fundamental human rights.

In conclusion, the submission by the ANC to the World Conference Against
Racism held in August 2001 outlined the universal message and spirit with
which to welcome the world to our shores during Youth Month and in
celebrating 16 June as follows. The richness of the planet’s cultural
diversity is in itself the latent all-embracing spiritual force from which
we can create a world that is free of conflict and poverty, racism and
intolerance. Through the centuries we have witnessed disregard and contempt
for the inalienable dignity of human beings. We have witnessed barbaric
acts that have outraged the conscience of humankind, and we have witnessed
slavery, genocide, colonialism and war.

We have proclaimed that the advent of a world in which all human beings
enjoy fundamental human rights and freedoms is the highest desire for all.
I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Inkosi N B SHABALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Chairperson, hon members, one is
privileged to participate in today’s debate about our young people. To
understand the majority of our youth today, we need to understand the
context in which they are living.


The key features of our country can be summed up as follows: the
persistence of many features of apartheid; growing socioeconomic
inequality; mass poverty and unemployment; declining living standards; and
a devastating HIV and Aids pandemic - a pronounced feature of social
disintegration. Despite all the interventions by the democratic government,
young people bear the brunt of all these realities. This is the stuff of
the youth in crisis.


However, the youth in their organisations in the townships, in the villages
and on the farms of South Africa need to take advantage of the favourable
legislative and policy framework for participation in processes affecting
their needs and interests.


Organised youth should strive to participate in and influence every phase
of the process of consultation, planning, budgeting, managing, monitoring,
public feedback and review.

In order to know their rights, young people need to know the relevant
provisions of the Constitution and the duties that the different spheres of
government expect of them.

Local government, for instance, has a unique position in relation to local
communities. It is closer to the people and more accessible than other
spheres of government. Youth should identify a full range of specific
demands around all these duties and responsibilities of local government.
The National Youth Commission has stated that local government is most
strategically positioned to implement youth policy and youth work. The view
is that local municipalities’ youth development visions and policies can be
translated into services and facilities that meet the needs of the youth.

The dissolution of the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund, however, was not a surprise as it was a response to the failures of
these bodies to spearhead development.


The mammoth challenge facing the National Youth Development Agency is
whether it is capable of rising above the tripartite alliance politics in
order to restore ownership of the agency and youth development itself to
all young people, irrespective of political affiliation.

We are impressed that the NYDA has taken the initiative, together with the
Local Organising Committee, to facilitate training of 15 000 youth
volunteers. They are participating in road shows and targeting rural areas
in order to mobilise the youth to rally behind Bafana Bafana.

With the 2010 Fifa World Cup being here, there could not be a better time
for South Africa to show the world that sport does indeed inspire and unite
people. The NYDA, as one of the high-level institutions focusing on youth
development, needs to deepen democracy, encourage more inclusive policy-
making and, especially, increase more public engagement and empowerment of
young people.

Hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup provides an excellent opportunity for young
people in our country to gain skills and work experience in a wider range
of areas, such as foreign language interpreting, call centre operating,
tour guiding, marshalling and ushering, etc.


When the World Cup is over, that would be the time to intensify soccer
training, the building of local stadia and to have administrative help,
equipment and technical support for communities, so that kids can play the
game regardless of their family’s finances, gender, geography, ethnicity or
language. Funding will help improve public sports facilities across South
Africa, further boosting South African sport and helping to build better
and healthier communities.

Organised sport is being used throughout the world to maintain social
cohesion and facilitate peace. As South Africa has a population of more
than 9 million young people between the ages of 15 and 25, youth sport
represents one of the most dynamic mechanisms in society for
transformation, because organised sport can engage the youth of all races,
genders and classes. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M WILEY (Western Cape): Morning, Deputy Chairperson. Thank you very much
for the opportunity to be here today. ...“the task that we face is indeed a
challenging one. But the cost of failure — for this generation’s children
and the next — is simply too high to bear.” Those are the words of Graça
Machel, the wife of Nelson Mandela.

Children and young people below the age of 24, who make up 60% to 70% of
the population of most developing countries, represent the future
generation, with enormous potential to achieve sustainable development.
Youngsters especially – those between the ages of 15 to 24 - are able to
contribute materially, through special skills, and intellectually,
particularly with alternative viewpoints and innovative ideas.

The World Bank acknowledges, in its World Development Report of 2007, the
youth’s positive potential not only in initiating but also in implementing
positive social change, if they could only get involved through
participation.

However, society has to provide a supportive environment, sufficient
assistance and opportunities, first of all, by investing in the human
capital of these young people through adequate education, health,
employment and recreation possibilities. Only then are youngsters able to
become responsible adults and achieve their full potential to contribute to
society’s development and socioeconomic growth.

Yet the reality is that the youth are often perceived more negatively in
terms of social problems, with society being reluctant or incapable of
investing in the youth and/or involving them in the processes that directly
concern them. This results in “depriving society of their energy, dynamism
and innovative spirit”, and, through this disregard, turning the youth into
an uncontrollable conflict situation.

Therefore, in the World Youth Report of 2007, the United Nations states
that “engaging the youth fully in the region’s development is thus not a
matter of choice, but an imperative”. Nelson Mandela, a former President,
said as well that: “The experience of all peoples is that their freedom
remains fragile and their rights empty shells unless they bring real
improvements to the lives of ordinary people.” This quotation was taken
from an address in which he emphasised that ordinary people needed to be
given opportunities to bring about real improvements in their lives.

The youth of South Africa face many daunting challenges. Three million, as
we have already heard, are unemployed. In the Western Cape the youth are no
less challenged. We have an estimated 80 000 to 100 000 gangsters here in
the Western Cape. The high levels of gangsterism and the associated social
problems are the result of deteriorating social networks and of young
people who seem to experience high levels of alienation and
purposelessness. The vast majority of these youngsters are aged between 16
and 22 years. The majority of victims of crime fall into this category as
well.

Positive male role models are often absent and this has contributed to a
loss of self-esteem and self-confidence. This has led to some of the
highest crime rates in South Africa and by far the highest drug-abuse rate
by a factor of three.

Peer pressure plays an enormous role in this regard. Most young people lack
marketable skills and have limited opportunities to participate in the
formal and informal job markets. Many young people are waiting for
opportunities to bring about real improvements in their lives.

The schooling system does not lend itself to artisan-based training, and
many learners find themselves in conflict in the classroom because they are
simply bored or are not suited to academic subjects.

Perceptions are that HIV and Aids and other social problems, such as crime,
violence, abuse, drugs, prostitution, teenage pregnancy, substance abuse
and parental neglect are wreaking havoc on the lives of young people. The
irony is that for these very youth, the freedom and rights that seemed so
promising after the dark years of apartheid are elusive and seemingly
unattainable. The question needs to be asked: Where did we go wrong?

Since the Year of Youth in 1985, the United Nations has defined youth as
being all young people between the ages of 15 and 24, taking into
consideration the various concepts of youth in the different cultural and
institutional contexts.

However, in South Africa, according to the National Youth Act of 1996, the
term “youth” comprises a larger age group, including all persons from the
ages of 14 to 35. These different definitions of age alone give an idea of
the difficulties when trying to grasp analytically what youth in all their
complexity mean.

In most of the literature, youth are simply connected to the concept of
adolescence, which was invented in the early twentieth century as a
universal linear transition period from childhood to adulthood, with a
focus on physical and psychological development. In this phase, young
people are facing various changes on different levels, especially owing to
hormonal changes during puberty and trying to construct their own identity,
so that adolescence is generally presented as a time of storm and stress,
conflict and confusion, which makes them vulnerable to risky behaviour.

This is compounded in our system at the moment by too few male teachers
acting as male role models. Little emphasis is placed on youth leadership,
such as prefect bodies, and there is an absence of structured physical
education in school. I could go on.

For those youngsters leaving school, especially the early leavers, there
are very few clear-cut options. The military, in many countries an option
for those needing a change, is essentially a closed shop in this country,
with a very low volume of intakes.

Skills training appears unstructured, with too few options at the moment,
and even a place like the traditional dockyard, which produced outstanding
artisans in the past, has been lost as an option.

In the Western Cape we are working towards a comprehensive youth strategy.
Already all departments have their own youth projects in place. One such
department is the Department of Economic Development and Tourism in which
they have a number of projects, like a new venture creation project for
women, a public-private partnership for 100 females that will run for the
next two years.

There is also the workplace skills programme, the contact centre, which is
a call centre programme, and a tourism-based project that will take 400
disadvantaged people into this industry.

Significantly, today is the 10th anniversary of Project Chrysalis, which
falls under the Department of Community Safety. This unique award-winning
programme, now recognised both internationally and nationally, takes
unemployed youths between the ages of 17 and 25 and puts them through three
months of rigorous training. Training often lasts 18 hours a day. Emphasis
is placed on physical, emotional and spiritual wellness while, at the same
time, exposing the youths to skills opportunities and developing the full
potential of an individual. Of the thousands of graduates, some are here
working in this parliamentary precinct at the moment.

The essence of the training is based on personal growth and group
discipline, teamwork, proper preparation for life, and one’s rights and
concurrent responsibilities within a constitutional state.

Significantly, this approach has attracted many more applications than
there are places available. The academy has had to stop advertising, and
even three more such institutions would not cater for the volume of
students applying.

Ironically, this approach is almost the opposite of the one taken by the
government at the moment in approaching youth development, where
malcontents are tolerated – eulogized, even. Their misbehaviour has seen
destruction, disruption and dishonour wrought upon their generation and the
country as a whole.
Simply giving money to misguided youths is like giving razor blades to a
child, or substituting parental guidance and love by dropping your child
off at the mall with wads of cash.

South Africa is missing a huge opportunity in youth development. There is a
desperate need for inspired leadership on the matter. Ironically, our youth
are hungry for challenges and not handouts. The problem lies with us, the
adults, who are confused, morally bent and who shy away from reality – and
we have heard about some of that this morning.

In the early 1930s, at the height of the Great Depression, Franklin Delano
Roosevelt championed several nationwide initiatives to lift his country,
especially the youth, out of poverty. One such project was the Civilian
Conservation Corps. This project, a cross between our Expanded Public Works
Programme and the Chrysalis model, helped millions of youths and laid the
foundation for the most advanced parks service in the world today. Members
would do well to Google this project and find out what it did for the
United States.

There is a danger, however, that any person who feels that youth
development is a chance to misuse our youth politically, to sell them an
inferior product, or to create false expectations, is doing not only those
youths a grave disservice, but undermining the nation as a whole.
Leadership in this noble cause must be pure, uncompromising and focused on
nation-building.

In that regard, I would like, if I may, Deputy Chair, to address myself to
one or two comments that were made this morning, because I would have
thought, as very highly paid public representatives, that we would know a
little bit more about our Constitution. Here is a copy of the provincial
constitution of the Western Cape. It is a fully authorised legal document.
It came into operation on 16 January 1998. I have a copy here for the
Deputy Chairperson, which I will give to the Table to pass over to the
Deputy Chairperson.

Chapter 4 of the constitution says that “the executive authority of the
Western Cape is vested in the premier”. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, could you
stick to the debate, and your time ...

Mr M WILEY (Western Cape): In conclusion, Madam Chair, I think that it is
very important when we debate enormously important topics in the House of
this nature, which should be a beacon of hope for the youth, that we stick
to the facts of the matter. The facts of the matter are that although I am
a member of the Western Cape, because I may be wearing a Western Cape
badge, I am a member and citizen of the South African Republic. [Applause.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, thank you for this opportunity. My colleague
- I would call him my honourable friend Tau - started this debate this
morning. Now, unfortunately, because of all the hot air that he released
here, I cannot agree with him.

Die agb Tau sou skynbaar vanoggend vir ons probeer oortuig het dat ’n
waatlemoen en ’n boerpampoen dieselfde ding is, maar dit is nie so nie.
[The hon Tau was apparently trying to convince us this morning that a
watermelon and a white pumpkin are the same thing, but this is not so.]

It seems that he has selective amnesia, because I want to disagree with him
on four levels.

Om die Verwoerdiaanse filosofie te gebruik as die enigste oorsaak van Suid-
Afrika se ontwikkelingspatrone kan, verseker, nie waar wees nie. En dit is
juis daarom, agb De Beer, dat ons die effek wat kolonialisme en apartheid
op Suid-Afrika se ontwikkelingspatrone gehad het in ag moet neem. So, ons
kan nie net op die invloed van apartheid fokus nie, maar ons moet ook gaan
kyk wat die invloed van die effek van imperialisme vóór dit op Suid-Afrika
se ontwikkelingspatrone was. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[To present the Verwoerdian philosophy as the only thing to have shaped
South Africa’s developmental patterns can surely not be accurate. And this
is precisely why, hon De Beer, we must take into consideration the effect
that colonialism and apartheid had on South Africa’s developmental
patterns. We therefore cannot focus only on the effect of apartheid, but we
should also look at the effect of imperialism before it on South Africa’s
developmental patterns.]

The next issue is one that the ANC continually wants to use and misuse. It
is this misnomer of continually referring to Africans in particular and
blacks in general. To continually refer to that is a very narrow and
shallow argument and I think it is necessary that we move forward and away
from it.

Daardie argument gaan ons nie vorentoe vat in terme van wat ons wil bereik
nie. Ten opsigte daarvan, en van die hele kwessie van taal en Afrikaans, is
dit nodig om te erken dat daar ’n tyd was toe die Afrikaners in hierdie
land opgestaan en gesê het, “Engels, Engels, alles Engels.” (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[That argument will not take us forward in terms of what we wish to
achieve. In this regard, and that of the whole question of language and
Afrikaans, it is necessary to acknowledge that there was a time when the
Afrikaners in this land stood up and said, “English, English, everything
English.”]

And it has very little to do with Africans or blacks, in particular, but
much more to do with the collective responsibility we, as South Africans,
have towards the future of this country.

The third matter regarding which I have a serious issue with the hon Tau
and his colleagues is that they speak like Tarzan but walk like Jane.
[Laughter.] They were the ones who until 1999 motivated that labour
brokerage in South Africa was the worst evil in the current circumstances.
And then, in 1999, when they had to implement the legislation, they did a U-
turn.

So, for a senior member like the hon Tau – a senior communist, I must say –
to come here today and talk about labour brokerage and his own party, who
reneged on the mandate that was apparently given to him, can certainly not
be true, and further link it to the youth. That cannot be right,
Chairperson.

The last issue that I want to take up is that of window-dressing by this
ANC government. To purport to speak to the FF Plus and address the issues
in terms of a national identity and so on certainly cannot be right.

Die VF Plus is ’n absolute klein minderheid wat, met respek, ’n beperkte
politieke invloed in Suid-Afrika het. [Tussenwerpsels.] En om dit voor te
hou, agb lid ... [Tussenwerpsels.] [The FF Plus is an absolute minority
which, with respect, has limited political influence in South Africa.
[Interjections.] And to hold this up, hon member ... [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order!

Mr K A SINCLAIR: And I must say sometimes I think the hon member Maine
wants to be a mini-me Malema. [Laughter.] To come and use that and say that
is the solution to our challenges in terms of nation-building cannot be
true.

So, agb Voorsitter, wat is die oplossing, as u my sal toelaat? [So, hon
Chairperson, what is the solution, if you will allow me?]

We must acknowledge that we live in a globalised world. We must focus on
education. We must focus on the widespread unemployment. But, above all,
the youth must provide us with quality leadership, not the leaders of the
youth league of this country. That is not leadership. [Interjections.] Yes.

So, in terms of that, I want to conclude by saying we must take collective
responsibility for our future. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Deputy Chair, hon Chief Whip, hon members ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Wait, wait, wait,
Gunda. Order, please! Let us respect the person who is debating. Continue.

Mr J J GUNDA: Thank you for your protection, hon Deputy Chair. Hon Deputy
Chair, hon members of this House, all protocol observed. This debate is
indeed really, really important for the youth of today, and I want us to be
honest. John C Maxwell said that whenever you are a leader and someone
criticises you and you just shout that person down, you are actually
stupid. John C Maxwell also went on to say that in order for a human being
to reach his or her goal, he or she needs to be a disciplined human being.

I would like to say to the youth today in this debate that it is a shame
that so many of them are still unemployed. It is heart-breaking to see that
some of them cannot get bursaries. It is heart-breaking to see that 70% of
the youth are unemployed. It is heart-breaking. And, and we must be honest:
yes, the government is trying its utmost, but the government is not doing
enough. Regarding the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth Agency,
the government must bring the culprits to book. What are they doing?
Millions of rands are given to certain individuals while the really poor
people are suffering. We cannot allow this kind of thing to go on. It is
impossible.

Die jeug van 1976 het met hul lewens betaal vir hierdie vryheid, en die
jeug van vandag het nie vryheid nie. Ons is nie ekonomies vry nie. Ons is
polities vry, maar ons jeug het nie ekonomiese mag nie. Om van hierdie jeug
leiers te maak, moet jy hulle begin verantwoordelik maak. En om hulle
verantwoordelik te maak, moet jy vir hulle ekonomiese vryheid gee. Ek dink
aan ’n kind en ek sien hoe ons kinders ... (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The youth of 1976 paid with their lives for this freedom, and the youth of
today do not have freedom. We are not free economically. We are free
politically, but our youth have no economic power. To turn the youth into
leaders one has to start by making them responsible. And to make them
responsible means giving them economic freedom. I think of a child and I
see how our children ...]

Members of Parliament would agree. When your children go to bed, they don’t
worry because they know there is food on the table. What about the children
who go to bed and there is no food, and they get up the next morning
knowing there isn’t even porridge for them to eat? [Interjections.] And
that is why I am saying to you, Maine, do not ask me what I am doing. Stop
wasting the millions and do the right thing, Maine. Hon Maine, do the right
thing.

I would like to say this: Until we come to the point where we acknowledge
that the youth are valuable ... Young people have value. Young people just
need to be directed. Young people just need to be helped and to be educated
- given a decent, quality education; not just certain individuals, but
everyone in South Africa belongs to South Africa. The Freedom Charter says
that all who live in South Africa shall share in this country. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S A DUMA (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Chair, I think I should first mention that
we must dwell very much on the principles of profit and advantage when we
deal with the issue of this forefront concept of youth today versus the
issue of justice, balance and the reciprocity process.

I completely agreed with hon Chairperson R J Tau when he specifically
articulated the issue of labour brokers. You currently understand that they
constitute not even a significant minority, but they take all the profit
margins. That is why he is expressing that perspective. [Applause.]

You must also take into cognisance the fact that we are dealing with the
alarmist populists of this world who are going to say a lot of things. The
reality and the crux of the matter is that a lot has been done and achieved
as well.

Oliver Tambo, the former president of the ANC, once said that a country
that does not take care of its youth is a dead nation. We are still
considering those words. Because of the Freedom Charter’s concept that the
“people shall govern”, we are here today, charting the way forward and
addressing the imbalances of the past. [Applause.]

The former president of the ANC, president Luthuli, once said: “What would
I do if I were prime minister?” He noted a lot of concepts and issues. One
of those was the hot debate of the nationalisation of mines, the post
offices, the banks, land. Hence, the debate today is critical. It is also
relevant for us to check that the youth are at the forefront. How do we
ensure that they participate in the mainstream economy of this country? We
must ensure that the environment is conducive to this. Our government
should also intervene with a holistic and inclusive approach. Those issues
should be taken into cognisance.

The hon Tau articulated very clearly the issue of free education. It should
be tangible. We should come up with the proper strategy going forward.
Government has already embarked on that strategy. We should also come up
with a proper timeframe and concept.

We must mention that one of our current barriers in society, when we check
the epoch, is whose voices are being heard in the South African media. That
is another challenge, as the youth will still understand it as being so
eurocentric that it ends up polarising issues and shifting our focus. That
is why you find that a lot of people are highlighting the wrong concepts.
I’m still going to speak about that.

Let me mention specifically that the DA tends to polarise every debate, as
if they come with a holistic and useful approach. Look at what happened in
the Western Cape. Selective amnesia syndrome is embedded in their systems.
They don’t come up with concrete things that can address South Africans. In
fact, I’m told that they don’t even wear proper Bafana Bafana jerseys. They
just procure theirs as if they were a federal country. We must address
those issues as well. [Interjections.]

It is true, hon Chairperson, that Solomon Mahlangu said, “My blood will
nourish the tree that will bear the fruits of freedom.” Economic freedom in
our lifetime should be visible. We must mention that all those things
should be taken into cognisance.

Maybe today is the day on which we should make such a necessary assessment:
Who are we as South Africans; as the youth of South Africa? Where do we
come from? Where are we, and where are we likely to go in terms of the
social pattern? Those concepts are the issues that should also be
addressed.

Currently, if you talk about the problematic areas that should be addressed
in South Africa, they must be named. The five priorities that our
government is trying to address ...
Mr A WATSON: Are you the Chair? If you are not, then you should look
forward. I am addressing the Chair. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can I now talk to you,
hon Watson?

Mr A WATSON: He interjected me.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, can I then
address you?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, may I rise on a point of order?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Fine, what is the point
of order?

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, the member is misleading this House by accusing
the Western Cape of making their own Bafana Bafana T-shirts that are not
true Bafana Bafana shirts. But if that were true, then everybody in
Parliament is also not wearing Bafana Bafana shirts because they all have
Parliament’s emblem on them. So, he must withdraw that. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, do me a
favour: Could you put that in black and white, because we might be given an
answer as soon as it is possible to get one? Could you do that for me?
Thank you. Continue, hon member.

Mr S A DUMA (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Chairperson, we will not be scared of the
debate. The issue of the ubuntu spirit, when one is coming to a conclusion,
should be taken into cognisance as well. If we are saying that our youth
should be at the forefront, let us ensure that in almost every component,
such as employment, they are the ones taking decisions. This is because
they form the majority, in any case, in South Africa.

If you are talking about the challenges that are facing youth in terms of
education, they should be the designers. If you are talking about the issue
of the economy, they should indeed be at the forefront, even coming up with
the proper methodological aspects that are going to address the issues of
South African society.

I must also mention in conclusion that a national democratic state and a
national democratic society is our ideal vision that will ensure that we
harness a proper society in South Africa. I agree that there are a lot of
things that are slowly going to be addressed. Thank you so much.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! I now call the
hon Mncube.
Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Chair ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem?

Mr D V BLOEM: Before the hon member speaks, I just want to get clarity on
the ruling that you have just given to Mr Watson, because he rose on a
point of order to say that the member was misleading the House. Now you are
saying that Mr Watson must write a letter; put it in black and white. That
was a point of order, and you must only make a ruling on what Mr Watson
said. That is why I am rising in this regard.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, I have
spoken to the hon Watson. I said what I did because we are running short of
time, and I am going to talk to him after this. It is not for you to
intervene. Thank you. Thank you, Mr Bloem. Do me a favour: could you sit
down for now, because I have spoken to Mr Watson and I will deal with that
issue.

Mr D V BLOEM: No. Madam Chair, I rise on another point of order. I think I
am very entitled to speak in this House. I am very entitled to do so. An
amount of 1,3 million people voted for us and I am entitled to speak.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela:) Hon Bloem, with due
respect, I am not undermining you. This is a democratic country, but could
you still, at the same time, listen to what other people are saying? Listen
with understanding. Thank you. Continue, hon member.

Ms B V MNCUBE: Hon Chairperson, I am privileged to take part in this
important debate, which commemorates 34 years since the 1976 Soweto
uprisings. The debate today is made even more useful because it recognises
the role that young people are accorded in our society. It pays homage to
the sterling heroism, the sacrifices and selflessness of the youth of South
Africa who made it possible for all of us to live in a strong and vibrant
democracy.

Hon Sinclair, you may be in Cope, but your mind is still locked in the
previous party, the National Party, and its principles and its policies. We
may forgive you because Cope has no policies. We saw what happened last
week at your policy conference. [Interjections.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chair, on a point of order: Is it proper for the hon
member to lie to the House?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): To?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: ... to mislead the House, hon Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): It is not.

Mr K A SINCLIAR: Oh, it is not, because the hon member is misleading the
House by saying that Cope doesn’t have policies. Firstly, we had an
election manifesto, and a very comprehensive set of policy documents was
accepted. [Interjections.] I will give her a copy, which is much better
than the policies of the ANC. Thank you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, my ruling is that
this is not correct, and it ends there. Continue, Mncube.

Ms B V MNCUBE: It is hypocrisy from the DA, hon Harris, to pretend to have
the interests of the majority of unemployed youth, being Africans in
particular, at heart on the issue of the youth wage subsidy. This is a
narrow interest of a white capitalist supremacy, aimed at further
exploiting the poorest of the poor. The wage subsidy getting to the labour
brokers, which the hard ...

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Sorry, hon Harris, I
was still busy.

Mr T D HARRIS: On a point of order, Chair, the hon member is implying - and
misleading the House - I suspect, that the Finance Minister, on the policy
of youth wage subsidy, is, I believe, narrow and a white supremacist.
Either she believes that or she is misleading the House. Could you give a
ruling on whether she is misleading the House?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Harris, my
understanding is that that is a response to the debate. Thank you.
Continue, Mncube.

Ms B V MNCUBE: This is a narrow interest of the white capitalist bosses
aimed at further exploiting the poorest of the poor. The wage subsidy that
is being argued here will go to the labour brokers, whose existence they
are defending wholeheartedly as they are pushing for its implementation
now. [Interjections.] You are pushing it now. So don’t be the mouthpiece of
the working class and the poor.

Hon Inkosi and hon Gunda, the National Youth Development Agency is a
multiparty agency at the highest decision-making level. All the parties are
represented in the agency. Therefore, we should work together and champion
the interests of the youth of South Africa and stop blaming the alliance.

Allow me, hon Chairperson, to pay homage to a fighter, a relentless
organiser and an inspiring leader of the youth of our country: Comrade
Peter Mokaba, who passed away on 9 June 2002. In five days’ time the youth
of our movement will commemorate eight years since the great leader of our
national democratic revolution joined fearless ANC cadres such as Walter
Sisulu, John Langalibalele Dube, Chief Albert Luthuli, Oliver Reginald
Tambo, Moses Mabhida, Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu and many more.

I also pay homage to all the compatriots that supported our nation’s fight
against apartheid throughout the African continent and the world. All of
them, through their determined struggles and efforts, ensured that South
Africans today are able to say, with conviction, “We are free. We are free
indeed.”

As we celebrate this Youth Day, we continue to repeat the message that the
nation expects the youth of today to follow in the footsteps of the 1976
youth and become agents of change, this time in the continuing struggle to
achieve the goal of a better life for all our people. Indeed, all of us
have the common responsibility to always recall the events of 1976, so that
the bravery and sacrifices of that generation of young people continue to
serve as an inspiration to work harder in our efforts and deeds towards a
united, democratic, nonracial and nonsexist South Africa.

Whereas the youth of 1976 used their energies to mobilise and campaign
against apartheid, the youth of today should use their talents to mobilise
and campaign against crime and drugs. The young people of today, the young
lions, must be at the forefront of the struggle to defeat violence against
and the rape of women and children. The good role models amongst them, the
best young lions, are those who get good results at all our educational
institutions. The good role models amongst them must be those who work with
the community to help the poor, who volunteer to help their neighbours, who
give due respect to other members of the community, including the elderly
and people with disabilities, and those who respect the values of ubuntu
and good moral conduct.

Today, we are free because in the past young people made great sacrifices.
This freedom has, in turn, brought about many opportunities. Accordingly,
the youth should bear no excuses in their individual and collective efforts
to put to good use all the many and varied opportunities brought by
democracy.

Young people must do everything possible to ensure that they access the
education and training opportunities that the youth of 1976 fought for with
their lives. The youth today defends our nationhood and instils pride and
patriotism among all young people for being South African and Africans.
They must rise up to protect their communities, which are being ravaged by
cowardly attacks on them by criminals and by disease.
We would like to use this opportunity to appeal to all youth formations and
all our social partners, namely labour, business and civil society, to join
hands and act together, addressing the critically important matter of youth
development and the empowerment of youth from economically disadvantaged
communities.

In closing, in seven days’ time our nation will host the 2010 Fifa World
Cup. We want to say to all the youth of South Africa: Be defenders of our
national symbols. Let us take this opportunity to ensure that our nation
triumphs in its effort to implant hope and common identity in the hearts
and minds of all its people, regardless of gender, sex, creed, colour and
social status. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, before I
call the last speaker, I would like to clear the air. Let me remind you
that a response to a debate cannot be said to be a point of order.
Furthermore, any member who rises to respond to a debate under the pretext
of a point of order will be ruled out of order. And before we close, after
the last speaker I would like to comment on something very disturbing, that
is happening in this House. Hon Tau, over to you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chairperson, let me take this
opportunity to thank all members who participated in the debate. It was
quite a youthful, honest and frank debate. They raised the challenges that
young people are faced with in our country. I did not hear anybody say that
it was not true that young people were the majority of the unemployed and
the disadvantaged in South Africa. Young people are the majority of those
who are faced with all the inequalities and illnesses that exist within
society.

Whether we are political parties or we posture as them, we all agree that
there is a sense of urgency to deal with problems that young people are
facing. I may not necessarily respond to all the issues raised by each
member, but it is important that we should not mislead ourselves when
dealing with some of the challenges young people are facing.

I would like to thank the hon Mncube for raising the issue of the need for
the establishment of the Youth Development Agency. All political parties
and their youth structures converged and agreed that the two institutions,
the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the National Youth Commission, were not
responding adequately to the challenges of young people. They are housed
separately. Therefore, there is no relationship between those two
particular institutions.

South African young people, including all political formations, agreed that
they should merge the two institutions. This is so that when a young person
goes to the NYDA, the NYDA should not say, “No, we are dealing with policy.
You must go to the Umsobomvu Youth Fund.” Then, when he or she goes to the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund, they say, “No. We don’t have the resources. We don’t
assist with this matter. You must go back to the previous institution.” Let
us bring all those institutions under one roof, as an elephant that can
drive youth development in this country, slowly but decisively – like an
elephant. And all political parties agreed to that.

I find it quite strange that the very same political parties are now
critical of this elephant. They are highly critical of this particular
elephant, which is hypocritical. At least if they were saying, “These are
the challenges that the NYDA is faced with; and these are the things that
we need to do to improve the functionality of the NYDA,” I would have said,
“Yes, that is probably an issue,” but you cannot come here and be
hypocritical and just shout down the NYDA.

Second to that, I found it quite strange because the DA youth formation was
the first one to praise the formation of the National Youth Development
Agency. Fortunately, I served in that ad hoc committee. When we interviewed
for appointment to the board of the National Youth Development Agency, I
was quite central to that. The DA youth was the first to hail the
appointment of the National Youth Development Agency. Now today I am
surprised that the Western Cape has its own youth development programmes -
a country within a country.
There are programmes that are geared towards addressing the challenges
facing young people. But now the attitude that is being presented here is:
We understand what you are doing in South Africa, but this is what we are
doing in the Western Cape to advance youth development. Why aren’t those
programmes part of the National Youth Development Agency’s programmes? Why
didn’t the Western Cape move faster in establishing offices of the National
Youth Development Agency and therefore support those offices to advance the
programmes of youth development in the country?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Sorry, hon Tau. Just a
minute. Hon Harris?

Mr T D HARRIS: Thanks, Deputy Chair. I am wondering if the hon Tau will
take a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Yes.

Mr T D HARRIS: When did any DA speaker today mention any youth development
agency?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): You see, he’s not listening, because
what I said was that instead of their saying, “This is what we are doing to
advance the programmes of the National Youth Development Agency”, they had
instead their own separate programmes, which seek to negate or compete with
what the country wants to do. That is also quite hypocritical. I think we
need to speak against that as the ANC or as this particular House.

Hon Sinclair, I think you are also being disingenuous. When we deal with
the philosophy of Verwoerd, of course I would agree with you that we cannot
unlink the philosophy of Verwoerd from colonialism, but you must understand
what I was trying to say earlier. I was characterising South Africa as
conceptualised by Verwoerd in developing this kind of a state.

Not only was it about not teaching young people maths and science but it
was about segregation and the establishment of Bantustans. I did not want
to go there. [Applause.] It was also about putting the Africans in
particular – I’ll repeat it: it was about putting the Africans in
particular – and blacks in general, who comprised Indians and coloureds, on
the periphery of the economy through the homelands system. [Applause.] That
was Verwoerd.

The theme itself refers to dismantling apartheid social relations. They are
not even considering the theme in the debate today, because they don’t know
what it is that we are trying to deal with. We are trying to undo what the
ANC in 1969 characterised as “colonialism of a special time”. Through that
we said: Yes, of course, the coloniser is not directly involved. The
coloniser has left the territory. But within that boundary there is a
minority that sees itself as superior to the majority and therefore
disenfranchises them, oppresses them, unlinks them from the mainstream of
the economy and so forth. Their lot was to be the suppliers of labour to
the benefit of key industries, particularly the mines. [Interjections.]

That is exactly what we have been saying here. We need to understand the
debate within that context, because, “through the colonialism of a special
time”, the social relations in South Africa were constructed. The debate
was seeking to respond to how we undo that and move forward as a country.
How do we undo that and move forward as a country - I didn’t hear what you
were saying about this as an hon member.

Of course, I am not surprised that the hon member decided to be so
disingenuous without going into much history. Even his own professor – you
would know him very well - Prof Andre Duvenhage, from the University of the
North West, agreed with what the hon Mncube was saying in terms of the
issue of Cope’s policies – that there are no policies. His own professor!
So I wonder if you are going to pass the thesis or the mini thesis if you
submit it and speak like that. I see you failing.

Briefly, I think what we are trying to do here or what we are trying to
address here as the NCOP is: How do we deal with this intergenerational,
abject poverty that the young people of South Africa attract? How do we
dislodge this intergenerational, abject poverty? It is a chain, and we need
to find a way to break this particular chain.

In my presentation I avoided being ideological, although the DA tried to
push a particular ideological economic front as a way of solving the
problems of the young people of South Africa. This is because we are
sitting with the problem of liberalism today. The problems that we are
having today are the other problems of liberalism.

It is in that context that the President said: Yes, we have pronounced on
this particular issue, but there are other views that are being projected
out there, such as the issue of the two-tier labour system – whether labour
brokerage won’t create a two-tier labour system and all sorts of things.
There is a sense of discomfort, and the President said that it was our
responsibility, as the leadership, that if a section of the population was
not happy about any pronouncement, we needed to listen and engage with that
particular section. And that is exactly what the President said. He’s
saying, let’s listen to ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, conclude.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): In conclusion, may I therefore say that
yes, the responsibility of the transformation of this country is squarely
in the hands of the young people. And it is for us as Members of
Parliament, as public representatives, as political parties to assist these
young people and not to play political games when it comes to the issues of
young people. This is because, if we do that, we are in fact creating a
time bomb and by the time it explodes, it will explode right in our faces
as Members of Parliament or public representatives. Thank you very much,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, may I
bring a point to your attention? We have staff members who can take
messages from point A to point B. But what I have noticed happening today
is people just crossing the line from one point to the other. That is not
supposed to happen. Please, let us be exemplary. The NCOP is made up of
very respectable and intelligent people. That concludes the debate.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Sinclair? Hon
Sinclair, there is no point of order that I am going to accept now. I have
closed the debate, and the next session has to start.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, you have raised a very serious issue. I just
want to make an enquiry. You referred to members walking around. Are you
indicating that there is floor-crossing happening? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): This is not the time
for jokes. We are busy working. Thank you, hon Sinclair. This means that
you don’t even know that floor-crossing stopped long ago. Maybe you were
out of the country.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, we now come to the
Consideration of Votes and Schedule of the Appropriation Bill. Could I
propose that in order for us to move a little bit faster, we don’t use the
electronic voting system and follow the normal procedure? When we start, I
will announce how we are going to sit so that we expedite the process. Does
the House agree with that? Okay, that’s fine.

As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put the Votes in the order in
which they appear on the schedule to the Bill. Before I do so, I would like
to remind members that during voting the doors will be closed. I hope you
have checked that everybody is inside, because we don’t want to lock people
out. Are all members from all sides inside the House?
Vote No 1 – The Presidency – put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 35: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J J; Jacobs, M
   P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate,  M W; Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B
   L; Matila, A G; Makhubela, M W; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z; Mncube, B V;
   Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L; Nesi, B;
   Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Qikani, A N D; Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R
   N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 2 – Parliament - put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 - Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs – put.

Division demanded.
The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.


   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 4 - Home Affairs – put and agreed to.

Vote No 5 – International Relations and Co-operation – put and agreed to.

Vote No 6 – Public Works – put and agreed to.

Vote No 7 – Women, Children and People with Disabilities – put.
Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 8 – Government Communication and Information System – put and
agreed to.

Vote No 9 – National Treasury – put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 - Public Enterprises - put.
Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I just want to raise a procedural matter as a
point of order once you finish with this specific Vote.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: What is your point?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I want to raise a point of order on a
procedural matter. The Rule is very specific that once the voting starts,
members who are outside must stay outside. Unfortunately, the officials
allowed three members to come in when the voting had already started. Since
it is an important matter, I would like those particular members to be
outside of the House, please.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All right, we will check the Rules quickly.
The Table staff has just advised me that if a member is outside while a
particular Vote is being tabled in the House, he or she can’t vote on that
Vote. But, if a member is in the House when a Vote is tabled, the member
can vote. [Applause.]

Vote No 11 – Public Service and Administration – put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 12 – Statistics South Africa – put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 – Arts and Culture – put and agreed to.

Vote No 14 – Basic Education - put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 15 – Health – put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: What is the problem, hon Gunda? I said that
there would be no debate once we started voting.

Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, I would just like to make a statement.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, you are not going to make any statement.
That’s exactly what I meant: Once we start voting, no statements will be
made. Do you want to make a statement, or what?

Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, I find it very strange that the very same people who
are crying for service delivery object to the Votes. If there is a problem
...
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Gunda, it is all right. You may sit down.
[Laughter.]

Vote No 16 – Higher Education and Training - put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 17 – Labour - put.
Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 18 – Social Development – put and agreed to.

Vote No 19 – Sport and Recreation South Africa – put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.


Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 20 – Correctional Services - put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 21 – Defence and Military Veterans – put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 22 – Independent Complaints Directorate - put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 23 – Justice and Constitutional Development - put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 24 – Police – put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 25 – Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries – put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 26 – Communications – put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 – Economic Development – put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 28 – Energy – put and agreed to.

Vote No 29 – Environmental Affairs – put and agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Human Settlements – put and agreed to.

Vote No 31 – Mineral Resources – put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 32 – Rural Development and Land Reform – put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

   AYES - 38: Adams, F; Boroto, M G; Bloem, D V; Chaane, T E; De Beer, C J;
   de Beer, O; Dikgale, M C; Duma, S; Feldman, D B;  Gamede, D D; Gunda, J
   J; Jacobs, M P; Magadla, N W; Maine, M C;  Makgate, M W; Makhubela, M W;
   Mashamaite, T A; Mashile, B L; Matila, A G; Memela, T C; Mlenzana, Z;
   Mncube, B V; Mnguni, B A; Mofokeng, T M H; Montsitsi, S D; Moshodi, M L;
   Nesi, B; Ntwanambi, N D; Nzimande, L P M; Plaatjie, S H; Qikani, A N D;
   Rantho, D Z; Rasmeni, R N; Sibande, M P; Sinclair, K A; Shabalala, N B;
   Tau, R J; Themba, M P.

   NOES – 10: Bekker, J M G; Chen, S S; De Villiers, M J R; Faber, W F;
   Groenewald, H B; Harris, T D; Lees, R A; Van Lingen, E C; Watson, A;
   Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 33 – Science and Technology – put and agreed to.

Vote No 34 – Tourism – put and agreed to.

Vote No 35 – Trade and Industry – put and agreed to.

Vote No 36 – Transport – put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 37 – Water Affairs – put.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am sorry. There is a step that we have
skipped. I just want to correct that.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, this is a point of order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am still dealing with the Schedule.
Mr D V BLOEM: With the Schedule, yes.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Can we come to the point of order later?

Mr D V BLOEM: On the Schedule, Chairperson ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, there is no point of order on the
Schedule.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, could you please give me a second? I officially
want to welcome the members of the ANC to Cope, because they are here.
[Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, let’s conclude. Order! Order!
Could you please pay attention. Some of us have other business after this.
That concludes the Consideration of Votes. I shall now put the whole
Schedule. Is there any objection to the Schedule being agreed to? No.
Therefore, the Schedule is agreed to.

Schedule put and agreed to.




                             APPROPRIATION BILL


              (Consideration of Bill and of Report of thereon)
Mr T E CHAANE: Chairperson and hon members, the Select Committee on
Appropriations, after considering the Bill, states as follows: The
Appropriation Bill provides for the appropriation of money from the
National Revenue Fund in terms of section 213 of the Constitution and
section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act. However, the spending of
the money is subject to the Public Finance Management Act and provisions of
the Appropriation Bill.

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act stipulates,
amongst other things, the legislative framework for amendments of the
Appropriation Bill by the House, facilitated through the process of
Parliament and its committee on appropriations.

Furthermore, Parliament is expected to amend or pass without amendments the
Appropriation Bill as soon as it is feasible, so that the President can
assent to it and the Act can be promulgated before the end of July each
year.

The committee has considered the provisions of section 10 of the Money
Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act and further considered
the presentation from various stakeholders during the public hearings, as
provided for by section 10(8) of the Act, as well as listened to the
debates on the different Budget Votes.

The committee is of the view that the appropriation for 2010-11, as
detailed in the Bill, mainly supports and also addresses the following
policy priorities of government: firstly, enhancing the quality of health;
secondly, fighting crime and corruption; thirdly, creating jobs, investment
infrastructure and protecting the environment; fourth, making improvements
in education and skills development; and, fifth, developing rural areas.

The committee, however, wishes to caution against the following. The
continued underspending by some departments does not only raise concerns
over capacity to spend but also creates unnecessary delays in the rolling
out of services to our people. There are also the continued negative audit
reports that might have a negative impact on the value for money spent.
Going forward, consideration should be given to adding the following
priorities to the Budget: the Ministry of Women, Children and People with
Disabilities, as well as allocations to the Department of Rural Development
and Land Reform, since the committee is of the view that those departments
have very broad mandates with limited funds.

The committee recommends the adoption of the 2010 Appropriation Bill
without any amendments. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! That concludes the debate. I shall now
put the question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance
with Rule 33, I shall first allow political parties to make a declaration
of vote if they so wish. Is there any political party that wishes to do so?
No. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question.

Before I call for the voting, please... You understand the system. Should I
repeat the system? Press button one to confirm your presence. There should
be lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? If not, a service officer
will assist you. We will proceed with the voting. Those who are in favour
must press button four. Those who are against must press button two, and
those who abstain must press button three. The voting will now take place.

Have you all voted? Mrs Chen, have you voted? Are you still going to vote?
Okay. Mr Watson?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, my voting machine is not working.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Let them give you a form, Mr Watson, to vote.
Give one to Mr Lees also, as well as Ms Van Lingen. Those members whose
machines are not working just raise your hands so that you can get a form
for manual voting. Voting is now closed. Remember that when you vote, you
have to put your card in. Have you forgotten that? [Interjections.] It is
not working – oh, okay. We will revert to the manual voting system if it is
not working. Have you all voted? On this side, we still have a shortage of
members. I think we must begin to count now. It will be quicker. Do we have
enough forms? We will use the hands. Has everybody voted? The staff will
... What is wrong, Mr de Villiers?

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: I am still waiting for a form.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are you still waiting for a form? Just raise
your hand. Are you voting aye or no?

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I will tell you in just a moment.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, we want to count the results.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: All the people will see my voting. The other ones are
using forms. I have a right to have a form.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nobody will blame you for how you vote. We are
wasting the trees of South Africa now. Has everybody voted now? The staff
will then give me the results.

Forty-five members have voted in favour. I therefore declare the Bill
agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
 DEVELOPMENT - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE MR D JACOBS,
                           MAGISTRATE AT CLOCOLAN

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
  DEVELOPMENT - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE L B MARUWA

         CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF
                            MAGISTRATE M K CHAUKE

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
 DEVELOPMENT - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE M T MASINGA

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
    DEVELOPMENT - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE W J M
                                  PRINSLOO

Monghadi T M H MOFOKENG: Modula Setulo, komiti e ile ya dula mme ya
sekaseka ho fanyehwa mosebetsing ha bomakgiseterata ba bahlano. Mabitso a
bona ke ana: Ntate Maruwa ya ofising ya Daveyton, ntate Chauke ya ofising
ya Pretoria, ntate Masinga ya ofising ya Umlazi KwaZulu-Natal, ntate
Prinsloo ya ofising ya Ermelo le ntate Jacobs. Kamora hoba komiti e
sekaseke ka botlalo dinyewe tseo ka bonngwe ba tsona, komiti e
ikgotsofaditse hore e dumellana le komishene hore ba fanyehwe mosebetsing.
Ke a leboha.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson, the committee sat and deliberated on the
suspension from duty of five magistrates. Their names are: Mr Maruwa from
the Daveyton office, Mr Chauke from the Pretoria office, Mr Masinga from
the Umlazi office, KwaZulu-Natal, Mr Prinsloo from the Ermelo office, as
well as Mr Jacobs. After the committee deliberated on those cases
individually, it was satisfied that it was in agreement with the commission
that they should be suspended from duty. I thank you.]
Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of
Magistrate Mr D Jacobs, Magistrate at Clocolan, be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate Mr D Jacobs,
Magistrate at Clocolan, accordingly agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.
Question put: That the Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of
Magistrate L B Maruwa be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report on the Provisional Suspension from office of Magistrate L B Maruwa
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of
Magistrate M K Chauke be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate M K Chauke
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of
Magistrate M T Masinga be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate M T Masinga
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of
Magistrate W J M Prinsloo be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Provisional Suspension from Office of Magistrate W J M
Prinsloo accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
 RELATIONS - PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENT (PTA) BETWEEN THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN
     CUSTOMS UNION (SACU) AND THE COMMON MARKET OF THE SOUTH (MERCOSUR)

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
    RELATIONS - AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
 AFRICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE FOR THE PROMOTION AND
                    RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, the report on the preferential trade agreement
between the Southern African Customs Union and the Common Market of the
South, Mercosur, and the report on the agreement between the governments of
the Republic of South Africa and of Zimbabwe are being considered today.
These reports have been deliberated upon by the Select Committee on Trade
and International Relations and have been approved by the committee.

In the interests of time, we will make available the statement to all the
members, especially in terms of the issues in the agreement between the
Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Zimbabwe.

I therefore urge this House to agree and adopt these agreements. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on the Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA)
between the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and the Common Market of
the South (Mercosur) be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) between the Southern
African Customs Union (SACU) and the Common Market of the South (Mercosur)
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe
for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
Africa and the Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments accordingly adopted in accordance with
section 65 of the Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT -
   MEMBERSHIP OF SOUTH AFRICA OF THE INTERNATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY
                                   (Irena)

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon members and colleagues, the Select
Committee on Economic Development, having considered the report on the
Membership of South Africa of the International Renewable Energy Agency,
tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, recommends that the
House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the
International Renewable Energy Agency report. Therefore, I put this report
to the House. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
  DEVELOPMENT - PROCLAMATIONS MADE IN TERMS OF SECTION 25 OF THE PROTECTION
  OF CONSTITUTIONAL DEMOCRACY AGAINST TERRORIST AND RELATED ACTIVITIES ACT,
                                    2004

Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT AD HOC COMMITTEE ON SOUTH AFRICA’S
                  READINESS FOR 2010 FIFA SOCCER WORLD CUP

Mr M P SIBANDE: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Chairperson and hon members, in
2006 the SA Football Association, supported by the South African
government, won the bid to host the Fifa Soccer World Cup. The South
African government made the commitment and guarantees to the people of
South Africa and Fifa that it would make the prestigious soccer event a
success.

In order to oversee the successful preparation of our country for the World
Cup, Parliament established an ad hoc committee to monitor progress and the
readiness of the host cities and the stadiums. The ad hoc committee
comprised a joint effort of both the portfolio and select committees
dealing with Energy, Tourism, Police, Transport, Public Enterprises, Health
and Home Affairs.

The ad hoc committee, in terms of South Africa’s readiness to host the 2010
Fifa World Cup, was tasked with the following: to assess the readiness of
various host cities for the 2010 Fifa World Cup and, consequently, enhance
ticket sales both locally and internationally; to assess the weaknesses and
challenges in the host cities’ base camps by encouraging short, medium and
long-term intervention; and to encourage the co-ordination and management
of the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup around the various host cities
and municipalities where base camps are located.

The delegation made the following findings regarding the readiness of the
stadiums for the 2010 Africa Fifa World Cup. Most of the stadiums and the
host cities that were visited by the ad hoc committee were ready and their
pitches were in a spectacular state and met all of Fifa’s requirements.
Although there were some concerns about the lights at some stadiums, these
concerns have since been resolved in all the areas where they were raised.
However, we were informed that the Disability Alliance would lodge a
protest over the lack of adequate seats at Soccer City Stadium. The
alliance held the view ...

Mr A WATSON: Could the member explain who the Disability Alliance is?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Would you like to explain, Mr Sibande?

Mr M P SIBANDE: No.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay, continue.

Mr M P SIBANDE: The alliance held the view that there was bias on the part
of the organisers, particularly the Local Organising Committee, resulting
in limited access to the stadium for disabled people. The City of
Johannesburg built about 50 seats inside the stadium to accommodate
disabled people in accordance with Fifa requirements.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, Mr Sibande. Mr Watson?

Mr A WATSON: Chair, I acknowledge that the speaker is not willing to say
who the Disability Alliance is, but in view of what he said afterwards, it
would seem that he was referring to the DA. And, I think, in terms of the
decorum of this House, we owe it to a party to use their correct name. We
would not distort the ANC’s name or any other name.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You both come from Mpumalanga. Could the two
of you please discuss that. I don’t know what he is referring to either.
Continue, hon member.

Mr M P SIBANDE: I must also say that the Fifa LOC undertook to purchase
extra seats to accommodate the access needs of disabled people.

In the Free State, the delegation expressed serious concern over the
continued lack of co-operation between the host city and the Free State’s
rugby leadership over their continued use of the stadium. The Free State
Cheetahs were continually using the stadium as their home ground for their
Vodacom Super 14 games. The continued use of the stadium by the Cheetahs
posed a serious risk to the growth of the grass and could have led to the
withdrawal of all World Cup matches scheduled to take place in the city of
Mangaung. The committee delegation recommended that the Free State Cheetahs
request permission in writing from the SA Rugby Union for their remaining
matches to be rescheduled to other venues. The delegation resolved that no
other matches, especially on 1 May and 8 May 2010, should be staged on the
Vodacom Park pitch. The captain’s run would also be moved to other venues
to avoid further damage to the pitch.

We also noted the lack of adequate support staff to assist with the proper
management and cleaning of the facilities. I must also inform the House
that we visited several base camps that were proposed for the 2010 Fifa
World Cup. Although most of the base camps were of a high quality, the
delegation expressed concern about the quality of the pitches at some of
the base camps. We were also notified of several contractual disputes that
were raised with respective parties and requested that they be addressed
immediately.

The delegation visited several host cities to ascertain their readiness. We
also visited the areas that were designated as fan parks and, in most
instances, we were pleased with their state of readiness. We were also
pleased about the availability of the tourism information kiosks. We
believe that these facilities will assist and make it easier for our
international guests to navigate themselves to the various games and fan
parks. They will serve as crucial points for our guests to get more
information about the areas they can visit in order to get a true
experience and reflection of South African life.

I must also say that we also visited airports in the host cities. We were
impressed with the world-class infrastructure, which will also benefit our
people beyond the World Cup. We were impressed by the baggage management
system at the airports, which would surely limit baggage theft and make it
easier for those who misplace their baggage to track it down.

Finally, I must inform this House that the delegation had engagements with
Eskom to ascertain their readiness to provide a reliable power supply and
ensure that we did not experience any blackouts. I must say that we were
pleased about ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Is that a point of order? Hon Sibande,
could you just hold on.

Mr S S MAZOSIWE: Chairperson, I just want to find out, with all sincerity,
what has gotten into the hon Bloem. Is there something wrong with him
today, because he is shouting at everybody?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): That is not a point of order. But let
us recognise the energy that the hon Bloem has. [Interjections.] Thank you
very much. Hon Bloem, you are out of order now. [Laughter.] You may
proceed, hon member.

Mr M P SIBANDE: I must say that we were pleased about the state of
readiness and with the assurance they gave us that no one would miss a game
owing to blackouts. We can say without a shred of doubt, “Ke Nako ya
Afrika”. Now is the time for Africa. “Sikhathi seNinginzimu Afrika.” Feel
it; it is here. We are ready to welcome the world. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
      TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - Intervention in SundayS River Valley Local
                         Municipality, Eastern Cape

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - INTERVENTION IN MOSES KOTANE LOCAL MUNICIPALITY,
                                 NORTH WEST

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
  TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - INTERVENTION IN THEMBISILE HANI LOCAL MUNICIPALITY

Mr A G MATILA: Chair, the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs met on 1 June to consider the three reports. It also
endorsed the decision taken by the three provincial executives in placing
these municipalities under section 3(1)(b).

Members will get this report and we ask this House to endorse the specific
reports. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on the Intervention in Sundays River Valley
Local Municipality, Eastern Cape, be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Intervention in Sundays River Valley Local Municipality,
Eastern Cape, accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Intervention in Moses Kotane Local
Municipality, North West, be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Intervention in Moses Kotane Local Municipality, North West,
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Intervention in Thembisile Hani Local
Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Intervention in Thembisile Hani Local Municipality
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, this is a reminder and, I
think, this reminder is something we are told to remember when we go home
and come back. Members are reminded that when the House adjourns they are
expected to remain standing until the procession has left the Chamber. That
concludes the business of the day. The House is adjourned. [Applause.]
The Council adjourned at 12:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            THURSDAY, 3 JUNE 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Register of shareholders of the South African Reserve Bank as at
       31 March 2010, in terms of section 32 of the South African Reserve
       Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces
CREDA INSERT - T100603e–insert6 – PAGES 2053 - 2059

CREDA INSERT - T100603e–insert7 – PAGES 2060 - 2067

CREDA INSERT - T100603e–insert8 – PAGES 2068 - 2074

                             FRIDAY, 4 JUNE 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 4 June 2010:


          a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 77).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled
    (1)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Social Services for consideration:

         a) Draft  Policy Framework for Accreditation of Diversion Services
            in South Africa under the Child Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of
            2008).

