---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS –see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give
notice that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of
the DA:

    That the House —


        1) notes the findings of the Freedom House Report, entitled
           “Freedom of the Press 2010: A Global Survey of Media
           Independence”, in which the South African media has been
           downgraded from free to partly free; and


        2) debates the threats to the freedom of the media and comes up
           with suggestions on how to ensure an enabling environment in
           order for the media to thrive.


     I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

      That the House notes that, in view of the fact that Hansard will be a
      century old on 31 October 2010, I propose that this House debates the
      centenary of Hansard.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House —


       1) notes the confusion that exists between Transnet and the Passenger
          Rail Agency of South Africa, Prasa, with regard to their
          respective usage of rail infrastructure; and


       2) debates the problems that currently exist in this regard and
          identifies solutions to solve them.

    [Applause.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that, on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the House —


        1) debates the consequences of the measles outbreak in Malawi,
           where 9 000 people have already fallen ill and 44 have died;


        2) warns that South Africa should be cautious as this communicable
           disease can easily spread to South Africa and increase the child
           mortality rate as it has affected 55 Zimbabweans this weekend
           and killed 384 children ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not discussing but giving notice. Are you
giving notice and not discussing?

Mr D A KGANARE: Yes, I’m giving notice.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: All right, but it’s too long.

Mr D A KGANARE: I proceed ...

         3) calls on government to be fully proactive in ensuring that
           its immunisation campaign reaches all communities in both rural
           and urban areas nationwide to prevent the spread of measles
           efficiently and effectively.

Mrs P C DUNCAN: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House –


        1) notes the current programme of the Gauteng Department of
           Social Development to remove from the care of their parents
           children being used as beggars on the streets of Tshwane
           Municipality; and


        2) debates the circumstances under which children living in poverty
           can be removed from the care of their parents or guardians, and
           comes up with solutions that can enhance human dignity and
           appropriate care.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M L FRANSMAN: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates the promotion of strategies, programmes and
    plans to promote nonracial integration as well as social cohesion
    amongst tertiary students.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


    That the House debates the social burden on communities resulting from
    the abuse of alcohol, and whether or not government’s response to the
    situation is adequate and producing results.

Thank you.

Mrs C N Z ZIKALALA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

    That the House debates the crisis unfolding within our education system
    owing to the current teachers’ strike.

Thank you.

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House debates the threat that illegal squatting poses to the
    special status of the Cradle of Humankind in Kromdraai as a world
    heritage site, considering that the West Rand District Municipality is
    failing to enforce a court order of the North Gauteng High Court to
    stop these unlawful and damaging activities.

Mr M B GOQWANA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


    That the House debates the accessibility of antiretroviral drugs in the
    rural areas.

Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr Z LUYENGE: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates South Africa’s readiness to deal with natural
    disasters.

I thank you. [Applause.]

                   TRAGIC VEHICLE ACCIDENT IN EASTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that a devastating accident took place over the weekend in
        the Ngqeleni district of the Eastern Cape;


     2) further notes that eight people were killed and 17 others injured
        when a construction truck veered off into a gravel road and
        overturned; and


    (3)     conveys its deepest sympathy to the families who have lost their
        loved ones in this  tragic  accident  and  assures  them  that  the
        thoughts and prayers of its  Members  are  with  them  during  this
        difficult time.


    Agreed to.

             SOUTH AFRICA HOSTING ICC WOMEN’S CRICKET CHALLENGE
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that South Africa has been selected to host the inaugural
        ICC Women’s Cricket Challenge which takes place in October;

   (2)      further notes that this international competition is an
        opportunity for some of the world’s best women cricket teams, which
        include Sri Lanka, Pakistan, the West Indies, Ireland and the
        Netherlands, to showcase their skills in a series of limited overs
        and One Day International games which will be played predominantly
        in Potchefstroom in the North West province;


      3) recognises that South Africa has once again been selected to host
         an international sporting event which will attract tourists to the
         country;


      4) further recognises that we have been afforded a further opportunity
         to showcase South Africa upon an international stage and encourages
         all South Africans to support the event and help build upon the
         legacy of the Soccer World Cup to ensure that South Africa remains
         a destination of choice for tourists;

      5) extends its best wishes to the South African team and expresses its
         confidence in the team’s ability to win this tournament; and

      6) calls upon all South Africans to fly the flag for the team in this
         tournament and help them to build momentum for the African
         Qualifying Games, which will be played in December, for the 2013
         Cricket World Cup.


Agreed to.

    CONGRATULATIONS TO GOOGLE ANITA BORG MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP FOR SCIENCE
                                 RECIPIENTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

       1) notes that two African women have become the first recipients of
          the Google Anita Borg Memorial Scholarship for outstanding
          contributions and leadership in computer science and that to
          qualify for the award candidates must be female students at a
          university in Europe, the Middle East or Africa, and must be
          studying computer science, computer engineering, informatics or a
          related field;


       2) further notes that South Africa’s Sinini Ncube, a masters student
          at Rhodes University and Kenyan born Shikoh Gitau, a doctoral
          candidate at the University of Cape Town, have both won the
          scholarship and that each will receive a cash prize of R67 000 and
          an opportunity to visit Google’s engineering facility in Zurich;


       3) recognises that Ncube and Gitau are the first sub-Saharan students
          to receive the award, which is open to applicants from Europe, the
          Middle East and, for the first time, Africa – provided they are
          women; and


       4) congratulates these two women on their achievement and for showing
          the world that the African continent can compete successfully
          internationally in the field of computer science, computer
          engineering and informatics.

Agreed to.

 SELECTION OF SOUTH AFRICAN CLIMATE SCIENTISTS FOR INTERGOVERNMENTAL REPORT
                              ON CLIMATE CHANGE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

     1) welcomes the selection of 12 South African climate scientists to
        contribute to a crucial Intergovernmental Report on Climate Change;


     2) notes that the scientists are part of more than 800 scientists
        selected to write the Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment
        Report;


     3) further notes that theirs is to assess the global body of
        scientific research so as to deliver a robust report that can be
        used to inform national and global policies on climate change;


     4) believes that the report will play an important role in providing a
        knowledge base for national and global societies to make an
        informed decision on future intervention strategies on climate
        change;


     5) further believes that the inclusion of 12 South African climate
        scientists on this panel is an indication of the advancement of
        South African science and the quality of the scientists’ work; and


     6) congratulates the 12 South African climate scientists on their new
        endeavour and for hoisting the South African flag high.

Agreed to.

          SOUTH AFRICA’S VICTORY IN WORLD TRAVEL AWARDS FOR AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

    That the House —

       1) notes that South Africa cleaned up at the annual World Travel
          Awards for Africa, winning 36 awards out of the total 49
          categories;


       2) further notes that for the sixth time in seven years the city of
          Cape Town was named Africa's leading destination at the awards
          ceremony held in Sandton, South African Airways was named Africa's
          leading airline, South African Tourism was named the continent's
          leading tourism board and Durban harbour was named the leading
          port;


       3) congratulates all winners in their respective categories; and


    (4)     further congratulates the South African  tourism  industry  for
          representing South Africa and the African continent.

Agreed to.

               HUMAN SETTLEMENTS OVERSIGHT VISIT TO COSMO CITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D E DLAKUDE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, during an oversight visit to Gauteng
the Human Settlements Portfolio Committee visited Cosmo City. This is a
mixed-use, fully integrated sustainable housing development under the
Breaking New Ground strategy launched in 2004. The development consists of
12 500 units comprised of RDP, financed-linked bonded units and rental
apartments, and of these some 8 200 units have been completed.

Sites for schools, clinics, churches, parks and recreational facilities,
commercial and retail shopping centres and industry indicate a well thought
out plan. Pretty gardens were being grown and children were playing in the
parks and enjoying the trampolines, amongst other things. Everything was
neat and tidy and there was no litter.

Education forms part of the ongoing work. On Saturdays, people can come and
learn about beautifying their homes with gardens and growing their own
vegetables, and 700 000 trees are being planted. This is a partnership
between the City of Johannesburg, the Gauteng provincial government and
private company Codefco Business Development.

Cosmo City is a very good example of the new human settlements now being
planned by the ANC-led government where their people can live, work, pray
and play in a safe and pleasant environment. Thank you. [Applause.]

            MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING SIGNED BETWEEN DA AND ID

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr W G JAMES (DA): On Sunday there was an historic step in the realignment
of South African politics. A political memorandum of understanding was
signed between the ID and DA to come together and to fight elections under
the DA’s banner.

This memorandum of the DA and the ID heralds the beginning of a new phase
in South Africa’s journey away from the politics of racial identity towards
the politics of shared values. These values will form the bedrock of the
new majority we are building in South Africa.

The political contest in South Africa is therefore now between the values
of openness and opportunities for all, as envisaged in the Constitution,
versus the drive led by the ANC to suffocate the DA’s space and to limit
opportunities to the politically-connected few.

More and more South Africans are discovering this fact every day, and in
2011 they will express this at the ballot box, which will result in a
greater number of municipalities falling into the control of the DA.

We look forward, therefore, to making the South African dream – of one
nation united under the Constitution – a reality for all who live in it.
[Applause.]

                            WATER SHORTAGE CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs H N NDUDE (Cope): The water shortage, which is now looming, is going to
be a crisis bigger than any this country has ever witnessed and its
implications will be huge. At the level at which water is currently being
used, our water supply will not meet the demand by 2015.

To add to our problems, many of our streams and water sources are heavily
polluted. Some of the water is so acidic and so heavily laced with
poisonous metals that it has become a danger to humans, animals and our
agriculture. Now, even the whole city of Johannesburg is being threatened
by the rise of acid water.

The extent to which effluents are being released by municipalities into the
streams is another serious problem that requires drastic action. We demand
that a very strict standard be imposed so that a dam such as the
Hartbeespoort Dam, which is fed by the Jukskei, Hennops and Crocodile
Rivers, for example, will not become a cocktail of chemicals devoid of
oxygen, killing all life within it.

Researchers are very worried about two problems with water in South Africa:
firstly, with respect to quantity; and secondly, the quality of the water.

The poor and inefficient management of this vital resource is going to
impact negatively on our agriculture and our industries. It will also cause
the price of water to soar, and that will have a major impact on
householders. Thank you. [Time expired.]

                         COMBATING CRIMINAL NETWORKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M F TLAKE (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government views crime
as a major challenge, with criminal networks having grown in their reach
and sophistication across national boundaries. This includes syndicates
that deal with money laundering, human smuggling as well as drug
trafficking and abuse.

In addressing this challenge, the Deputy Minister of Police, Fikile
Mbalula, met with the People’s Republic of China’s Vice Minister of Public
Safety, Chen Jian, on Friday, 1 August 2010 to sign minutes of talks
relating to police operations between the two countries.

These talks mainly focused on intensifying transnational crime combating
operations, but also explored lessons China and South Africa could learn
from each other’s security models as well as the countries’ exchange of
intelligence information on a range of issues. This includes drug
trafficking, illegal immigration, money laundering, arms smuggling and
human trafficking.

Through this co-operation we will be able to work closely within the
framework of enhanced policing. This will result in providing assistance in
case investigations and handing over criminal suspects, subject to the laws
relating to mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and extradition.
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I remind the hon members that statements are
supposed to be only one and a half minutes long?

                    CORRUPTION IN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K P SITHOLE (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP has taken notice of President
Zuma’s interest in the present corruption within several government
departments currently under investigation by the Special Investigation
Unit.

We believe that all forms of government corruption must be identified and
eradicated as a matter of urgency. If the ANC is to deliver successfully on
the many promises it has made to the citizens of our country, stepping up
the fight against corruption will go a long way in eradicating the many
service delivery problems that are currently plaguing most government
departments.

The IFP unreservedly supports strong initiatives to eradicate corruption. I
thank you.

                 INVESTIGATION BY SPECIAL INVESTIGATiNG UNIT
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF PLUS): Adjunkspeaker, die VF Plus verwelkom die
aankondiging van president Zuma dat die Spesiale Ondersoekeenheid korrupsie
gaan ondersoek en dat dit die Polisie gaan insluit.

Hierdie ondersoek moet egter nie net handel oor die tydperk van die vorige
hoof van die polisie, Jackie Selebi, nie maar moet ook alle
diensverskaffersooreenkomste insluit wat aangegaan is sedert die aanvang
van genl Cele se termyn in Junie 2009.

Die VF Plus het ’n klag by die Openbare Beskermer ingedien en ’n antwoord
van haar ontvang dat sy ondersoek sal instel na die sluit van die R500
miljoen huurkontrak vir ’n nuwe polisiehoofkantoor.

Die feit dat die kontrak deur die Departement van Openbare Werke onderteken
is, verskoon egter nie genl Bheki Cele se rol nie, aangesien die
behoeftebepaling vir akkommodasie deur genl Cele geëvalueer en onderteken
is. Genl Cele kan hom dus nie verskoon van hierdie transaksie nie.

Daar bestaan geen regverdiging vir die prosedure wat gevolg is om nog ’n
gebou op ’n dringende basis te bekom nie. Daar is tans reeds ’n huurkontrak
vir die polisie se hoofkantoor. Slegs nadat hierdie huurtermyn ten einde
gekom het, behoort ’n nuwe gebou betrek te word. Belastingbetalers se geld
gaan nou gebruik word om twee huurkontrakte vir twee geboue vir die polisie
te betaal.

Die regering moet egter nie net stop by die instel van ondersoeke na
korrupsie in sekere staatsdepartemente nie. Amptenare wat betrokke is by
korrupsie, ongeag hul posisie en politieke lojaliteite, moet vervolg word.

Hierdie vervolging moet nie net beperk word tot die amptenare wat korrupsie
gepleeg het nie, maar moet ook geld vir amptenare wat in bestuursposte is
en moet behels dat amptenare die korrekte prosedures volg met die
toekenning van kontrakte aan diensverskaffers. Dankie. (Translation of
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF PLUS): Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus welcomes the
announcement by President Zuma that the Special Investigating Unit will
investigate corruption and that this will include the Police.

This investigation should, however, not only cover the period of the former
head of Police, Jackie Selebi, but should also include all agreements with
regard to service providers which have been made since Gen Cele took office
in June 2009.

The FF Plus has submitted a complaint to the Public Protector and received
an answer from her that she will investigate the R500 million lease that
was secured for a new head office for the Police.

The fact that the contract was signed by the Department of Public Works,
however, does not excuse Gen Bheki Cele’s role, as Gen Cele evaluated and
signed the needs assessment for accommodation. Therefore, Gen Cele cannot
excuse himself from this transaction.

There is no justification for the procedure that was followed to obtain
another building urgently. Currently, there is a lease in place for the
head office of the Police. A new building should only be moved into once
this rental period has expired. Taxpayers’ money will now be used to pay
two leases for two buildings for the Police.

Government should, however, not only investigate corruption in certain
government departments. Officials who are involved in corruption,
regardless of their positions and political loyalty, should be prosecuted.

This prosecution should not only be limited to officials who commit
corruption, but should also include officials at management level who
should ensure that officials follow the correct procedures with regard to
awarding contracts to service providers. Thank you.]

                   CELEBRATION OF SADC’s 30th ANNIVERSARY
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H T MAGAMA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC will equally and
joyfully celebrate with the SA Development Community, SADC, on its 30th
anniversary in Namibia’s capital, Windhoek. The SADC has been in existence
since 1980 and its main aim was to co-ordinate development projects in
order to lessen the economic dependence on the then apartheid South Africa.

Today, the SADC’s vision is one of economic wellbeing; improved standards
of living and quality of life; freedom and social justice; and peace and
security for the people of Southern Africa. The SADC’s common agenda is
based on various principles such as development orientation; subsidiarity;
market integration and development; facilitation and promotion of trade and
investment; and variable geometry.

The SADC region is still facing a number of challenges that needs to be
resolved so as to ensure its effective functioning. The ANC believes that
it is important to consolidate the SADC as a regional economic community.
Therefore, the ANC government has to play a prominent role in strengthening
and consolidating the region politically. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        AVERTING PUBLIC SECTOR STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K J DIKOBO (Azapo): Madam Deputy Speaker, depending on the decision of
leaders of public sector unions tomorrow, South Africa could be faced with
a huge public sector strike. We have no intention of doing collective
bargaining in this House, but we want to raise the following: The country
cannot afford to have a strike at this sensitive stage, particularly in
respect of the education sector.

The strike will have a crippling effect on the lives of ordinary people. We
still want to urge the parties to try and find each other. It will be
unfortunate if, as in the 2007 public sector strike, the state as employer
comes up with a revised offer after disruptions and loss of valuable time.

We are seeing the same approach in Tlakgameng in the North West province
where government somehow found the money to construct the tarred road. We
are told that things will go back to normal in Tlakgameng, but the reality
is that schools have been destroyed in the process. Why did it take all the
time and damage for the relevant authorities to “find the money”? That is
why we are telling the employer to go and find the money to avert the
strike, if it can be found. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  ABANDONMENT OF BABIES IN THE WESTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP notes that more
than 500 babies were abandoned in Cape Town over a period of 12 months.
Welfare organisations in Cape Town agree that the number of abandonment
cases is on the increase. We are expressing great concern over this ever-
increasing phenomenon.

We are therefore urging government to urgently implement programmes that
will assist would-be mothers with child rearing skills and provide
information to pregnant women who cannot afford to raise a child with
suitable alternatives as opposed to child abandonment. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                         PRESIDENT’S VISIT TO RUSSIA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Deputy Speaker, President Jacob Zuma has expressed
satisfaction with the outcome of his visit to Russia on Thursday, 5 August
2010 which resulted in the signing of several agreements on energy, visa
requirements and space. The visit also afforded both countries an
opportunity to further consolidate and enhance relations at both bilateral
and multilateral levels.

At a multilateral level, both countries shared a commitment to promoting a
more equitable distribution of power and influence in the global political
and economic systems. Both countries uphold diplomacy of international law
and the centrality of the United Nations, UN.

President Zuma’s three-day visit to Russia was part of the ANC government’s
plan to work together with the countries in the South to continue to
promote South-South relations and agitate for a fairer and more humane
international trade and financial system and a just world order.

Part of this plan is to push new trade and investment routes to the fast
growing emerging economies who are also members of Brazil, Russia, India
and China, Bric. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  SADTU MEMBERS WREAKING HAVOC IN EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J R B LORIMER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC allies, the teachers’
trade union and the SA Democratic Teachers Union, Sadtu, continue to
destroy the life chances of South Africa’s poorest children. Really, this
has been better illustrated than the public servant strike, which is
currently under way. Sadtu allied teachers in Soweto began staying away
from school the week before the strike began and at many schools around the
country are still not back at work. Even worse than staying away, Sadtu
members interfere with the constitutional rights of other teachers to work
and of pupils to get education.

Sadtu members in the Vaal, armed with sticks, yesterday attacked schools
and assaulted working teachers. This is not the first time that Sadtu
members have been guilty of thuggish behaviour. In East London, in May,
Sadtu members assaulted teachers who arrived at a district office to fetch
exam papers. In one school they tore up the papers in front of the primary
school pupils who were trying to write. They knew the exams would expose
their failure to teach.

From the Eastern Cape to the Northern Cape to Bushbuckridge, Sadtu
threatens to attack and kill school principals and their families if they
try and make union members come to class on time. Yet nothing happens to
these thugs.

This government may talk the talk, but when it comes to upsetting their
political allies in Sadtu the ANC’s need for election workers becomes more
important than the future of South Africa’s children.

As long as the ANC gives Sadtu a free pass to terrorise our children,
parents, teachers and communities, this government’s promise to fix
education is doomed to failure. [Applause.]

             ALLEGATIONS AGAINST DEPARTMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C M P KOTSI (Cope): Madam Deputy Speaker, there are too many allegations
made against the Department of Mineral Resources in respect of the
allocation of mineral rights to Imperial Crown Trading and others. The fact
that Imperial Crown Trading has no known capacity whatsoever to mine iron
ore adds to the public’s suspicion that this was a political deal with key
people. What Cope has identified as far as a relationship with those in
political office, including the highest office in the land, is concerned is
that once the deal was done, Imperial Crown Trading, ICT, was in a hurry to
cash in on the rights and bank the fortune — thanks to the ANC, which
turned a blind eye.

No wonder that workers who risk their lives and limb daily to bring the
iron ore to the surface are so incensed, as of course is the rest of South
Africa. ICT openly admits that this was money for jam.

It should be noted that family members of the President have registered
nearly a hundred companies since Polokwane. Clearly, this was a turning
point for personal fortunes. Is this what the Department of Mineral
Resources is set up for? If such information is classified in the near
future, we will never know how the country is being looted even further.
Clearly, this is the animal farm type of a better life for all and we can
do more.

We demand a full inquiry into: firstly, why the Department of Mineral
Resources awarded the rights to ICT in the first place; and secondly, why
it took no measures to stop the rights being sold immediately after. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                       JURISDICTION OF REGIONAL COURTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L T LANDERS (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government has again
proved its commitment to improving access to justice for all our people by
giving our country’s regional courts the power to deal with civil cases.
The new powers come as a result of the Jurisdiction of Regional Courts
Amendment Act, which was announced by the hon President, Jacob Zuma, and
came into effect on Women’s Day.

The country’s regional courts were established in 1952 to deal with serious
criminal offences and to hand out harsher penalties. Cases that regional
courts will now preside over include family disputes such as divorce,
maintenance, adoption and matters relating to the custody of minor
children. Disputes over movable and immovable property of between R100 000
and R300 000, which were previously dealt with by the high court, can now
be heard in regional courts.

Regional courts will also have the power to deal with credit agreements
between R100 000 and R300 000, as well as Road Accident Fund claims of
between R100 000 and R300 000. The amendments in general increase access to
justice for members of the public and in particular for women and children
who go to courts daily for the resolution of family-related disputes.

The ANC-led government continues to find ways of improving access to
justice for all our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

              CALL FOR PRESIDENT TO EXPLAIN ZIMBABWE SITUATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K S MUBU (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA calls on President Jacob Zuma to
explain the ANC government’s failure to publicly condemn the Mugabe
administration’s flouting of a 2008 SADC Tribunal Ruling, which declared
Zimbabwe’s Land Reform Programme as unlawful.

Following yesterday’s delivery of his report on Zimbabwe at the SADC
Summit, the President refused to publicly address the considerable
obstacles hindering the establishment of a democratic dispensation in that
country. His muted stance on Zimbabwe’s brazen contempt for the tribunal’s
ruling has further undermined the legitimacy of the highly respected SADC
Tribunal and that of the SADC itself.

The ANC government’s evasive approach to the Zimbabwean political situation
has seen it resorting to court action to keep the contents of various
reports regarding the Zimbabwean political situation out of the public
domain. The report, compiled by Judges Dikgang Moseneke and Sisi Khampepe
about the fairness of Zimbabwe’s 2002 presidential election, and the
infamous general’s report commissioned by former President Mbeki are two
such examples.

President Zuma’s smoke and mirrors policy regarding Zimbabwe has allowed
President Mugabe’s despotic tendencies to flourish and the rights of South
African citizens in Zimbabwe to be repeatedly and systematically abused.
This deserves a full explanation. I thank you. [Applause.]

         CONGRATULATIONS TO NORTHERN CAPE ON SUPERSONIC CAR PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs X C MAKASI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC government congratulates the
Northern Cape for being presented with an opportunity to host a Bloodhound
Supersonic Car Project. The Bloodhound Supersonic Car Project is a pencil-
shaped car powered by a jet engine and a rocket that is designed to reach
approximately 1000 or 1600 km/h.

It is being developed and built with the intention of breaking a land speed
record by the largest ever margin. This project will position the Northern
Cape in the world of extreme sports. It will attract and bring a lot of
tourists, as well as creating a platform for businesses to grow, thus
contributing to the Gross Domestic Product of the province. Moreover, for
the people of the Northern Cape this project will go beyond the breaking of
the land speed record and serve as a tool for aspiring young children about
the purpose of careers like science, technology, engineering and
mathematics.

The utilisation of the Hakskeen Pan in the province as a fast track will
create an opportunity for tourism growth around the area. When the track is
fully developed it can be used by other extreme sports as a fast track in
the world, thus putting the province in the international arena. I thank
you. [Applause.]

            MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING SIGNED BETWEEN DA AND ID
                        AVERTING PUBLIC SECTOR STRIKE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Deputy Speaker, I’m here. Feel me. [Laughter.] The
ID is dead. It has allowed itself to be conquered, annihilated, wiped out,
buried and swallowed by the Democratic Alliance. What they are forgetting
is that the natives of this land, the Khoi and the San, were conquered and
their culture and language destroyed by the colonisers.

Ek wil net vra: Wat makeer Patricia de Lille? Hoekom vergeet sy so gou? Ons
mense kom van die ANC, want die ANC se boodskap is duidelik. [I just want
to know what is the matter with Patricia de Lille. Why does she forget so
easily? Our people come from the ANC, because the ANC has a clear message.]

It is only the ANC that will be able to assist the people of the Western
Cape. In fact, we are very happy that the ID and the DA are now in one
corner. [Interjections.] We don’t need many other struggles.

Ja, sê maar dankie! Ek is baie bly! [Gelag.] [Applous.] [Yes, say thank
you! I am very happy! [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Kucace gca okwekati emhlophe iphuma ehlungwuni ukuba UPatricia De Lille
umqolo akanawo, ngumsonto onyikinyiki. [Uwelewele.] Abantu bebala udlale
ngabo. Ngoku uyabaleka iinyawo zibeth’emqolo, uyokungena esiswini sentlanzi
ngokukaYona. Ngelishwa, andinalo ithemba lokuba yena uyakuze atyekezwe yile
ntlanzi njengoYona. Hamba kakuhle ke Patricia De Lille, uhambo lwakho
lusothusile naxa singothukanga kangako. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Siyadloba ke kuba
ngoku utshaba thina sizakulubona kakuhle. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[It is crystal clear that Patricia de Lille doesn’t have the backbone, she
is unreliable. [Interjections.] She gambled with the coloureds.  Now she is
running as fast as she can, she is catering for her own interests; remember
the story of Jonah in the Bible who was swallowed by the big fish.
Unfortunately, I doubt if she will be spewed out like Jonah. Go well,
Patricia de Lille, your departure was not expected, even though we are not
amazed that much. [Applause.] We are excited because we will now clearly
see who our enemy is.]

Lastly, I want to say, we condemn all actions that attempt to demonise the
genuine struggles of our workers in the country. We call on all the parties
to endeavour to find a settlement in any dispute that they may have. I know
that the strike is not what the workers want. I know that the strike is not
what the employers want. There is no other solution except to go back to
the negotiation table. It is important that we make sure that in South
Africa social dialogue succeeds. There is no other method. Back to the
negotiation table to find a settlement; others will not resolve the
dispute. Thank you. [Applause.]

                 INVESTIGATION BY SPECIAL INVESTIGATING UNIT
                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Deputy Speaker, my response to the statement
by the Freedom Front Plus is that, since the release of the audit report of
2008-09, we had a press briefing last year at which the Department of
Public Works briefed the media on the work that we were doing on reviewing
our supply chain management processes, in particular the department’s
entire lease portfolio.

More recently, and concurrent with the department’s own work in this
regard, the Special Investigating Unit is also conducting a broader
investigation which is inclusive of the department’s lease portfolio. Also,
the Office of the Public Protector has served the Department of Public
Works with a communiqué requesting specific information regarding the
specific case for the purpose of its own separate investigation.
Consequently, the implementation of the two leases in question is being
held in abeyance in order to allow space for the processes of all these
investigations to be proceeded with. Thank you.

                       JURISDICTION OF REGIONAL COURTS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy
Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Luwellyn Landers for the statement
that he made about access to justice, and the granting of civil
jurisdiction to regional courts. That is a very important step which is
going to bring justice closer to many South Africans. It complements the
steps that have already been taken by the Department of Justice in the form
of introducing the Superior Courts Bill, which will bring the superior
courts to many provinces that didn’t have them before, like Mpumalanga and
Limpopo; the building of the new courts, the upgrading of existing courts
and also, more importantly, the conversion of so-called branch courts into
full services courts.

The expansion of small claims courts to all magisterial districts and the
promotion of the use of indigenous languages in all our courts — all these
things, together, are going to assist in bringing justice closer to the
people of South Africa. Therefore, we thank you for your statement. Thank
you.

                        AVERTING Public seCTOR strike

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Deputy
Speaker, I want to respond to the hon member who raised the issue of the
public sector strike, urging the employer to go and find the money to avert
the strike.

I want to take this opportunity to state the assurance that the Minister
had announced in several press briefings that, on behalf of government, the
Department of Public Service and Administration - the Minister and his team
in particular - is making extremely strenuous efforts to meet the demands
that have been placed by the public sector workers on the state to avert
the strike and to find an acceptable solution to all the parties concerned.

As you all know, we are in the midst of trying to finalise the negotiations
on the public sector dispute. At the moment, the Minister has announced
that the offer that has been made by government to the trade unions, which
is being considered now, is an offer of 7% against their basic demand of
8,6%, with a further 1,5% of what is defined as pay progression and a
further 0,5%, which is attributable to the housing allowance that amounts
to R700, making a total of 9% against the demands that the trade unions
have made on the employer.

Government has moved, in this particular offer, from its initial opening
offer of 6% to a total sum now of 9%. The housing allowance will move from
an opening offer of R600 to R700. This proposal is currently being
considered at a meeting of the bargaining council today. So, we don’t want
to jeopardise the outcome of this particular matter by taking the debate in
the House any further.

However, I really want to reiterate our commitment as government to finding
a solution that is acceptable to all parties. In the context of the matters
that underline the demands that have been placed before us by the trade
unions concerned, government has given an assurance that we must put a
scientific process in place that must be directed at reviewing the
remuneration policy of public sector workers in the medium to long term.

I would like to give an assurance to this House that, within the resources
that are available to the state, we are determined to find an appropriate
solution that balances both the interests of the public sector and the
interests of the people we are serving. We cannot allow ourselves to be
compromised from meeting the obligations that we as a government have
committed ourselves to in our programme of action.

The issue of finding an appropriate solution and ensuring that the strike
is averted is very central to our commitment. We believe that the workers
of this country have a democratic right to strike, but in so far as we
support that and take heed of that right, we also would like to urge the
workers concerned that the right must be exercised without any threat,
intimidation or violence. Thank you.

                   celebration of SADC’s 30th anniversary
                         PRESIDENT’S VISIT TO RUSSIA
              CALL FOR PRESIDENT TO EXPLAIN ZIMBABWE SITUATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION (Ms S C van
der Merwe): Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to respond to the two
members’ statements from ANC colleagues. The first one was regarding the
30th anniversary of the SADC. Indeed, I think it is a great milestone and
the SADC has made enormous strides during that time, both in political
integration and cohesion, as well as in the region of economic integration
issues with which we are still seized. Hon members will remember that we
signed a Free Trade Area, FTA, within the SADC in 2008. That process is
under way and we are busy consolidating and implementing that FTA towards
even greater regional integration.

The second member’s statement was regarding the President’s visit to Russia
- and I think this is a very important point. Members in this House would
be aware that the President had visited Brazil and India at the invitation
of their presidents as well as Russia, and next week he will be visiting
China. I think it is very important that those countries were very high on
the list of our foreign Ministry, the Department of International Relations
and Co-operation as well as the invitations from those respective
Presidents. Because Brazil, Russia and China are the fastest growing
developing economies in the world and South Africa is also considered to be
an important angle in that.

So, as a country we are consolidating our relationship with these countries
in order to further those very important rapidly growing economies in the
emerging markets. I think it is a very significant step and we are very
pleased that we have had a very positive response from all those other
countries in our engagement with them.

I would like to ask the hon member Mubu where he gets his information
because the SADC Summit only concluded 40 minutes ago. So, he must really
be very well aware of what was decided there, because that communiqué has
not yet been published. I don’t know where he gets this information. Maybe
he is just seeing into the future. Thank you. [Applause.]

  Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Water and environmental
Affairs - Overview and Analysis of the Annual Reports of Water Boards, 2008-
                                     09

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Overview and Analysis of the Annual Reports of Water Boards, 2008-
09 accordingly adopted.

    Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
  Administration - Oversight Visit to Thusong centres: Gauteng and Northern
                               Cape Provinces

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Oversight Visit to Thusong centres: Gauteng and Northern Cape
Provinces accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 14:53.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly
The Speaker

   1. Submission of confidential report

    a) A letter dated 4 June 2010 has been received from the Minister of
       Justice and Constitutional Development, submitting a report
       containing information of a commercially sensitive nature and
       requesting that the report be declared as confidential. In view of
       the provisions of section 36 of the Promotion of Access to
       Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000), the request has been
       acceded to and the report is hereby placed before the committee in
       terms of Rule 157(1)(c) of the National Assembly Rules.

       Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
       Development.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
       on Public Service and Administration. The report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
       referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service Sector
           Education Training Authority (PSETA) for 2007-08, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 83-2008].

    2) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
       Finance for consideration and report:

        a) Protocol amending the Convention with Protocol between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
           Ireland for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
           of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and Capital
           Gains, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
           1996.

        b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention with Protocol between
           the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
           of Ireland for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
           Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and
           Capital Gains.


        c) Protocol amending the Convention between the Republic of South
           Africa and the Kingdom of Sweden for the Avoidance of Double
           Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
           Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

        d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol amending the Convention
           between the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Sweden
           for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
           Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

    3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Justice and Constitutional Development:

        a) Proclamation No R.27 published in Government Gazette No 33279,
           dated 8 June 2010: Referral of matters to an existing Special
           Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
           Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1974 (Act No 74 of
           1996).

    4) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Trade and Industry:

        a) Government Notice No R.348 published in Government Gazette No
           33152, dated 7 May 2010: Introduction of a compulsory
           specification for compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) in terms of
           section 13(1)(a) of the National Regulator Compulsory
           Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

        b) General Notice No 396 published in Government Gazette No 33197,
           dated 17 May 2010: Prohibition on the use of the intellectual
           property rights of the Moses Mabhida Stadium and other World Cup
           stadiums, save with the authority of the metro or municipality in
           which they are located, in terms of section 15(1) of the
           Merchandise Marks Act, 1941 (Act No 17 of 1941).

        c) General Notice No 409 published in Government Gazette No 33203,
           dated 17 May 2010: Publication in terms of section 10(3) the
           Consumer Affairs (Unfair Business Practices) Act, 1988 (Act No 71
           of 1988) of Report No 125 on an investigation conducted by the
           Consumer Affairs Committee.

        d) Government Notice No R. 443 published in Government Gazette No
           33211, dated 28 May 2010: Amendment to the compulsory
           specification for replacement brake-lining assemblies for road
           vehicles in terms of section 13(1) the National Regulator
           Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

        e) Government Notice No R.425 published in Government Gazette No
           33217, dated 24 May 2010: 2010 Soccer World Cup Liquor
           Regulations in terms of the Liquor Act, 2003 (Act No 59 of 2003).

        f) Government Notice No 493 published in Government Gazette No
           33259, dated 3 June 2010: Announcement of the implementation date
           of the Probity and Central Information-Sharing Register in terms
           of section 87 of the National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of
           2004).

        g) Government Notice No 494 published in Government Gazette No
           33260, dated 3 June 2010: Announcement of the implementation date
           of the National Register for Gambling Devices and Machines in
           terms of section 87 the National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of
           2004).

        h) Government Notice No R.504 published in Government Gazette No
           33265, dated 11 June 2010: Notice of intention to introduce a
           subregulation for the energy efficiency of buildings in terms of
           section 20(1) of the National Building Regulations and Building
           Standards Act, 1977 (Act No 103 of 1977).

        i) General Notice No 612 published in Government Gazette No 33309,
           dated 25 June 2010: Proposed prohibition on the use of certain
           words together with an emblem in terms of section 13 of the
           Merchandise Marks Act, 1941 (Act No 17 of 1941).
        j) General Notice No 613 published in Government Gazette No 33309,
           dated 25 June 2010: Proposed prohibition on the use of certain
           words together with an emblem in terms of section 13 of the
           Merchandise Marks Act, 1941 (Act No 17 of 1941).

    5) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The reports of the
       Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
       information for 2009-10 are referred to the Committee on Public
       Accounts for consideration:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited (Eskom)
           for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

        b) Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10

    6) The following papers are referred to the Joint Standing Committee on
       Defence for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Defence
       and Military Veterans:

        a) Letter from the President of the Republic, dated 7 July 2010, to
           the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing members of the
           Assembly of the extension of the employment of the SA National
           Defence Force to participate in the third phase of the UN Mission
           in the Democratic Republic of Congo for service in fulfilment of
           the international obligations of the Republic of South Africa
           towards the United Nations.
        b) Letter from the President of the Republic, dated 30 July 2010, to
           the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing members of the
           Assembly of the employment of the SA National Defence Force in
           cooperation with the SA Police Service for the prevention and
           combating of crime and maintenance of law and order within the
           Republic of South Africa, and to render support to Government
           departments during the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup
           tournament.

        c) Letter from the President of the Republic, dated 30 July 2010, to
           the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing members of the
           Assembly of the extension of the employment of the SA National
           Defence Force to participate in the AU-UN hybrid operation in
           Darfur (Unamid) for service in fulfilment of the international
           obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the United
           Nations (UN) and African Union (AU).

    7) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Economic Development for consideration and report:

        a) Strategic Plan of the Competition Tribunal for 2010-15 (Revised
           July 2010).

        b) Strategic Plan of the International Trade Administration
           Commission of South Africa (ITAC) for 2010-13.

        c) Medium-Term Strategic Plan for the Khula Enterprise Finance (Ltd)
           for 2011-13 and Business Plan 2010-11.

        d) Three-Year Strategic Plan of the South African Micro-Finance Apex
           Fund (SAMAF) for 2010-13.

        e) Strategic Plan of the Competition Commission for the period 1
           April 2010 to 31 March 2013.

        f) Strategic Plan of the Industrial Development Corporation of South
           Africa (Corporate Plan) for the period 1 April 2010 to 31 March
           2013.

    8) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
       for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Labour:

        a) Report of the Auditor-General to Parliament on an investigation
           at the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
           (CCMA) – June 2010 [RP 193-2010].

    9) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Water and Environmental Affairs:
        a) General Notice No 654 published in Government Gazette No 33333,
           dated 29 June 2010: Publication of sector guidelines for
           environmental impact assessment regulations for general comment
           in terms of section 24J of the National Environmental Management
           Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

        b) Government Notice No 579 published in Government Gazette No
           33342, dated 2 July 2010: Model air-quality management by-law for
           easy adoption and adaptation by municipalities in terms of
           section 46(1) of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998
           (Act No 107 of 1998).

        c) General Notice No 677 published in Government Gazette No 33348,
           dated 2 July 2010: Publication of bio-prospecting benefit-sharing
           agreement for public comment in terms of section 83 of the
           National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No
           10 of 2004).

        d) Government Notice No 596 published in Government Gazette No
           33361, dated 7 July 2010: Publication of bio-prospecting, access
           and benefit-sharing regulations, 2008, for delegating authority
           to issue permits in terms of section 42 of the National
           Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

        e) 2009-10 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1) of
           the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of
           1998).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    Correction:  The following entry replaces item 1(d) published under
               Tablings in the name of the Minister of Trade and Industry
               in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 4
               August 2010, on page 2286:
               (d)     Government Notice No R. 443 published in Government
                    Gazette No 33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment:
                    Compulsory Specification for Replacement Brake Lining
                    Assemblies for Road Vehicles, in terms of the National
                    Regulator Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5
                    of 2008).


