---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 October 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-10-27
---

WEDNESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 9129.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

                                 (Statement)
                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy
President, fellow Cabinet colleagues and Deputy Ministers, the Governor of
the Reserve Bank, MECs for Finance, members of the diplomatic corps,
directors-general, heads of institutions in the finance family, hon
members, guests, ladies and gentlemen, former President Mandela once said
that “after climbing a great hill, one only finds that there are many more
hills to climb”. This is particularly true in Nkandla. As a youthful
nation, we have had our fair share of hills to climb. Our successful
hosting of the World Cup earlier this year is surely proof that no hill is
too steep.

As we move out of the depth of the greatest recession since the 1930s, we
find yet another hill facing us – the highest, and perhaps the highest we
have yet to climb. This is the creation of jobs and the reduction of
poverty. Today is the birthday anniversary of a great South African, Oliver
Tambo, who dedicated his life to these goals of a better life for all South
Africans. Can we applaud this! [Applause.]

In taking the struggle forward, Cabinet has this week released details of a
new growth path that sets out a vision and outlines key areas where jobs
can be created. This is an agenda for collective action by the state,
business, organised labour and civil society. In fact, all South Africans
have an interest in energising and activating the growth path.

Members of the House will know that details of the new growth path have
been under intensive discussion since this time last year. A more inclusive
approach to development and creating jobs has been at the forefront of the
work of Parliament and many of its committees this year, and it was
recently the central theme of Nedlac’s annual summit. Our central goal is
unequivocal. We have to accelerate growth in the South African economy, and
we have to do so in ways that will rapidly reduce poverty, unemployment and
inequality.

In February this year, we spoke of our shared humanity, our generosity, our
resilience and our capacity to heal and deal honestly with each other as
South Africans. We said these attributes were our most precious asset, an
asset that gives us formidable capacity to fight adversity, to find common
ground amongst us and to move forward to our goals. Now is the time to
demonstrate this; the challenges before us demand it.

We have done well, but this is not good enough. We know our challenges. It
is time to be impatient with ourselves. I believe the time for talking
about our challenges is over. The challenges that we know so well —
poverty, unemployment, deteriorating infrastructure, delays in service
delivery – demand our urgent responses.

Our communities have been very patient. They want this economy to create
jobs, and they want faster and better delivery of public services. All
South Africans — those who are poor and those who are privileged — want
economic growth. But they don’t want just any growth; they want economic
growth that creates opportunities for meaningful participation. This is not
only for us, but it is also for our neighbours and, more importantly, for
our sons and daughters and future generations.
It is my privilege to introduce the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement on
behalf of the President and the Cabinet and to encourage the House and its
committees to engage fully with its proposals as part of the more wide-
ranging discussion of the central economic, social, financial and
developmental challenges of our time.

I need to stress that the design of a growth strategy is our first step and
an important one. Our next challenge, to which we are fully committed, is
its implementation — aligning our policies and programmes, managing
infrastructure project contracts, supporting accelerated business
investment and actually delivering on the outputs and activities that are
now documented in the outcome statements, delivery agreements and strategic
plans for every government department, every public entity, every state-
owned enterprise and every municipality. All of us — every Minister — is
committed to this.

As you know, we can deliver on a plan, as you have seen in the World Cup.
We can deliver this on time and more or less on budget. We know that we can
mobilise all South Africans behind a major project. In the midst of a
global recession, we brought a special brand of South African magic to the
television screens of the whole world. Billions of people around the world
watched South Africa perform at its best, and we hosted 350 000
enthusiastic visitors in our own land. We know what it feels like to work
together as a nation, to share a collective pride in saying, “Ke nako! It’s
time! We can do it!” Of course, we also know that economic development is
not an event, but a process which requires sustained effort and continuous
engagement unfolding over many years.

The 2010 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement begins with a reminder that
development is not about numbers, but about people and improving the
quality of their lives.

Our third progress report on the Millennium Development Goals, MDGs, has
recently been published as a collaborative effort between Statistics SA and
a range of civil society organisations. It is a timely reminder that while
we can report steady progress on several fronts, we are lagging well behind
targets in others.

We are likely to achieve the 2015 MDG targets for reducing extreme poverty,
access to water and sanitation and providing school opportunities and
achieving gender equity in education. But on critical health indicators
such as maternal and child mortality, which Minister Motsoaledi
continuously reminds us of, and HIV and TB prevalence, we are not on track
to achieve the targets. The quality of many of our schools falls short of
acceptable standards. On broader economic indicators, we still have a very
unequal distribution of income, and too few South Africans have jobs.

So, we have to place health care and the creation of the national health
insurance, education, employment and the requirements of the growth path at
the centre of our policy framework for the period ahead.

This is in part about expenditure allocations, and it is also about how we
manage public service delivery. It is about taking forward the work of
Minister Chabane’s Performance Monitoring and Evaluation and Administration
department and various interdepartmental teams which have developed
specific outputs and targets that are now embedded in 12 sets of delivery
agreements covering national, provincial and local government
responsibilities.

These commitments and priorities have already influenced departmental
planning and budgeting. Examples of existing spending programmes that
relate to each outcome area are provided in the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, and they will be elaborated on in more detail in February next
year.

We are making our policy priorities and service delivery goals more
measurable and more exact. We are strengthening our capacity to root out
corruption and waste. We are making it possible for members of this House
and ordinary citizens to see links between activities and projects of
government departments and service delivery in our communities.

Our budget policy framework is also informed by the requirements of a new
growth path in which six key sectors and activities have been identified
for unlocking employment potential: infrastructure, through the expansion
of transport, energy, water, communications and housing; agriculture and
the agro-processing sector; mining and mineral beneficiation; the green
economy and associated manufacturing and other services; manufacturing
sectors identified in the Industrial Policy Action Plan; and tourism and
selected services sectors.

Government’s new growth path provides the basis for co-ordinated policies
and programmes across the state and a reinvigorated dialogue and co-
operation among social partners. This is what accountability means.

South Africa was recently ranked first amongst 94 countries in the
International Budget Partnership’s Open Budget Survey. [Applause.] Mr
Manuel should be the first one to say “yeah” because he, together with
officials, had a lot to do with this.

I’m going to repeat this, hon Deputy Speaker. South Africa was recently
ranked first amongst 94 countries in the International Budget Partnership’s
Open Budget Survey, which assesses the degree to which governments provide
sufficient budget documentation to allow for public participation,
understanding and oversight in national budget decision-making. This is
something that all of us should be very proud of. [Applause.] This is
indeed what accountability means.

The challenge before this House and indeed before all South Africans is to
strengthen our capacity to use this information to improve oversight,
accountability, service delivery and thus improve the pace and quality of
our social and economic progress. In other words, we have all the
information; there is no shortage of information. There is also no shortage
of transparency with regard to that information. But democracy works when
we use the information in a constructive and rigorous way so that we can
hold people accountable for what they are supposed to deliver.

Before returning to these development challenges, allow me to comment
briefly on developments in the global economy. International trade and
output have started to grow again, after the severe recession brought on by
the financial sector crisis in developed countries. Fiscal and monetary
policies remain broadly expansionary, but growth remains fragile,
especially in major developed economies where employment has yet to recover
— like in South Africa — and debt levels continue to rise — unlike in South
Africa.

After declining by 0,6% in 2009, the world economy is expected to grow by
4,8% this year, which is considerably stronger than was expected at the
beginning of the year. China and other major developing countries remain
the primary engine of world growth as their economies continue to be driven
by rapid industrial expansion, urbanisation, and modernisation. India,
Germany and Brazil are also contributing significantly to global growth.

Let me reinforce this message. This message is saying to us that the way in
which the globe is growing at the moment is very different from 10 years
ago. Developing or emerging countries are playing a far more powerful role,
and they are in fact the locomotives which are driving global growth at
this point in time.

However, there are signs that this recovery has slowed since the middle of
this year. In the United States the Federal Reserve Bank has indicated that
additional stimulus measures may be needed to prevent deflation. We must be
cautious about these additional stimulatory measures which will have
benefits for the United States and could have benefits for us.

However, this phenomenon called “quantitative easing”, which puts more
money out into the economy and possibly more money that will come to
economies that are our own for the short term only and inflate or
strengthen our currencies, is a challenge that, at a global level, the
President will have to tackle when he goes to the G20 summit later in
November in Korea.

China has taken steps to tighten its policy to prevent its economy from
overheating. Last weekend’s meeting of G20 finance Ministers and central
bankers in South Korea drew attention to the risk of increased
protectionism and disjointed actions by countries seeking to gain trading
advantages by weakening their currencies.

At the same time, countries with high fiscal deficits are obliged to reduce
their deficits and stabilise their debt levels through, hopefully, growth-
friendly fiscal consolidation plans phased in over timeframes that are
specific to the conditions of each country.

The G20 proposes a stronger multilateral co-operation focused on structural
reforms to sustain global demand, foster job creation and increase growth
potential while completing financial repair and regulatory reforms without
delay. It is uncertain how these international co-operation efforts will
work out.

So many countries share the same policy challenge – finding the right
balance between measures taken jointly with other nations and steps aimed
at protecting national interests.

This is developing as a major challenge to us globally. One sits in global
fora and thinks they are attending to concerns of the globe as a whole. But
often countries end up advancing their own national interests and find it
difficult to connect in respect of gobal interests.

It is clear that the rebalancing of global trade — consumption and
investment patterns, increases in spending in surplus countries and
decreases in deficit economies — in ways that are consistent with current
account and fiscal sustainability norms will take many years, and, indeed,
rapid rebalancing would be highly disruptive.

To understand the complexity of this restructuring, we need to appreciate
that the decreases or increases in consumption or investment that may be
required in specific countries have implications for production in other
countries, which will in turn impact on investment elsewhere in the world,
leading to further shifts in trade patterns and dynamics.

These interconnected changes in economic activity bring real opportunities
for growth and a redistribution of global income and welfare, but they are
not correlated in predictable ways with exchange rate movements. The
current global co-ordination efforts are therefore focused also on new
sources of growth, longer-term trade development and a more stable
financial system.

The world is beginning to realise that the West is no longer the only
source of growth and demand, and that if continents like Africa are not
adequately developed they, in fact, will suffer in the longer term as well.

In early November, President Zuma will join other G20 heads of state in
seeking a common framework for reshaping the global economy and addressing
the challenge of aligning divergent national interests within a
multilateral co-operative vision and a plan of action. South Africa’s view
is that shared long-term goals and well-sequenced reforms are more likely
to succeed than unilateral or protectionist steps.

In the context of Africa’s improving prospects, it is important to note
that sub-Saharan Africa is well positioned to benefit from improvement in
global demand. Africa has largely escaped the negative overhang of high
household debt and weakened banking systems that have been felt in many
other regions.

However, slow growth in developed countries has reduced the flow of
remittances to low-income countries in Africa, and rising debt in core
markets could impact negatively on development assistance to African
countries. Nevertheless, low global interest rates, high commodity prices
and a particularly strong Chinese demand for Africa’s exports provide
positive economic boosts, particularly in countries that have undertaken
structural and budgetary reforms.

Growth in sub-Saharan Africa is expected to accelerate from 2,6% in 2009 to
5% in 2010 and 5,5% in 2011 as commodity prices remain high, exports
recover and domestic demand accelerates. The growth rate in Africa will be
second only to Asia in the world during this year and next year. This is a
remarkable performance for the so-called “forgotten continent”.

This strong expansion of regional economic activity is supported by
institutional reforms that provide a positive environment for the expansion
of private investment. These include the following: a greater commitment to
democracy, political stability and the strengthening of institutions of
governance; the opening up of African markets to local and foreign
competition through reduced trade and investment barriers; and increased
investment in the national infrastructure to reduce costs and facilitate
trade. These have all played an important part.

The prioritisation of spending on health and education in national budgets
will also support rising productivity. It is notable that in 2009, real
spending on education and health increased in 20 out of 29 low-income
regional economies in Africa. However, greater economic integration is
necessary to harness the full potential of intraregional trade, and the
expansion of regional infrastructure networks is required to facilitate
faster movement of goods and services between countries at a lower cost.
This is a challenge for countries around us and for our region as well.

South Africa experienced a decline in gross domestic product, GDP, of 1,8%
in 2009 and a loss of employment estimated at close to a million jobs.
Yesterday, we had further grim news that another 90 000 jobs have been
lost. This was a severe deterioration, despite a continued expansion in
government infrastructure spending and the countercyclical monetary and
fiscal policy response that we generated.

Higher commodity prices have contributed to a somewhat more buoyant
recovery this year than was anticipated at the time of the February Budget.
Households have started to spend again as interest rates decline together
with lower inflation, but we don’t want them to overspend and get into debt
again.

Trends in the productive sectors of the economy confirm that output has
responded promptly to recovery in trade and consumer confidence. In the
first six months of 2010, manufacturing value added grew by 5,8% as
compared to the previous year, driven by increased production of motor
vehicles, petrochemicals and basic iron and steel. However, the momentum of
growth in manufacturing appears to have slowed down in the second half of
the year.

Output in mining increased by 2,2% during the first half of 2010, and it
appears to have expanded further in the third quarter. Measures to address
regulatory uncertainty in the mining sector are under way under Minister
Shabangu’s guidance, which will in due course contribute to improved
investment, taking into account the favourable outlook for commodity
prices.

Agricultural output declined by 3,2% in 2009, and quarterly growth
accelerated in the first half of 2010 due to a bumper maize crop. Anybody
who wants to buy maize must please contact Minister Joemat-Pettersson.

The construction sector continued to grow during the first six months of
2010, though at a slower pace than in 2009. Public infrastructure projects
in progress will in due course lead to further private investment and a
more efficient business environment. The Gautrain project provides a clear
example of this, with new business investment seeking to take advantage of
opportunities that come with being located alongside a new public transport
system. Similar benefits will flow from road improvements and public
transport projects in all our cities and metropolitan areas.

As Minister Ndebele and Deputy Minister Cronin will confirm, investments
that make it easier for people to get to work are good for both the economy
and people’s living conditions.

Retail sales have recovered well since their substantial decline last year,
though the pace has slowed since the end of the World Cup. We project a
moderate recovery in household consumption expenditure, from 2,6% growth
this year to about 4% a year over the period ahead, which will lead to some
growth and job creation in the retail sector.
At this stage, we expect an overall growth of 3% in South Africa in 2010,
rising to 3,5% in 2011 and 4,4% by 2013. So, we have raised our forecast
from 2,3% to 3%. Employment and private investment are expected to rise
gradually as growth accelerates. Growth in real gross fixed capital
formation is expected to rise from an estimated 0,8% in 2010 — quite a
severe decline — to 5,6% in 2011 and 5,9% in 2013. This is crucial for
economic growth in South Africa.

The slowdown in our economy since 2008 has contributed to the narrowing of
the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments from over 7%
of GDP to an estimated 4,2% this year, which has been comfortably financed
by capital inflows – although this was too much capital inflow.

Infrastructure spending, combined with a recovery in domestic demand, will
result in faster growth in imports than exports over the next three years.
Capital inflows and a recovery in corporate profits will also lead to
higher income payments to global bond and equity investors. The current
account deficit is forecast to widen to 5,8% by 2013, unless we begin to
export a lot more than we anticipate at this point in time.

Headline CPI, consumer price index, inflation has declined to 3,5% for the
year to August this year — the latest figure that came out today is 3,2% —
and it is expected to remain below 6% over the next three years, supported
by a moderation in food price trends and a relatively buoyant exchange
rate.

This year has seen two further declines in the Reserve Bank’s repurchase
rate, to 6% in August – its lowest level since the rate was introduced in
1998. Supply and demand for credit has begun to improve in recent months as
consumer confidence has improved, and lending to businesses for investment
and inventory restocking is likely to accelerate over the period ahead. The
latter is absolutely crucial, particularly for our small businesses if they
are going to thrive in these difficult circumstances.

The monetary policy stance will continue to target low and stable inflation
to support a more competitive exchange rate and reduced investment costs
through lower real interest rates. This will be accompanied by measures to
contain inflationary pressures and build competitiveness in our economy.

Public sector investment remains the cornerstone of government's strategy
to support higher sustainable economic growth in South Africa. This is
because it reduces bottlenecks in the economy and draws in private sector
investment. Higher levels of public and private investment are necessary
over the medium term to raise the economy’s growth potential and create
employment, and also contribute significantly to the countercyclical
macroeconomic stance.
Private business investment makes up about 60% of gross fixed capital
formation, and it has contributed over half of the overall investment
growth in 2006 and 2007. Since then, investment has been dominated by
public corporations while private investment and capital spending by
government departments have declined. Investment by state-owned enterprises
has risen from 1,9% of GDP in 2005 to 5,6% of GDP this year. Private sector
companies cut back sharply on expansion plans during recession, reducing
their capital spending by 7% in 2009 and an estimated 2,5% in 2010.

Over the period ahead, a more balanced expansion in investment is
projected, though state-owned enterprises will continue to play a leading
role. To remove bottlenecks and reduce the cost of doing business, the core
investment plans of state-owned enterprises remain focused on capacity
expansion in electricity, rail, ports and roads, with the bulk of spending
carried out by Eskom, Transnet and Sanral.

In the energy sector, the integrated resource plan under the oversight of
Minister Peters will provide clarity on committed generation projects and
the future direction of power generation technology such as nuclear and
renewable energy. The planned increase in generation capacity from the
Medupi and Kusile coal-fired stations will be supplemented by independent
power producers, initially through direct sales to Eskom, but ultimately
through an independent buyer of power.
A total infrastructure spending of R811 billion is projected over the MTEF
period ahead, of which 40% will be in energy, 26% in transport and 11% in
water supply. State-owned enterprises will add over R320 billion to public
sector debt over the next three years.

Reliable electricity supply, clean water and better transport services have
to be paid for over time. So, we will see further rises in tariffs and user
charges over the period ahead. However, despite these necessary
adjustments, the fiscus will continue to ensure that basic services are
accessible and affordable to all, in particular the poor.

South Africa’s present economic growth trajectory cannot meet, as we have
said repeatedly recently, the country’s employment needs. Faster inclusive
growth is required over an extended period of time to significantly
increase labour absorption, reduce high levels of unemployment and achieve
a more equitable distribution of income.

To achieve five million jobs over 10 years, which we talked about
yesterday, we need to seek growth of over 6% a year at a fairly high level
of labour absorption, together with measures aimed at broadening
participation and inclusive development.

This is what government’s new growth path proposes in order to bring about
the marked reduction in poverty and inequality that we all seek.
To achieve our developmental aims, South Africa needs to promote more rapid
job creation through a broad range of policy initiatives.

Labour market institutions must be strengthened, including expanded further
education and training, and specific interventions are needed to increase
both public and private sector demand for labour, especially for young
workseekers.

We want to see greater participation of our development finance
institutions in cofinancing infrastructure projects, enterprise
development, housing and farming support.

Our Industrial Policy Action Plan has to be implemented together with
increased support for small enterprises and local economic development.

Greater investment and competition are needed in the electricity, transport
and communications sectors to ensure greater efficiency and better prices.

We need to see improved economic co-operation between countries in Southern
Africa, including financial and trade institutions, transport,
communications, energy and water networks.

Finally, and underlying all of the above, we know that improvements in
public service delivery will depend on better financial management, good
governance and disciplined pursuit of agreed service delivery outputs and
targets.

Minister Davies and colleagues in the Economics cluster will also be
looking at other measures to support exporters and manufacturers, through
our trade facilitation agencies, investment in technology and industrial
development zones and institutions such as the Industrial Development
Corporation.

Furthermore, we recognise that the value of the rand is a critical
challenge to and in our growth strategy. As in many emerging economies,
South African producers are currently under pressure because the strength
of the real exchange rate reduces the competitiveness of manufactured
exports and lowers the cost of imports.

We appreciate that sustained exchange rate overvaluation creates
difficulties for many businesses and threatens jobs in some sectors. It can
lead to unbalanced growth, the widening of the current account deficit and
increasing vulnerability to economic shocks.

Capital flows to emerging markets have increased steadily over the past
decade, supported by favourable growth dynamics, improved credit ratings,
greater openness and the development of domestic financial markets. Net
private capital flows to emerging economies could reach US$825 billion in
2010. In 2009 this figure was US$581 billion.

You can see that there is a huge amount of money flowing towards emerging
markets, including South Africa. Fixed income investments will reach a
record of US$70 billion to US$75 billion in 2010. Net capital inflows to
South Africa have risen strongly over the past two years, reaching 5,5% of
GDP in the first half of 2010, compared with 4,7% in 2009.

These flows are both structural and cyclical. They derive in part from a
need for developed economy pension funds and other investors to recoup
losses by finding sound long-term and high-yielding investments in emerging
markets.

At the same time, low interest rates in advanced economies are supporting
what we call “carry trades”, in which investors borrow money at low
interest rates and invest in assets in countries that pay higher interest
rates. Such short-term investments are inherently volatile — they come in,
and they can go quicker that we can realise.

The policy challenge is how to continue to attract long-term inflows that
we need — which we don’t mind having because these are investments in our
economy — while minimising the risks of volatile capital movements. I
repeat, this is a concern not just for South Africa, but also for many
smaller emerging markets around the world.

The rand has appreciated by 6,6% against the United States dollar since
December 2009 and by 5,5% against currencies of our major trading partners.
Taking into account that South Africa has higher inflation than its major
trading partners, the real effective rand exchange rate, which reflects
losses or gains in competitiveness, is now about 12% above its average
level for the past decade. This appreciation has occurred despite sustained
accumulation of reserves by the Reserve Bank — the Governor is waiting to
see whether we will give her more money.

Since the beginning of 2010, foreign exchange purchases and swap
interventions by the National Treasury and the Reserve Bank have amounted
to R43 billion. The value of gross foreign exchange reserves held by the
Reserve Bank stood at US$44 billion in September 2010. Emerging market
currencies of other commodity producers, such as the Chilean peso, have
experienced similar appreciation pressures, while the Brazilian real is
even more overvalued.

We believe that international co-operation is needed to achieve a more
stable international financial environment, as proposed in the recent G20
communiqué. In keeping with this framework, several adjustments to our
financial and foreign exchange regulatory arrangements are proposed, while
recognising that in some instances measures may be strengthened or reversed
as circumstances change.

Firstly, the National Treasury and the Reserve Bank will continue to
purchase foreign exchange reserves. These will be funded by revenue
overruns in 2010-11 — Minister Ndebele was hoping to get his hands on some
of this money — and the issuance of government bonds and debentures.

Secondly, the Reserve Bank will sterilise inflows associated with foreign
direct investment inflows using foreign exchange swaps. Recently, a South
African company was taken over by an oversees company, and over a billion
dollars is coming into South Africa. We have to use some of this money that
we are talking about or alternatively use the swap mechanism that we have
just described to mop up the money, so that it doesn’t affect our exchange
rate further.

Thirdly, exchange control and offshore investment limits on individuals
will be amended to encourage the diversification of portfolios and remove
unnecessary limitations. Restrictions on the “blocked” assets of emigrants
will be lifted as well.

Fourthly, to make South Africa attractive as a corporate investment
destination and to encourage investment in the rest of the African
continent, qualifying international headquarter companies will be allowed
to raise and deploy capital offshore without exchange control approval with
effect from 1 January 2011.

Fifthly, exchange controls on domestic companies will be reformed to remove
barriers to their international expansion from a domestic base, South
Africa.

Lastly, the prudential framework for foreign investment by private and
public pension funds, including the Government Employees Pension Fund, will
be reviewed to support portfolio realignment and offshore diversification,
especially within Africa and into other emerging markets. A second draft of
regulation 28 of the Pension Funds Act — the regulation that governs this
process — will be published shortly and will take effect next year.

The Reserve Bank will publish details of the proposed exchange control
reforms. These measures form part of ongoing efforts to reform South
Africa’s prudential framework covering offshore investment by domestic
individuals and companies. An increase in foreign assets will reduce South
Africa’s external vulnerability through income inflows and by supporting a
two-way demand for the rand. Reserve accumulation serves as a protection of
the economy against future shocks, though it cannot directly determine the
exchange value of the rand.

In several countries tax measures have been introduced to counter currency
appreciation. The effectiveness of these measures is being carefully
monitored by us. Further steps to moderate the impact of capital flows on
the South African economy will be considered, drawing on both international
experience and the assessment of the likely local impact and also
developments when President Zuma joins the G20 summit later in November.

It is important to stress that the above reforms form part of a broader
process to improve and strengthen the financial regulatory system, informed
by international co-ordination efforts led by the G20 and the multilateral
Financial Stability Board.

Several reforms are required by new international regulatory standards
arising from the crisis itself. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
recently proposed a new framework, known as Basel III, for banking
supervision. The implementation of the new framework will be led by the
Registrar of Banks.

Similarly, the Financial Services Board is in the process of strengthening
the prudential regime for insurers. Other reforms are drawn from lessons of
the financial crisis, but they are adapted to our circumstances.

In moving towards a “macroprudential” approach to the supervision of
financial institutions, the focus falls on assessing and monitoring the
strengths and vulnerabilities of the financial system as a whole, in
addition to the supervision of individual institutions. In order to achieve
this, several institutional changes are proposed.

Firstly, as announced at the time of the Budget, a Council of Financial
Regulators is to be established, comprising all financial regulators in
South Africa, to promote effective co-ordination and information-sharing
and to give effect to macroprudential supervision and to ensure that things
don’t fall between cuts.

Secondly, the SA Reserve Bank now has a revised mandate that includes a
particular responsibility for financial stability.

Thirdly, proposals will be tabled to strengthen the regulation of market
conduct, including retail banking and insurance aimed at both client
protection and broadening access to financial services.

Lastly, the scope of financial regulation will be extended to cover private
pools of capital, over-the-counter markets and credit rating agencies.

Detailed proposals on financial sector regulatory reforms are contained in
a discussion document entitled Strengthening the Financial Sector to Better
Serve South Africa, which the National Treasury will release shortly, after
appropriate consultation.
As the world economy recovers from the global crisis, there is considerable
debate about how quickly governments should be closing or narrowing their
budget deficits. Some argue that the recovery will be held back if
governments cut expenditure too quickly, while others point to the
potentially devastating effects of fiscal default. Many European countries
are making very sharp budget cuts — you can see the protests in the streets
— to maintain sustainability, sometimes resulting in severe social unrest.

In South Africa’s circumstances, a careful balance needs to be found
between continued real growth in expenditure, while reducing the future
interest cost burden on the fiscus so that expenditure growth can be
sustained. Where we have to borrow, we will do so mainly to invest in
infrastructure that contributes to building productive capacity. Improved
delivery of services also requires that we use resources more efficiently,
reduce waste and combat corruption – all of which you have heard of before.

Our approach is explicitly countercyclical, which means that fiscal
consolidation will be phased in without the curtailment of core public
services and in support of sustainable growth. This is what the G20 refers
to as “growth friendly” fiscal consolidation. Careful management of the
fiscus over the past 16 years has meant that we had fiscal room for a
budget deficit of 6,7% last year and 5,3% this year, which has brought
forward the economic recovery.

The proposed budget framework anticipates a narrowing of the deficit to
around 3% of GDP by 2013-14 and the stabilisation of government debt at
about 40% of GDP in 2015-16. This is a great achievement compared to what
is happening elsewhere in the world. Expenditure will continue to grow,
though moderately, and revenue is expected to recover relative to GDP.

It is nonetheless important to note key lessons from the painful
adjustments that the United States and many European countries are
undergoing. Fiscal overcommitments can lie buried for decades in pension
and social insurance accounts, housing finance arrangements or
unsustainable economic subsidies.

When there is continuous growth, the difficulties are deferred to future
generations and they are all too easily ignored or forgotten. But when
things go wrong, as they have gone wrong over the past two years, they can
do so with devastating speed, as we have learned. A sound understanding of
the long-run trends in revenue, expenditure and public sector financing is
therefore critical, and careful planning of future reforms is required.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement notes that real noninterest
government expenditure per person has doubled over the past eight years.
This was made possible by buoyant growth and revenue in the economy and the
declining share of debt service costs in GDP. Government spending on
infrastructure and social assistance continued to expand strongly during
the economic downturn in 2008 and 2009.

In other words, the fiscal space that was created prior to the recession
enabled us to make sure that, unlike other countries, that had to cut
salaries and jobs or reduce pensions or grants that we give to people, we
were able to maintain all of them, and still have a sustainable and
incredible fiscal envelope. [Applause.]

Expenditure growth will be slower over the period ahead, averaging real
growth of about 3% a year. However, the overall public sector borrowing
requirement is considerably larger than the budget deficit. Mainly because
Eskom and Transnet need to borrow to finance large infrastructure expansion
plans, overall public sector borrowing will be about 10% of GDP this year,
declining to 6% of GDP over the next three years.

Our fiscal policy framework is fundamentally about ensuring that our
wellbeing is not unfairly purchased at the expense of future generations.
Where we introduce programmes that raise the level of government spending,
we need to be clear about how the required revenue will be raised and at
what cost to the productive sectors of our economy.

To assist in our understanding of the underlying principles, I have asked
the National Treasury to prepare a paper on fiscal guidelines for a wider
discussion early next year. This will act as a future framework, if you
like, for our fiscal decision-making.

What, then, are the adjustments to the 2009-10 appropriations? These are
additional amounts of money that our Treasury committee assigns to
government entities and departments that are considered to be unforeseen
and unavoidable. I am very mindful that the new legislative arrangements
for Money Bills have brought additional responsibilities to Parliament’s
portfolio committees and appropriations committees in particular. We
welcome the first budget review and recommendation reports, which have been
tabled over the past week.

Several concerns raised by portfolio committees will need to be explored
further – underspending on climate change initiatives, noted by the
Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs, for example, and
the need to improve oversight of the Expanded Public Works Programme,
recommended by the Public Works committee. I have taken special note of
this committee’s observation that the department cannot be expected to
budget for certain types of official funerals as these cannot be accurately
predicted. I am sure that Minister Doidge and I can find a way of dealing
with this.

I am pleased to be able to table a comprehensive Adjusted Estimates of
National Expenditure to accompany the Adjustments Appropriation Bill and –
for the first time – the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill for the
consideration of the House. I cannot deal with all the adjustments in
detail, but let me highlight the main points.

In total, the adjusted expenditure level is R2,5 billion lower than the
February Budget estimate, which included an unallocated contingency reserve
of R6 billion. Contributing to this decrease is a lower provision for state
debt costs due to the current strength of the rand and the decrease in
interest rates and savings declared by departments amounting to almost
R2 billion.

The main additional allocations in the Adjustments Appropriation are as
follows: R1,8 billion in roll-overs arising from commitments related to
unspent balances in 2009-10; R6,2 billion to cover higher remuneration
costs, including the occupation-specific dispensation, OSD; R396 million
for various self-funding department-specific activities; R2,2 billion in
unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure adjustments recommended by the
Treasury committee, including R769 million to cover property rates due to
municipalities on behalf of provinces, funded through the devolution of
property rate funds grant; R320 million for OSD salary adjustments in the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, the National
Prosecuting Authority and Legal Aid South Africa; R350 million for OSD
salary adjustments in the health sector, conditional on an agreement being
reached in the bargaining council; R363 million for expenditure associated
with natural disasters and the outbreak of disease; R200 million for the SA
National Defence Force for support activities during the 2010 Fifa World
Cup; and R100 million to scale up HIV and Aids prevention services.

Now, what of the 2011 Budget, and what are some of the indicators for the
Budget? Chapter 4 of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement summarises the
spending framework for the period ahead, informed by government’s 12 agreed
outcomes, with priority given to education, health, infrastructure
development, job creation and other matters arising out of the growth path.

Several areas of reform are proposed to contribute to identifying savings
and opportunities for more effective organisation of public services. These
are issues of serious concern that need to be given much more energetic
attention.

Firstly, there are too many departments where administrative capacity is
excessive or inefficient, relative to frontline services. [Applause.] This
will come under rigorous scrutiny in the budget process. Some provinces
have gone to the extent of hiring over 5 000 admin staff instead of
employing frontline teachers, nurses and doctors, and that is unacceptable.
[Applause.]

Secondly, effective training programmes need to be strengthened across the
Public Service.

Thirdly, a new approach to budgeting and management of capital projects
will be introduced together with technical assistance to departments and
municipalities in which there is underspending on infrastructure
maintenance. This is another area which will require energetic action.

Fourthly, nondepartmental agencies and entities are under review, with
special focus on governance, remuneration and mandates.

Fifthly, strengthened capacity is in place to deal with wrongdoing in
government procurement, and improved rules will enhance transparency in the
supply chain process.

Sixthly, information technology systems and management of consulting
services will come under specialised scrutiny within the supply chain
regulatory framework.

Preparation of the 2011 Budget is now well under way. Cabinet has agreed to
a preliminary framework for the MTEF period ahead that, over a three-year
period, makes available R67 billion more than the baseline tabled in
February this year, of which R40 billion goes to provinces, R24 billion to
national departments and R3 billion to municipalities. A further
R22 billion remains unallocated to departments at this stage and is set
aside for key education, health, infrastructure, job creation and growth
path priorities.

Proposals for expanding youth employment opportunities will enjoy special
priority. And in reflecting on opportunities for our youth let me
congratulate a group of students of Belgravia High School who are sitting
in the front row there and are with us in the gallery, who were winners in
three consecutive regional quiz competitions. Congratulations to you.
[Applause.]

We should set up a competition between you and a parliamentary team.
[Laughter.] Minister Nzimande will lead the parliamentary team. We should
also take this opportunity — I’m sure all of you will join us in this,
colleagues — to wish all matric students well in the examinations which
have just started this week.[Applause.]

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement sets out broad policy
considerations underlying the expenditure proposals, including government’s
economic and industrial policy framework, the need to strengthen
infrastructure maintenance, land and agrarian reform goals, pressing needs
in education and health service delivery and the challenges of improving
police services and the administration of justice.

Several critical long-term public expenditure pressures need to be
addressed systematically over the period ahead. Firstly, we have to
complete the reform of social security arrangements that has been under
discussion since the 2002 Taylor Committee Report. The key aim is improved
preservation of savings for retirement among working South Africans.
Consolidation of the fragmented existing administrative arrangements for
social security is also a priority.

Secondly, we have to implement a national health insurance system. The
first phase will involve improved primary health services in rural areas
and underserved communities and an expanded programme of hospital
construction and revitalisation. An interministerial committee has met to
consider the fiscal and financial implications of further health financing
reforms, and it will develop practical transition proposals.

Thirdly, we have to improve the maintenance of our transport infrastructure
and networks and invest in modern public transport systems.

Fourthly, we have to provide for fiscal contribution to new growth
initiatives, industrial development and job creation.

These are all major social and economic reform projects which will require
substantial fiscal and financial reforms, phased in over many years. If we
are to make rapid progress in these transformation programmes, it is
imperative that equally rapid progress is made in r educing wastage and
inefficiency elsewhere in the government system and in improving financial
management and governance. I thought you would clap for this one.
[Applause.]

Our spending programmes have to be paid for. It is therefore reassuring to
be able to note that the improved economic performance has contributed to a
projected increase of R31 billion in tax revenue for the current year by
comparison with the February Budget estimate. [Applause.] Total tax revenue
is expected to amount to R679 billion in 2010-11, or 25,3% of GDP. A strong
increase in VAT proceeds has been recorded partly because of higher
consumer demand and partly also because of lower capital investment and
reduction in VAT refunds.

Customs duty collections have improved mainly as a result of higher vehicle
and component imports. For the period ahead, tax revenue is expected to
average about 26% of GDP – still somewhat below levels recorded before the
recession. This looks like a lot of money. So, let’s just remind ourselves
that even if this looks like a lot of money, it will still take us another
three years before we catch up to where we were prior to the recession.
This is a reminder that we need to be a little less exuberant about the
extra revenue.

Consolidated government revenue, including social security funds and public
entity revenue, will recover to about 29% of GDP. I need to remind members
of the House that today marks the start of the final month of tax season
2010 for nonprovisional taxpayers, whose returns are due by 26 November.

I’m doing this on behalf of the commissioner and not the former
commissioner. [Laughter.] I urge all taxpayers who have not yet filed their
tax returns to do so within the next 30 days and to join the 2,6 million
taxpayers who have already submitted their returns. This is an 18% increase
in compliance and early filing compared with last year. Let’s say “thank
you, South Africa”. [Applause.]

This growth in compliance comes despite the difficult economic conditions
in which all South Africans find themselves, and reflects the strong
foundation of tax morality and compliance which have been laid and
continues to take root and grow within our country. Let me therefore
applaud the many millions of our country’s taxpayers who respect their side
of the social contract, which has allowed us to continue our vital role in
providing social and infrastructural investment without overburdening
ourselves and future generations with unmanageable levels of debt.
[Applause.]

Our capacity to pursue those who seek to evade tax obligations continues to
be reinforced. Tax authorities the world over are co-operating more than
ever before to throw open the veil of tax manipulation. South Africa now
has double taxation agreements with 70 jurisdictions, which provide for
extensive exchange of information between tax authorities. In addition, tax
information exchange agreements have been agreed to at officials’ level
with six financial centres, and a further 16 agreements are being explored.


This is important because we can join several countries and conduct an
audit on a single multinational company through six countries’ revenue
services. These information exchange provisions allow us to exchange
information and therefore get a holistic view of a particular company,
whereas in the past you would only see your own country’s view of a
particular company.

A joint audit is being made possible through these agreements, and it has
already yielded R3 billion in additional revenue this year. [Applause.]
Combined with the growing availability and accuracy of third party data
from financial institutions, employers and other sources, there are very
few places for the noncompliant to hide. But, of course, they are very
creative; they will find a place to hide.

We are, however, offering another opportunity for taxpayers to come clean
and join the ranks of full participation in our democracy. The Voluntary
Disclosure Programme, which allows for the waiving of penalties of up to
200% for those who make a full, honest and voluntary disclosure of prior
evasion, will begin next month.

Let me tell you about a deal that has just been reached between Germany,
the United Kingdom and Switzerland. Switzerland, as you know, holds bank
accounts and doesn’t give details of those bank accounts to anybody. After
about two or three years, particularly after the recession, countries in
Europe have been saying to Switzerland that they want to know whose money
it is that they have so that they can collect tax on it.

In the past three days a final agreement has been reached that Switzerland
will collect tax on behalf of the United Kingdom and Germany on capital
gains, interest earned and other income that comes into those accounts.
They will not give the names of the people whom these accounts belong to.
Howerver, billions of dollars and euros of additional revenue will be going
to the United Kingdom and Germany as a result of this deal.

I now move to an area that we are a little bit sceptical about. We want to
enhance supply chain management. Clean administration is also the central
principle in our approach to supply chain management and ensuring value for
money in government procurement of goods and services.

The National Treasury has been working closely with other departments and
agencies to combat fraud and corruption under the leadership of the
Interministerial Committee on Anticorruption, chaired by Minister Chabane.
This is sometimes called a committee on corruption; so, we have to be
careful. This has already yielded several positive outcomes, but more has
to be done. Procurement and tender fraud to the value of nearly R25 billion
is currently under investigation. Our approach comprises the following five
initiatives, which will include legislative and regulatory reforms.
We will be increasing the monitoring capability of government aimed at
early detection of fraud. Departments and government agencies will be
required to provide specific information to their treasuries on their
procurement practices, which will allow for this monitoring to happen.
Where necessary, the cash disbursements process of government agencies will
be temporarily assumed by treasuries, thereby ensuring that only valid
contracts are honoured and that government is charged a fair price.
[Applause.]

In line with international best practice, transparent public disclosure
will be required at each stage of the supply process in all spheres of
government, including reasons for making certain decisions. In other words,
once a tender process is complete, all tender documents must be on the
Internet for everybody to see. [Applause.]

Government will look holistically at identifying procurement requirements
that could be better managed centrally, such as the use of transversal
contracts for the acquisition of high value and complex goods and services.
This is already happening in the health sector.

In addition, stiff penalties of up to double the contract value are
proposed for service providers who obtain government contracts
fraudulently. [Applause.] Public officials who assist in tender fraud will
also be liable for resultant losses incurred by government. We will recover
the money from the officials as well. [Applause.]

Measures are required to ensure that officials who have breached the buying
rules should not remain under suspension, drawing full benefits while
investigations drag on for years. [Applause.] Minister Baloyi is attending
to this matter.

Tax compliance measures associated with government procurement will be
strengthened. The introduction of a withholding tax on payments made to
businesses in respect of government tenders is under consideration. It is
also proposed that procedures for the issuing of tax clearance certificates
should be revised to provide for direct checking by Sars of tax compliance
of winning bidders rather than preclearance of bidders. So, we are going to
turn this process around.

Members of the House would have heard through the media about the arrest of
prominent business people and senior government officials, including former
heads of departments recently. Members will also be pleased to know that
the government was awarded preservation orders worth about R200 million,
which included a Learjet, a golf course, a holiday home and a hotel. If we
finally do get hold of the Learjet, we will give it to Minister Sisulu.
[Laughter.]

This is the result of co-operation and co-ordination of efforts between
several investigative agencies. Can we congratulate all of them, ladies and
gentlemen. [Applause.] As a result of these efforts, we are beginning to
see a change of attitude on the part of service providers. In a recent
case, a firm was paid R10 million by a department for work that they had
not done, and they voluntarily returned the money to the fiscus.
Congratulations to them too. [Applause.]

We will now turn the tide on corruption and fraud. We will ensure that tax
funds and government monies are spent wisely and managed with integrity. We
owe this to our honest citizens and responsible taxpayers.

Allow me to conclude by saying again that the time for action is now! Now
is the time to improve the quality of basic education; to improve health
and life expectancy; to ensure that all South Africans are protected and
feel safe; to expand employment through inclusive economic growth; to
invest in a skilled and capable workforce; to accelerate the construction
of economic infrastructure; to promote sustainable rural communities and
food security for all; to invest in human settlements and improved quality
of household life; to build a responsive, accountable, effective and
efficient local government system; to protect our environmental assets and
natural resources; to build a better and safer Africa and a better world;
and to promote a development-oriented Public Service and inclusive
citizenship. These are the 12 outcomes we have committed to.

In elaborating on the policies and programmes needed to give effect to
these outcomes, we have a special opportunity to forge a broad-based social
compact – a shared social and economic vision – aimed at effective
partnerships between government, business, labour, communities and civil
society in pursuit of common goals. Cabinet has agreed on a growth path
that sets a target of creating five million jobs in the next 10 years
through efforts that require commitment and co-operation between all
spheres of government, business, organised labour and community partners.

To borrow President Barack Obama’s words, let us —

   ... put good ideas ahead of the old ideological battles; a sense of
   common purpose above the same narrow partisanship; and insist that the
   first question each of us asks isn’t, ‘What’s good for me?’ but ‘What’s
   good for the country my children will inherit?’


[Applause.]

Allow me to express my appreciation to President Zuma for his sound
leadership and advice, and to Deputy President Motlanthe for valued
guidance. I am grateful for the support of the Ministers’ Committee on the
Budget and for the hard work that they do, members of the Treasury
committee, Cabinet colleagues who have all agreed with everything I said
... [Laughter.] ... premiers and provincial finance MECs during a year of
considerable financial strain and a budget process that still has some way
to go as we begin to work out how we really reprioritise our expenditure in
this government.

I want to thank the Auditor-General, Terence Nombembe, and his staff, who
bring a professional spotlight to bear on all of our work, and I know that
the House will join me in expressing our admiration and thanks to them.
[Applause.]

I would also like to commend Mr Mufamadi in his absence, Mr Mshiyeni Sogoni
... [Interjections.] Is he here? I was told he was out there somewhere.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Mr Charel de Beer and Mr Chaane, who
chair the Standing Committees on Finance and Appropriations and the Select
Committee on Finance, who have more onerous duties now that new
parliamentary budget procedures are being introduced.

The Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Ms Marcus, has brought
astute leadership in difficult times. Thanks to you, Governor. [Applause.]
Mr Magashula and the staff of the SA Revenue Service continue to bring
innovation and energy to the collection of taxes on our behalf. Hopefully
they will collect R40 billion instead of R30 billion. [Applause.]

I would also like to thank Deputy Minister Nene for his tireless support
and insight. The director-general, Mr Kganyago, who is wearing a very
modest tie today, and the National Treasury team have once again delivered
a set of budget statements on time, though not perhaps within an affordable
and efficient word count.

I hereby submit the 2010 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and I table
the Adjustments Appropriation Bill, the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill
and the Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure for consideration by
Parliament. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement referred to the Standing Committee on
Finance and the Standing Committee on Appropriations for consideration in
accordance with their respective mandates.

Revised Fiscal Framework referred to the Standing Committee on Finance for
consideration and report.

The House adjourned at 15:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     1) Division of Revenue Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister
        of Finance. Referred to the Standing Committee on Appropriations and
        the Select Committee on Appropriations.

2.    Introduction of Bills


    (1)     The Minister of Finance


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 34 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 77).


          b) Division of Revenue Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33652 of 14 October 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
             for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Basic Education


          a) Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 26 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33666 of 22 October 2010.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Basic
              Education of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160.


    In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the
              Bills may be submitted to the
    JTM within three parliamentary working days.


     (3)    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development


          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 37 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 33580
             of 23 September 2010.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
             Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, and
             referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


 In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the Bills
             may be submitted to the
 JTM within three parliamentary working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Vacancy in Public Service Commission

    (1)     A letter dated 25 October 2010 has been received from the
        President of the Republic –


          a)  informing the National Assembly about the expiry of the term
             of office of the chairperson of the Public Service Commission
             (PSC), Dr Ralph Mgijima, on 31 January 2011; and


          b) requesting the National Assembly to fill the vacancy that will
             arise in terms of section 196(8)(a) of the Constitution of the
             Republic of South Africa, 1996.

Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration
        for consideration and
report.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance and the Standing Committee on Appropriations for
        consideration and report in accordance with their mandates as set
        out in section 6 of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
        Matters Act, 2009 (No 9 of 2009), and for consideration of the
        revised fiscal framework by the Standing Committee on Finance in
        accordance with section 12 of the same Act:

        (a)      Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2010 [RP 233-2010].

     2) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance:


        (a)      Proclamation No R55 published in Government Gazette No
             33596, dated  1 October 2010: Fixing 4 October 2010 as the
             date of commencement of section 28 and section 51 in terms of
             section 82 of the Financial  Intelligence Centre Act, 2001
             (Act No 38 of 2001).

        (b)      Proclamation No 56 published in Government Gazette No
             33598, dated 1 October 2010: The reappointment of members of
             the Tax Courts for a further period of five years in accordance
             with section 83(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
             1962).

        (c)      Government Notice No R867 published in Government Gazette
             No 33596, dated 1 October 2010: Amendment of Money-Laundering
             and Terrorist-Financing Control Regulations in terms of section
             77 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
             2001).

        (d)      Government Notice No R869 published in Government Gazette
             No 33596, dated 1 October 2010: Exemptions granted in terms of
             section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act
             No 38 of 2001).
        (e)      Government Notice No R846 published in Government Gazette
             No 33585, dated 1 October 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/416) in terms section 48 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (f)      Government Notice No R847 published in Government Gazette
             No 33585, dated 1 October 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/664) in terms section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (g)      Government Notice No 866 published in Government Gazette
             No 33597, dated 1 October 2010: Determination of interest rate
             for purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official
             rate of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the
             Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

        (h)      Government Notice No R871 published in Government Gazette
             No 33601, dated 8 October 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/665) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


     3) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
        reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Breede-Overberg
             Catchment Management Agency for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP221-2010].
        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Inkomati Catchment
             Management Agency for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP162-2010].

     4) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health, Portfolio Committee on Social Development, Portfolio
        Committee on Basic Education, Portfolio Committee on Water and
        Environmental Affairs and Portfolio Committee on Economic
        Development:

        a) Millennium Development Goals Country Report 2010.

               3. Membership of Committees

    The following changes to Committee membership have been made by the
ANC:

    Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture


    Discharged:  Farisani, Rev. T


    Appointed:   Nwamitwa-Shilubana, Ms T


    Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


    Discharged:  Turok, Mr B


    Appointed:   Cele, Mr MA


    Portfolio Committee on Communications


    Discharged:  Muthambi, Ms AF


    Appointed:   Ndlazi, Ms Z


    Portfolio Committee on Economic Development


    Discharged:  Huang, Dr SB and Skosana, Mr JJ


    Appointed:   Gcwabaza, Mr NE and Tsotetsi, D


    Portfolio Committee on Transport


    Discharged:  Gcwabaza, Mr NE and Duma, Mr NM


    Appointed:   Huang, Dr SB and Magubane, Mr NE


    Portfolio Committee on Labour


    Discharged:  Khumalo, Ms FT, Mnisi, Ms NA and Tsotetsi, Ms DR
    (alternate)


    Appointed:   Luthuli, Dr AN and Nonkonyana, Mr M
    Portfolio Committee on Public Works


    Discharged:  Jacobus, Ms L


    Appointed:   Magubane, Mr NE


    Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises


    Discharged:  Nonkonyana, Mr M and Duma Mr NM (alternate)


    Appointed:   Mokoena, Mr AD and September, Ms C


    Portfolio Committee on Police


    Discharged:  Chauke, Mr HP


    Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs


    Discharged:  Mokoena, Mr AD


    Appointed:   Thibedi, Mr J and Mnisi, Ms NA


    Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs


    Discharged:  Mdaka, Ms NM
    Appointed:   Nelson, Mr WJ


    Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services


    Discharged:  De Lange, Mr JH


    Appointed:   Cele, Mr MA


    Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperations


    Discharged:  Gxowa, Ms NB


    Appointed:   Jacobus, Ms L, Chauke, Mr HP, Malgas, Ms HH


    Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology


    Discharged:  Luthuli, Dr AN


    Appointed:         Line, Ms H,  Thibedi, Mr J and Ndlazi, Ms Z


    Portfolio Committee on Sport & Recreation


    Discharged:  Lishivha, Ms TE
    Appointed:   Sunduza, Ms T


    Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry


    Discharged:  Hajaig, Ms F and Line Ms H


    Appointed:   September, Ms C


    Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs


    Discharged:  Luyenge, Dr Z (alternate)


    Portfolio Committee on Mining


    Discharged:  Bikani, Ms FC, Mathibela, Ms NF, Moss, Ms LN and Ngele, Ms
    NJ


    Appointed:   Mjobo, Ms LN


    Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform


    Discharged:  November, Ms NT (alternate)


    Appointed:   November, Ms NT (full time)


    Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration


    Discharged:  Rasool, Mr E
    Appointed:   Nyekemba, Mr E


    Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training


    Discharged:  Gina, Ms N (alternate) and Lekgetho, Mr G


    Appointed:   Gina, Ms N


    Constitutional Review Committee


    Discharged:  Hajaig, Ms F


    Committee on Auditor-General


    Discharged:  Matshoba, Mr JM and Nonkonyana, Mr M


    Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions


    Discharged:  Mocumi, Ms P, Ainslie, Mr R and Fihla, Mr NB


    Appointed:   Khumalo, Mr F


    Joint Standing Committee on Defence
    Discharged:  Gololo, Mr CL and Koornhof, Mr GW


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2010 [RP 233-2010].


      b) Adjustments Appropriation Bill 2010 [B 34 - 2010].

      c) Division of Revenue Amendment  Bill 2010 [B 35 - 2010]

     d) Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2010 [RP 232-2010] which
        includes:

       1. Vote No 1 – “The Presidency” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


       2. Vote No 2 – “Parliament” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


       3. Vote No 3 – “Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;

       4. Vote No 4 – “Home Affairs” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


       5. Vote No 5 – “International Relations and Cooperation” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;
       6. Vote No 6 – “Public Works” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


       7. Vote No 7 – “Women, Children and People with Disabilities” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


       8. Vote No 8 – “Government Communications and Information System” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


       9. Vote No 9 – “National Treasury” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      10. Vote No 10 – “Public Enterprises” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      11. Vote No 11 – “Public Service and Administration” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2010-2011;


      12. Vote No 12 – “Statistics South Africa” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2010-2011;


      13. Vote No 13 – “Arts and Culture” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      14. Vote No 14 – “Basic Education” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      15. Vote No 15 – “Health” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


      16. Vote No 16 – “Higher Education and Training” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2010-2011;


      17. Vote No 17 – “Labour” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;
      18. Vote No 18 – “Social Development” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      19. Vote No 19 – “Sport and Recreation South Africa” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2010-2011;


      20. Vote No 20 – “Correctional Services” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2010-2011;


      21. Vote No 21 – “Defence and Military Veterans” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2010-2011;


      22. Vote No 22 – “Independent Complaints Directorate” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2010-2011;


      23. Vote No 23 – “Justice and Constitutional Development” –
          Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


      24. Vote No 24 – “Police” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


      25. Vote No 25 – “Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2010-2011;


      26. Vote No 26 – “Communications” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;

      27. Vote No 27 – “Economic Development” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;
      28. Vote No 28 – “Energy” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


      29. Vote No 29 – “Environmental Affairs” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2010-2011;


      30. Vote No 30 – “Human Settlements” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      31. Vote No 31 – “Mineral Resources” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      32. Vote No 32 – “Rural Development and Land Reform” – Adjustments
          Estimates, 2010-2011;


      33. Vote No 33 – “Science and Technology” – Adjustments Estimates,
          2010-2011;


      34. Vote No 34 – “Tourism” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


      35. Vote No 35 – “Trade and Industry” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-
          2011;


      36. Vote No 36 – “Transport” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011;


      37. Vote No 37 – “Water Affairs” – Adjustments Estimates, 2010-2011.

2.    The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of  the  Judicial  Inspectorate
        for Correctional Services for 2009-2010 [RP 260-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development, dated 27 October 2010

      The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
      resolved to initiate a Repeal of the Black Administration Act and
      Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill.

      The National Assembly noted that the Portfolio Committee on Justice
      and Constitutional Development was proposing to introduce a Bill that
      would extend the date of application of section 1(3) of the Repeal of
      the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Act, No 28
      of 2005, to 30 December 2012.  The extension was for the purposes of
      obtaining greater public input and consensus on contentious issues
      contained in the Traditional Courts Bill [B15-2008] and allowing
      traditional courts to continue functioning legally.

      The National Assembly instructed the Portfolio Committee on Justice
      and Constitutional Development to publish the full particulars of its
      legislative proposal in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee
      Reports. The House furthermore granted the Committee permission to
      proceed with the proposed legislation.

      Prior notice of introduction of the Bill was given in the Government
      Gazette, No 33580, dated 23 September 2010, and an explanatory summary
      of the draft Bill was published in the same Gazette. The Gazette also
      contained an invitation to interested persons and institutions to
      submit written representations before 26 October 2010. The Committee
      received one written submission from the Law, Race and Gender Unit:
      University of Cape Town. The submission welcomes the extension of the
      deadline in that it “will allow more time for Parliament to consult
      more broadly and effectively so as to appropriately address the matter
      of regulating traditional courts”.


      The Committee, in accordance with Rule 243, reports that it has
      introduced the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
      Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B37-2010] (National Assembly- sec 75) by
      submitting a copy thereof to the Speaker.

Report to be considered

 2. Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Mining  on  the  Geosciences
    Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2010], dated 08 September 2010.

    The Portfolio Committee on Mining, having considered the subject of the
    Geosciences Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2010] (National Assembly  –  Section
    75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    as a Section 75 Bill, reports as follows:

1.    Background


The Geosciences Amendment Bill, 2010 (“the Bill”), tabled in  Parliament  on
14 June  2010  and  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Mining  for
consideration and reporting, seeks to amend the Geosciences Act,  1993.  The
Bill was approved by Cabinet on 02 December  2009  for  public  consultation
and for introduction in Parliament. The Bill effects certain  amendments  of
a technical nature to the principal Act.

The main objects of the Bill are the following:
    • to mandate the  Council  for  Geosciences  (the  Council)  to  be  the
      custodians of geotechnical information;
    • to be a national advisory authority in respect of geo-hazards  related
      to infrastructure and development;
    • to undertake reconnaissance operations, prospecting research and other
      related activities in the mineral sector; and
    • to add to the functions of the Council.

The Bill seeks to put mechanisms in place  to  address  problems  which  are
associated with infrastructure and development  on  dolomitic  land  in  the
Republic. It empowers the Council to be the custodian  of  all  geotechnical
data, for the purpose of compiling a complete geotechnical risk  profile  of
the country. It further enables the  Council  to  become  the  custodian  of
technical information relating to reconnaissance operations and mining.

Subsequent to the briefing by  the  Department  of  Mineral  Resources,  the
Committee  invited  selected  organizations  to  make  written  and/or  oral
submissions  and  testimonies.  The  public  hearings  were   conducted   on
Wednesday, 01 and Friday, 03  September  2010,  where  the  Committee  heard
submissions and testimonies from five organizations, namely:
    • The South African Institute of Engineering Geologists;
    • The Geological Society of South Africa;
    • The National Union of Mine Workers;
    • The National Housing Builders Registration Council; and
    • The Construction Industry Development Board.

The  public  hearings  process  was  followed  by   consideration   of   the
submissions received and clause by clause deliberations on the Bill.

This report therefore outlines an overview of key issues  arising  from  the
oral submissions received by the Committee and further provides  an  account
of the Committee’s deliberations on the Bill.

2.    Overview of submissions received by the Committee

   1. The South African Institute of Engineering Geologists

The  South  African  Institute  of  Engineering  Geologists  (SAIEG)  is   a
voluntary  organisation  representing  the  profession  of  engineering  and
environmental  geology.  Members  are  required  to  be  registered  natural
scientists as prescribed in The Natural Scientific Profession  Act  (Act  27
of  2003).  The  SAIEG  represents  a  profession   of   approximately   200
engineering   and   environmental   geologists.    Engineering    Geologists
investigate  and  provide   geologic   and   geotechnical   recommendations,
analysis, and design  associated  with  human  development  since  primarily
called geological geoscientists.

According to the SAIEG, the Council  for  Geosciences  has  over  the  years
performed and continues to perform a vital support role to this industry  in
the provision of primary information in the form of  map  information,  data
archives and data products that are indispensible for  performing  our  role
to the above mentioned economic sectors.

The SAIEG comments and concerns on the Geosciences Amendment Bill  were  the
following:
    • Geohazards definition – definition added was acknowledged.


    • Objects of Bill in  the  preamble:  The  Council  for  Geosciences  is
      defined as being a “mandatory advisory authority”. On the  Objects  of
      the Council in section 2(c), the Council is referred to as a “national
      advisory authority”, apparently not “mandatory” in this instance.  The
      definition of the Council as “mandatory” might clash with the role  of
      others  as  advisors  in  certain  instances,  leading  to   conflict,
      particularly when the Council did not  have  high-level  expertise  in
      certain specialised fields.


    • Section 1(f)(c): The NHBRC noted that  landslides  and  slope  failure
      might be described as geohazards. Although  geological  investigations
      for input into the  slope  stability  analyses  were  carried  out  by
      suitably trained and experienced geoscientists, the design of remedial
      measures and  the  analytical  responsibilities  pertaining  to  slope
      stability fell directly under  the  responsibility  of  professionally
      registered geotechnical engineers. A potential  conflict  between  the
      investigation and design professions was highly likely if  Geosciences
      professionals became regulators in this field of expertise.


    • Section 3: Given  that  the  Council  for  Geosciences  wished  to  be
      mandated  a  more  direct  role  in  the  management  and  control  of
      geohazards,  it  would  seem  pragmatic  that  the  board   also   had
      representation from  the  geotechnical  industry.  For  the  board  to
      exercise its responsibilities in the control over the  performance  of
      this core function of the Council as is required in section 4  of  the
      Bill, a representative  from  the  geotechnical  fraternity  would  be
      surely  required  to  guide  the   relevance   of   the   geotechnical
      responsibilities of the Council and align them with  the  geotechnical
      industry in the country.


    • Section 4(c): While applauding the creation of a national databank  of
      geotechnical information, the SAIEG remained concerned  that  breaches
      in confidentiality might  occur.  In  most  databanks  the  owners  of
      information were allowed to define the extent to which information was
      made available.  As  an  example,  it  might  be  made  known  that  a
      geotechnical investigation had been carried out over an area  but  the
      owner of the data might not wish to release the results for  which  he
      had  paid,  often  large   sums,   into   the   public   domain.   The
      confidentiality  of  information  and  possible  conflict   with   the
      copyright act needed to be addressed.


    • Section 4(eA) -  Review  and  evaluate  all  geotechnical  reports  in
      respect of geohazards that may affect infrastructure  and  development
      at  prescribed  tariffs:  The  scope  of  engineering  geological  and
      geotechnical investigations meant that volume of reports was  produced
      annually dealing with engineering geological  investigations,  not  to
      mention geotechnical engineering investigations for infrastructure and
      development. Geotechnical engineering reports were further subject  to
      the control of Engineering Council of South  Africa  (ECSA)  Codes  of
      Practice and were engineering in  nature  and  not  geoscientific  and
      could not be adequately evaluated by geoscientists  alone.  The  SAIEG
      operated closely with the Council for Geosciences in  many  areas  and
      thus had a fair understanding of the level of expertise  and  staffing
      levels within the Council. The organization was of the view  that  the
      Council in its current state would not be able  to  effectively  carry
      out the mandate as envisaged in the Bill. The volume of work  entailed
      in review and evaluating of all these reports could delay approval  of
      development by months if not  eventually  years  and  could  therefore
      cause development and  growth  to  grind  to  a  halt.  The  effective
      evaluation of related geotechnical engineering  reports  with  complex
      engineering design inputs could, in the  majority  of  cases,  not  be
      carried out by the majority of the Council staff or in most  cases  by
      any person with only a geological background.


    • Section 4(g) - Conduct investigation and render  specialised  services
      to public and private institutions: The SAIEG regarded this as  unfair
      competition. It was apparent from the wording of this clause that  the
      Council for Geosciences would be mandated to  carry  out  geotechnical
      investigations that could place it in competition with an  established
      industry.  The  result  would  be  unfair  competition  by   a   state
      institution  against  the  private  sector  using   state   subsidised
      resources. The SAIEG believed that the resources of the Council  would
      be better used in research,  rendering  of  specialised  services  not
      available from  the  geotechnical  sector,  and  co-operating  in  the
      education of all who operated in or were dependant on the geotechnical
      professions and that this mandate would detract the Council  from  its
      vital responsibilities in this regard. Furthermore, under the  current
      wording of the Bill, the Council would be entitled to use  data  taken
      from professionals operating in the private sector at  no  charge  and
      use it to compete with the same professionals. A further  concern  was
      that, there was a  conflict  of  interest  in  that  the  Council  for
      Geosciences was able to operate as  providers  of  services  in  areas
      which  they  themselves  regulate,  making  them  both  'player'   and
      'referee'. The SAIEG found this totally unacceptable in any context.

   2. The Geological Society of South Africa

The  Geological  Society  of  South  Africa  (GSSA)  is  a  “not-for-profit”
voluntary association which is a learned and professional  society  existing
for the benefit of its members and for the earth science professions.

According to its constitution, the principle objectives of the society are:
    •  to  promote  and  advance  the  earth  sciences  and  earth   science
      professions;
    • to encourage and uphold the highest professional and ethical standards
      among its members / fellows;
    • to represent earth scientists in South Africa and elsewhere,
    • to promote co-operation and synergy  between  related  structures  and
      societies including, but not limited to Africa; and
    • to function for the benefit of its members and for the public good.

During the consultation  process,  there  were  essentially  six  issues  as
documented in the Department of Mineral Resources' responses to  the  GSSA’s
comments and concerns, and these were the following:
    • The GSSA agreed that for the object of the Bill to be achieved,  there
      would have to be an expansion of skills and resources in  the  Council
      for Geosciences which would necessitate an increased budget. The  GSSA
      noted that there was an increased budget in  the  proposed  amendment,
      however, it felt that it must reiterate that this must be  an  ongoing
      commitment, especially in view of the current  financial  difficulties
      that the Council was facing. In addition, the GSSA  noted  that  there
      was no detail in how the increased budget had been calculated nor what
      the increased expenses will be targeting.


    • The GSSA pointed out that the  technical  and  ethical  competence  of
      individuals within the geoscientific profession  was  covered  by  the
      GSSA, South African Council of Natural and Scientific Professions  and
      the South African Mining Codes  (SAMCODES).The  Department’s  response
      appeared to be concerned with the use of the  Council  as  a  watchdog
      regarding exploration hence their term “project expenditure”.

    •  The GSSA expressed its concern regarding the capacity of the  Council
      to be responsible for the petroleum sector. The GSSA agreed  with  the
      Department’s response to the effect that the Bill would be amended  to
      remove reference to the petroleum sector.

    • The GSSA expressed its concern that the amendment to the Bill excluded
      the GSSA from specifically nominating a representative of professional
      and academic expertise. The Department’s response was that,  the  Bill
      made provision for the Minister to appoint such an individual and  the
      GSSA still had grave concerns  with  this  amendment.  The  GSSA  also
      pointed  out  that  the  organization  represented  the  majority   of
      geoscientists in South Africa,  particularly  those  with  significant
      professional and academic expertise and therefore felt that it was  in
      a  better  and  more  informed  position  than  the  Minister  or  the
      Department. Further to this point, the GSSA  noted  that  the  present
      incumbent that the organization nominated had attended all the Council
      Management Board meetings  in  the  past  year  while  the  Department
      representative had not attended a single one.

    • The GSSA expressed its concern regarding the use of what they called a
      rather ill-defined term “exploration and prospecting research”  within
      the bill and was still unclear on what this  meant.  The  Department’s
      response showed a misunderstanding. The organization proposed that the
      words ”geotechnical research” be used.

    • The GSSA agreed with the Department’s response  in  that  the  amended
      bill does not allow the Council to undertake any mining development or
      activity.

   3. The National Union of Mine Workers

According to the National Union of Mine Workers  (NUM),  the  South  African
mining sector continued to experience unique challenges  related  to  health
and safety and these required appropriate legislative  measures  that  would
assist to deter the situation. The National Union of Mine  Workers  provided
that it continued to  engage  other  stakeholders  on  the  best  acceptable
practice that would help to alleviate the problems  associated  with  health
and safety in the mining sector. In May 2009, in its National Congress,  the
union resolved the following: “Through the Mine Health  and  Safety  Council
force the mining industry to  develop  more  advanced  geophones  technology
capacity for earlier signs of possible seismic events”.

The  NUM  appealed  that  the  Bill  should  ensure  that  the  Council  for
Geosciences was well equipped and in a position to contribute to  safety  in
mines. The NUM believed that:
    • The Council for Geosciences should be  in  a  position  to  work  with
      related stakeholders such as Mintek to develop technologies that could
      detect and give early signals of seismic events  as  this  would  save
      many lives.


    • The Bill should ensure that the Council has a role in ensuring  safety
      in the mines by mandating the mining industry to develop systems  that
      would assist to detect seismic activity in the mines.

    • The Council should be constituted in a manner  that  would  complement
      the State-Owned Mining Company as this would strengthen  the  role  of
      the State in exploration  for  purposes  of  mining  which  would  not
      necessarily be conducted by the Council.


    • The Council should improve its relations  with  the  Mine  Health  and
      Safety Council and Mintek and establish a  working  relationship  with
      the yet to be established  State-owned  mining  company  in  order  to
      develop technologies that would detect seismic events  in  the  mining
      sector.

The NUM emphasized that adequate  funding  was  central  for  the  effective
functioning of the Council for Geosciences and  recommended  that  the  Bill
should make proper and adequate provision for the funding  of  the  Council.
The  NUM  further  recommended  that  there  was  a  need  for  an  improved
coordination between the  Council  for  Geosciences,  the  Mine  Health  and
Safety Council, Mintek  and  the  State-owned  mining  company.  This  would
ensure  safety  in  mines,  strengthen  government’s  function  to   explore
minerals and ensure information  on  technology  development  as  safety  in
mines was an important aspect and should be central to  the  agenda  of  the
Council for Geosciences.

   4. The National Housing Builders Registration Council

The National Housing Builders Registration Council (NHBRC)  was  established
in terms of the Housing Consumers Protection Measures Act  (Act  No.  95  of
1998 - as amended). The NHBRC  was  primarily  established  to  protect  the
interests of housing consumers and to regulate the home  building  industry.
The NHBRC  has  delivered  valuable  services  to  the  South  African  home
building industry since 01 December  1999,  commencing  with  the  statutory
requirement for registration of all home builders,  as  well  as  compulsory
enrolling  all  residential  housing  units  to  be  constructed.  This   by
implication ties registered home  builders  to  a  strict  code  of  conduct
firstly,  and  secondly  compliance  with  prescribed  technical  structural
requirements that have to be met  to  ensure  structural  integrity  of  the
residential unit.

Right from the onset, and before the establishment of the  legislation  that
entrenched NHBRC as a statutory body, the expertise residing in the  Council
for Geosciences was recognized. Also the independence  of  the  Council  for
Geosciences, and its ability to serve the needs of  the  built  environment,
and specifically  the  homebuilding  industry  objectively,  was  considered
paramount to the NHBRC in delivering on its mandate. The  following  actions
were documented in the NHBRC Home Building Manuals, and which by Section  12
of the Housing Consumer Protection measures  Act  prescribed  the  technical
requirements to be met by both engineers  and  home  builders.  The  section
reads as follows:

“The Home Builder shall  appoint  a  Competent  Person  to  investigate  any
proposed townships  or  existing  township  areas  which  are  underlain  by
dolomites/limestones.  The  Competent  Person  shall   prepare   a   clearly
motivated report in which the township stability is zoned in terms  of  Part
1, Section 2, Table 8 in accordance with prevailing  professional  practice.
The report must detail any precautionary  measures  which  are  required  to
reduce the risk of sinkhole formation / subsidence and any  restrictions  on
land usage, layout, erf sizes, density, services, etc. The report  shall  be
submitted to the Council for Geosciences for  their  confirmation  that  the
investigations  conducted  on  the  stability  of  dolomites/limestones  and
referred to in the report are,  in  their  opinion,  consistent  with  sound
professional  practice  and  that  the   investigations   meet   all   legal
requirements pertaining to such stability investigations.”

With regard to the  Geosciences  Amendment  Bill,  the  NHBRC  commented  as
follows:

    • Section 2 of  the  Memorandum  on  the  Objects  of  Bill:  The  NHBRC
      supported the reference to the Council for Geosciences as a  mandatory
      national advisory authority.  However,  in  the  Amendment  Bill,  the
      wording is not repeated, and it might  therefore  not  be  seen  as  a
      mandatory  requirement,  to  have  development  proposals   in   areas
      identified with geohazards submitted to the  Council  for  Geosciences
      for review and comments. This would  negate  the  provisions  captured
      specifically within the NHBRC technical requirements  to  ensure  safe
      and durable tenure solutions especially in the subsidy  sector.  Also,
      it was noted that the previous (Geosciences Act) notation referring to
      only “infrastructural development" was used in both  the  “Objects  of
      Bill,” section 2 and “Summary of Bill”, section 3. This reference  was
      changed  and  reflected  correctly  in  the  Amendment  Bill  to  read
      “Infrastructure and development”, but it should be ensured  that  this
      was correctly reflected throughout the Bill.


    • Section 2(c) – Objects of the Council: The Council is referred to as a
      “national advisory authority”. NHBRC believe that the word “mandatory”
      should  be  included  as  per  above.  This  would  ensure  that   all
      developments in areas  identified  as  complying  with  the  geohazard
      definition will be submitted for review and comments.


    • Section 3(b) –  Management  Board:  No  provision  was  made  for  any
      representation from the Department of Human Settlements, or the NHBRC.
      The organization therefore believed that this might be  an  oversight,
      and that provision should be made for  at  least  representation  from
      NHBRC who by virtue of its  mandate  was  operating  as  a  regulating
      authority in residential development, and  more  specifically  subsidy
      housing delivery nationally.

    • Section 4(5)(1)(eA)  –  Functions  of  Council:  NHBRC  applauded  the
      intention of the Council to review all geotechnical reports in respect
      of geohazards nationally. The organization also needed to caution  the
      fact that this provision would demand extensive capacity to be created
      by Council for Geosciences. In the absence of capacity, this provision
      might create an untenable bottleneck and delay for all  infrastructure
      and development projects nationally.

    • Section  4(5)(1)(g)  –  Functions  of  the  Council:  NHBRC  saw  this
      provision as problematic, especially where the Council may  be  called
      upon to do investigations, and then to review and provide comments  on
      same. This would create a “judge and jury” scenario, and would not  be
      accepted in the built environment. Also, this would expose the Council
      for Geosciences  to  possible  charges  of  negligence  and  therefore
      appropriate insurance would need to  be  put  in  place.  Council  for
      Geosciences would also effectively compete with  other  professionals.
      The NHRBC proposed that the Council for Geosciences concentrate on pre-
      feasibly investigations for strategic planning, and mapping  of  same,
      rather  than  involving  themselves  in  detailed  Phase   1   and   2
      investigations, and which had the potential  of  causing  an  industry
      outcry.

    • Section 4 (5)(2)(f) – Functions of the Council: The word “mandatory”
      should be added to enforce the Council for Geosciences’ function as a
      national mandatory advisory authority.


    • Section 5(b)(3) – Functions of the Council: All geotechnical  reports,
      cannot be reviewed and be commented on by the Council for  Geosciences
      (refer Section 4 (5)(1)(eA) – Functions of Council above).  A  similar
      description and only demanding review and  comments  on  areas  to  be
      developed in identified geohazard conditions should be applicable.

The NHBRC supported the Bill with the proposed amendments.

   5. Construction Industry Development Board

The inputs by the Construction Industry Development Board (CIDB) were  based
on its mandate and function. Public  and  private  sector  clients,  natural
scientists  and  engineers  in  the  built  environment,  developers   other
stakeholders in the building,  civil,  commercial  and  industrial  property
sector, researchers, students and academics  in  the  soil  and  Geosciences
field,  were presumed to be directly involved with the work of  the  Council
for Geosciences. Although the  work  of  the  Council  for  Geosciences  was
critical for the building and construction industries, it was  not  possible
for the CIDB to have a direct involvement in the work of the Council.

The intention of the CIDB’s submission  was  to  support  stakeholders  that
played a  direct  role  in  using  geotechnical  information/Geosciences  in
infrastructure development. The CIDB wished to first  and  foremost  support
the  intention  of  the  Bill.  The  organization  also  wished  to  endorse
specifically the submission of the SAIEG and, to some extent,  that  of  the
NHBRC. Where the two organizations disagree,  the  CIDB  would  support  the
SAIEG. The CIBD specifically wished  to  draw  attention  to  the  following
issues in support of their stakeholders:
    • Capacity issues: The Bill was ambitious in its  mandate  in  that  the
      Council for Geosciences was expected to do a lot of work, which  might
      be impractical.


    • In the Objects of Bill, the Council  for  Geosciences  is  defined  as
      being a “mandatory advisory authority”, but later on in the Bill,  the
      Council  is  described  in  section  3(c)  as  a  “national   advisory
      authority”. It might serve  the  affected  industries  better  if  the
      definition was “national advisory authority”  rather  than  “mandatory
      advisory authority”.


    • The mandate to operate as  service  providers  while  also  regulating
      these areas was seen to create a conflict of interest. It  was  always
      good to separate  these  areas  to  avoid  this  obvious  conflict  of
      interest. Other service providers would not take kindly  to  this  and
      might actually see the Bill in its totality as being unfair.

    •  The  definition  of  geohazard  might  need  further  expansion   and
      refinement, especially as it began to differentiate  between  specific
      areas like landslides and slope failures on the one hand and  remedial
      measures on the other versus the professionals that dealt  with  these
      issues. Also, with reference to “Review and evaluate all  geotechnical
      reports in respect of geohazards, that might affect infrastructure and
      development at prescribed tariffs”, might  create  both  the  capacity
      challenges based on definition  provided  and  a  challenge  with  the
      professionals evaluating “all” geotechnical reports.

   2. Key issues emerging from the consideration of the Bill and public
      hearings

Having  considered  the  Geoscience  Amendment  Bill  [B  12  –  2010],  the
Portfolio Committee on Mining welcomed the amendment of the Geoscience  Act,
1993. However, having looked at  the  submissions  received,  the  Committee
felt it necessary to propose  some  amendments  after  taking  into  account
issues raised by the organizations.

4.    Recommendation

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Mining  having  considered  the   Geosciences
Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2010] (National Assembly – Section  75)  reports  the
Bill with amendments [B 12A – 2010].

Report to be considered.

CREDA INSERT - T101027e- INSERT 3 - PAGES 3377 - 3426

CREDA INSERT - T10127e- INSERT 4 – PAGES 3427 - 3449

CREDA INSERT - T10127e – INSERT 5 – PAGES 3449 - 3458

CREDA INSERT - T10127e – INSERT 6 – PAGES 3458 – 3483

