---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-16
---

                          TUESDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see coll 000

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that a vacancy which occurred
owing to the passing away of Ms A M Rantsolase has been filled by the
nomination of Mr K A Moloto, with effect from 9 November 2010. In terms of
section 48 of the Constitution, members of the National Assembly must swear
or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution
before they begin to perform their functions in the National Assembly. Hon
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, are your members ready?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, they are. They are
outside, waiting to be sworn in.

The SPEAKER: Will two members please accompany the member into the Chamber?
[Applause.]

                                    OATH

Mr K A Moloto, accompanied by Ms N D Ngcengwane and Ms M L Dunjwa, made and
subscribed the oath, and took his seat.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms E MORE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House —


      1) debates the findings of the latest HIV antenatal clinic survey; and

      2) comes up with recommendations on how to further reduce the
         transmission of HIV from HIV-positive mothers to their babies.

I thank you.
Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the House debates the consequences to Johannesburg of the failure
    of government to deal adequately and robustly with the rising water
    table in the city.

Mrs T E KENYE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates the extension of service hours for clinics and
    community health centres.

Mr N SINGH: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

    That the House debates the consolidated report by the Auditor-General of
    national and public entities for the period 2009-10, and particularly
    the many accounting irregularities by public entities contained therein.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates ways to inform and educate the public,
   particularly the transport industry, about the rationale behind the
   pending implementation of the new traffic demerit system that many are
   opposing.

Thank you.

Mrs A T LOVEMORE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the issues that should inform the much-needed
   development of a comprehensive migration policy for South Africa.

Mrs G M BORMAN: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That this House debates the future of informal settlements in South
    Africa with a view to finding solutions to the problem of housing the
    ever-increasing number of people migrating to our cities and towns.

Mrs L S MAKHUBELA-MASHELE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates the integration of community development workers
    into the public sector.

Mr D A KGANARE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the House debates the incidence of yet another R380 million in
    irregular and fruitless expenditure incurred by the Road Traffic
    Management Corporation and the failure of government to deal decisively
    with errant officials.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Speaker, op die volgende sittingsdag van die Huis sal
ek namens die DA voorstel:

     Dat die Huis ’n debat voer oor die regering se botsende benadering ten
     opsigte van die Infraco Company wat deur die regering as openbare
     onderneming in die lewe geroep is om telekommunikasiedienste aan die
     gewone verbruiker en die platteland te lewer, maar terselfder tyd ’n
     kabinetsbesluit geneem het om nie Infraco Company te lisensieer om
     hierdie dienste te kan lewer nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)


[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House I shall
 move on behalf of the DA:


    That the House debates government’s conflicting approach with regard to
    the Infraco Company which has been established by government as a public
    enterprise to deliver telecommunication services to the ordinary user
    and rural areas, whilst at the same time taking a cabinet decision not
    to give the Infraco Company a license to be able to offer these
    services.]

Mnr P VAN DALEN: Agb Speaker, op die volgende sittingsdag van die Huis sal
ek namens die DA voorstel:

    Dat die Huis -

      1) ’n debat voer oor die korrelbedkernkragreaktor as openbare
         onderneming se vermoë om tot Suid-Afrika se energiebehoeftes by te
         dra, ten spyte daarvan dat die belastingbetaler reeds miljarde
         rande tot die projek bygedra het; en


      2) die uitfasering of die privatisering van hierdie openbare
         onderneming in sy debatvoering oorweeg.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr P VAN DALEN: Hon Speaker, at the next sitting of the House I will move
on behalf of the DA:


   That the House –


      1) debates the ability of the pebble bed modular reactor, PBMR, as a
         public enterprise, to contribute towards South Africa’s energy
         needs, in spite of the taxpayer already having contributed
         billions of rand to the project; and


      2) considers the phasing out or the privatisation of this public
         enterprise during its debate.]

Mr M A NHANHA: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the alarming observation by Chief Justice Ngcobo
   that fundamental flaws exist in the dispensing of justice and reserved
   judgements in this country.

      KYOTO PRIZE FOR ARTS AND PHILOSOPHY AWARDED TO WILLIAM KENTRIDGE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House –


   (1)      notes that South African artist William Kentridge has been
         awarded the 2010 Kyoto Prize for Arts and Philosophy, becoming the
         first African recipient of Japan’s highest private award for global
         achievement;
   (2)      further notes that the awards, now in their 26th year, are
         regarded as Japan's equivalent of the Nobel Awards, with prizes
         awarded each year in three categories, namely: Arts and Philosophy,
         Advanced Technology and Basic Sciences;


   (3)      recognises that these prizes honour “significant contributions
         to the betterment of humankind” and each comes with a cash award of
         50-million; and


   (4)      congratulates William Kentridge on winning this prestigious
         award and for flying the South African flag high.

Agreed to.

           150TH ANNIVERSARY OF ARRIVAL OF INDIANS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House –


   (1)      notes that today marks the 150th anniversary of the arrival of
         the first people of Indian origin on South African shores to work
         as indentured labourers in the sugar plantations of Natal;


   (2)      further notes the celebrations and festivities planned to
         commemorate this event;


    (3)     acknowledges the influence of Indian traditions and customs that
         not only significantly contributed towards our shared cultural
         identity, but also shaped the vibrant South African socio-political
         landscape;


    (4)     recognises the sacrifices made by generations of Indians to
         preserve their heritage and ethnic identities; and


    (5)     wishes all South African Indians a memorable celebration of this
         event.

Agreed to.

                       INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR TOLERANCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

    That the House –


    (1)     notes that in 1996 the General Assembly of the United Nations
         invited member states to observe the International Day for
         Tolerance on 16 November, with activities directed towards both
         educational establishments and the wider public;


    (2)    further notes that this action came in the wake of the United
         Nations Year for Tolerance, 1995, proclaimed by the General
         Assembly in 1993 and that the year had been declared on the
         initiative of the General Conference of UNESCO on 16 November 1995;


    (3)    acknowledges that tolerance is one of the foundations of
         democracy and human rights;


    (4)    supports international efforts to promote tolerance through
         educational programmes, especially in conflict ridden countries;


    (5)    calls on all South Africans to practise tolerance and to live
         together in peace with one another.

Agreed to.

           MULTILATERAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN SIX AFRICAN UNIVERSITIES
                          ON AFRICAN UNIVERSITY DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

    That the House –


    (1)    notes the signing of a multilateral memorandum of agreement
         between six African universities on African University Day, 12
         November 2010;


    (2)    further notes that this agreement hopes to ensure the
         development of the next generation of African academics and
         professionals and the reinvigoration of African scholarship;


    (3)    acknowledges the importance of this partnership for the next
         generation of African academics to stemming the brain drain in
         Africa and in creating new opportunities for collaborative research
         and exchange among institutions;


    (4)    recognises the importance of higher education in the fight
         against poverty and the need for continental collaboration; and


    (5)    congratulates the University of Stellenbosch for the success of
         its Hope Project, and its contribution to this continental
         agreement.
Agreed to.

             LAUNCH OF 17th WORLD FESTIVAL OF YOUTH AND STUDENTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

     That the House –

    (1)    notes with enthusiasm the launch of the 17th World Festival of
         Youth and Students on Thursday morning, 11 November 2010, in
         Johannesburg, by the Minister in the Presidency Mr O C Chabane;


    (2)    further notes that the festival, organised by the National Youth
         Development Agency will be hosted in South Africa for the first
         time from 13 to 21 December 2010, at Nasrec, and is expected to
         attract about 30 000 local and international delegates including
         heads of state;


    (3)    recognises that the festival is a platform that will bring
         together young people from across the globe, to work together to
         build a world of peace, solidarity and social transformation, free
         of human rights abuses;
    (4)    recalls that South Africa will be joining countries like Cuba,
         Venezuela and Korea who had successfully hosted the WFYS in the
         past; and


    (5)    welcomes this initiative and believes that once again this is
         the indication of the confidence the international community has in
         South Africa as well as in our ability to host big events
         successfully as shown by our hosting of the FIFA Soccer World Cup.

Agreed to.

        APPOINTMENT OF TANZANIA’S FIRST FEMALE PARLIAMENTARY SPEAKER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, I move without notice:


    That the House –


    (1)    notes with great pride the appointment of Tanzania’s first
         female parliamentary speaker, Anne Makinda, on Friday, 12 November
         2010;


    (2)    further notes that this is the first time in the history of
         Tanzanian politics since Chama Cha Mapinduzi came to power in 1961
         that a woman has taken up such a position;


    (3)    recognises that it is in a year that has also seen the first
         albino woman, Benedict Mahaka, elected to parliament early this
         month, in spite of the prevailing discrimination against albinos;


    (4)    acknowledges the significant strides that women on the continent
         are making, especially in those positions of power that were
         previously male-dominated on account of traditional practices in
         conservative Africa; and


    (5)    congratulates Speaker Makinda warmly and encourages her to allow
         opposition parties to play their role effectively, to give support
         for meaningful debates on a new constitution and to ensure that the
         executive is fully accountable in line with modern democratic
         practices.

Agreed to.

                      REMUNERATION OF PRESIDENT OF RSA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move:

    That the House —


      1) in terms of section 2(1) of the Remuneration of Public Office
         Bearers Act, 1998 (Act No 20 of 1998), and having due regard to the
         criteria listed in that subsection, determines the salary payable
         to the President of the Republic of South Africa at two million,
         three hundred and sixty seven thousand four hundred and sixty six
         rand (R2,367,466) per annum with effect from 1 April 2010; and


      2) in terms of section 2(1) of the said Act, determines the amount of
         one hundred and twenty thousand rand (R120 000) per annum as that
         portion of the remuneration of the President to which section
         8(1)(d) of the Income Tax Act, 1962, shall apply.

Agreed to.

  DEADLINE FOR AD HOC COMMITTEE ON PROTECTION OF INFORMATION LEGISLATION TO
                                   REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move:
    That the House extends the deadline by which the Ad Hoc Committee on
    Protection of Information Legislation has to report to 28 January 2011.

Agreed to.

  DEADLINE FOR AD HOC COMMITTEE ON COMMISSION FOR GENDER EQUALITY TO REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move:

    That the House extends the deadline by which the Ad Hoc Committee on
    the Commission for Gender Equality Forensic Investigation has to report
    to 28 January 2011.


Agreed to.

     DEADLINE FOR JOINT AD HOC COMMITTEE ON CODE OF JUDICIAL CONDUCT AND
                            REGULATIONS TO REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move:

    That the House, subject to the concurrence of the National Council of
    Provinces, extends the deadline by which the Joint Ad Hoc Committee on
    the Code of Judicial Conduct and Regulations on Judge’s Disclosure of
    Registrable Interests has to report to 28 January 2011.

Agreed to.

                   KILLING OF BRITISH TOURIST ANNI DEWANI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D M GUMEDE (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC, together with all members of the
Portfolio Committee on Tourism, notes with shock the senseless killing of a
British tourist, Anni Dewani, while on honeymoon with her husband in Cape
Town. They were hijacked while taking a drive through Gugulethu to
experience the night life in a South African township. We express our
sincere condolences to the family and friends of the victim and wish her
husband strength and comfort during this very difficult period.

During the World Cup South Africa won the hearts of the world as a
destination and as a nation. We cannot allow these animals to destroy this
image. We thus urge the people of Gugulethu and the surrounding areas, in
partnership with the police, to triple their actions to ensure that these
scoundrels are speedily apprehended.
We further appeal to the tourism industry and the public to be vigilant in
regard to tourism safety, and to caution visitors not to enter unfamiliar
areas, especially at night. Thank you. [Applause.]

                          CASH INJECTION INTO ESKOM

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Hon Speaker, yesterday I sent a request
to the Speaker calling for an urgent debate to be held in the House today,
about the government’s plans to make a R20 billion cash injection into the
failing parastatal Eskom. This allocation would be made available to Eskom
in addition to its recently doubled guaranteed framework of R350 billion.
Notwithstanding the Speaker’s response declining the request, on the
grounds that it did not qualify as a matter of urgent national importance,
the Cabinet’s vacillation on the source of this additional funding
indicates the deep divisions in the executive.

That this announcement was made without prior public consultation and,
seemingly, without a detailed financial plan and endorsement by the
Minister of Finance by virtue of its not traversing the prescribed Treasury
protocols, indicates a blatant disregard for transparency and
accountability by the Zuma administration. This is a clear attempt by the
ANC government to undermine the basic principles on which our democracy is
based.
The DA regards this as a matter of urgent national importance. While the DA
absolutely supports the need to secure South Africa’s future energy
suppliers, Parliament and the public have the right to know why Eskom
requires this additional allocation of state funds, and how government
plans to finance its R20 billion commitment, especially given that just
three months ago the government could not find R4 billion to fund an
operational budgetary requirement to meet the public servants’ pay rise
demands.

The President must demonstrate that his administration is committed to
accountability, and make a full disclosure of how the government plans to
fund the proposed cash injection into Eskom, and what the exact opportunity
cost of this intervention will be to the people of South Africa.

                 ARMS DEAL INVESTIGATION BY BRITISH COMPANY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M G P LEKOTA (COPE): Speaker, Cope welcomes with optimism the decision
by Britain’s auditing watchdog to name those South Africans who took bribes
of, reportedly, R1 billion in the arms deal. Today many innocent South
Africans walk around with the stigma of association with the Defence
acquisition our country entered into. Suspicions that they are perhaps
implicated persist. [Interjections.]
The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members.

Mr M G P LEKOTA (COPE): It is right and proper that the transgressors
should be named and shamed, and then tried and jailed. Their assets and the
assets of their colluding spouses, where warranted, should thereafter be
seized. The Accountancy and Actuarial Discipline Board of the UK is
scrutinising KPMG’s confidential records on BAE. It is anticipated that its
audit will reveal financial evidence that BAE indeed paid out huge bribes
to supply Hawk trainer aircraft and Gripen fighter jets to South Africa for
R2,1 billion.

Already a completed investigation in the UK and Liechtenstein points to
allegedly obscene payments of more than R200 million by BAE. One of our
citizens once served in the Department of Defence. Whilst SA Police
investigators have been impotent, other investigators abroad are about to
blow the lid on some of the alleged 28 politically well-connected
individuals who cashed in. The fact that BAE recently settled a
£286 million fine for failing to comply with global antibribery rules is
evidence that BAE has been using improper influence. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

         FESTIVE SEASON CRIME-FIGHTING CAMPAIGN OPERATION DUTY CALLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M A MOLEBATSI (ANC): Hon Speaker, on 4 November 2010 the Minister of
Police, supported by the department and senior management of the SA Police
Service, SAPS, launched Operation Duty Calls, which is a festive season
crime-fighting campaign. The operations will include: high police
visibility, increased roadblocks, and stop-and-search operations. Police
will also execute high-density operations while maintaining visibility at
all hot spots.

The ANC supports the drive by the Minister and SAPS to mobilise our force
over the period. Let me in advance thank the men and women in the SAPS, who
will sacrifice by working over the festive season so that we can spend our
time safely with our families. We call upon all citizens of our country to
co-operate and work together with our SAPS members to fight crime,
particularly during the festive season. Viva, Operation Duty Calls! Viva!

                   CONDOLENCES TO FAMILY OF SHRIEN DEWANI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Mr Speaker, the IFP wishes to express sincere
condolences to the friends and family of Shrien Dewani. The IFP trusts that
our Police Force are leaving no stone unturned in their efforts to swiftly
bring these criminals to justice. We urge all local government sections to
take the necessary preventative measures in making sure that all tourists
arriving in our country are well informed about which areas are unsafe to
travel through.

In this regard, we suggest that general tourist safety information packs be
placed on all in-bound flights to South Africa. Heinous crimes such as this
have no place in South Africa. We urge the Minister of Police to send a
very clear message to the perpetrators of this crime to the effect that no
crime will be accepted. They will be caught and they will pay dearly for
it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

             DESTRUCTION AT MINES BY AURORA EMPOWERMENT SYSTEMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Speaker, the tragic saga of the Grootvlei and Orkney
mines, which were awarded to Aurora Empowerment Systems, represents
everything that has to be fought against in South Africa. It is an absolute
scandal that this crisis has been allowed to continue for over a year with
devastating consequences for the environment and workers’ rights.
Throughout all of this the ANC has remained quiet, while Aurora Empowerment
Systems have been allowed to sow destruction at these mines!

The ID wants to know why there was not proper due diligence in regard to
Aurora Empowerment Systems to ensure that they could actually pay for these
mines and provide the necessary funding to keep them operating. Due
diligence in this case seems only to extend to confirming that President
Zuma’s nephew and his lawyer, and Mandela’s grandson were directors of this
company. To add insult to injury, the workers have had to watch as
Khulubuse Zuma has engaged in public displays of huge wealth while
continuing to insist that he has no money to pay the workers on the mines.

In addition, millions of litres of untreated acid mine water have been
pumped daily into the surrounding wetlands, with devastating environmental
consequences. It has now also been reported that some union officials are
receiving death threats for questioning the role of the liquidator Enver
Motala’s complicity in this tragedy. This must end. It is high time that
the government intervened so as to stop this tragedy from turning into a
complete catastrophe. I thank you.

                 LAUNCH OF TR3 VISION 2010 AND TAXI ACADEMY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N R BHENGU (ANC): Speaker, on 2 November 2010 the SA National Taxi
Association Council, Santaco, unveiled the TR3 Vision 2010 and launched the
taxi academy. The TR3 Vision 2010 is about redefining, restructuring and
refocusing the taxi industry as a key player in the mainstream of the
economy. The taxi academy will provide training to taxi owners, rank
managers, taxi drivers and conductors to improve the quality of services
provided by the taxi industry to 15 million commuters every day.

The Minister of Transport, Mr Sibusiso Ndebele, attended this event and
commended Santaco for demonstrating their understanding of broad-based
black economic empowerment and the co-operative development policies of the
ANC government. The Department of Transport pledged R5 million towards the
taxi academy.

The TR3 Vision 2020 will enable the taxi industry to realise its potential
as a true broad-based black economic empowerment sector in transport with
multibillion rand financial muscle. The ANC will support efforts by the
people to become the masters of their own destiny.

                    DEATH OF BRITISH TOURIST ANNI DEWANI

                            (Member’s Statement)
Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Speaker, the ACDP wishes to convey its condolences
to the husband and family of Anni Dewani, a British tourist who was killed
on Saturday night while on honeymoon with her husband. Our sympathy goes to
Mr Dewani and we pray that he will find strength and comfort during this
very difficult time.

The ACDP further appeals to the Minister of Tourism and all relevant
stakeholders to ensure that it becomes a requirement for tour companies and
guides to inform tourists about areas they can and cannot visit at night,
so that we do not have a repeat of this unfortunate and tragic event.

We further call on the police to leave no stone unturned until they find
the murderers of Anni Dewani and for experienced detectives to be given
this case to ensure that the perpetrators are convicted by our courts. A
clear message must be sent to criminals out there that the attacking and
killing of tourists will not be tolerated. Thank you.

           INVOLVEMENT OF POLITICIANS IN CONTRACTS WITH GOVERNMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S C MOTAU (DA): Speaker, media reports suggest that the ANC, via its
front company, Chancellor House, is benefiting from the national energy
crisis again, through its recent purchase of a major Swazi coal mine which
is, in turn, apparently set to supply coal to several power plants,
including the new Medupi plant. The DA believes that this amounts to a
gross conflict of interest. It blurs the lines between party and state, and
we once again call on the ANC to shut down Chancellor House.

Chancellor House is a front company that is doing nothing but enrich the
ANC and it is doing that through very questionable means. We cannot have a
situation where the ANC is able to benefit from an energy crisis of its own
making and its insider knowledge of state dealings, in order to bankroll
its own party financing and election campaigns.

In April this year, the DA’s Chief Whip, Ian Davidson, submitted a Private
Members’ Bill to ban political parties from tendering and contracting with
general government. The Bill seeks to regulate the awarding of government
tenders in order to ensure that no business entity in which a political
party has an interest can tender with government or parastatals.

This episode only re-emphasises the need for such legislation. Where there
is such provision in place in our law, a coal mine owned by an ANC front
company will not be permitted to contract with Eskom. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                           TUBERCULOSIS TREATMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC welcomes the new development of a
potential drug treatment that has the ability to simplify and shorten
tuberculosis, TB, treatment to less than six months. Currently, the drug is
being tested for effectiveness, safety and tolerability on patients at two
centres, the Lung Institute at the University of Cape Town and the TASK
Research Centre in Bellville.

If successful, the experimental regimen will offer a shorter, simpler,
safer and more affordable treatment option for multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis, MDR TB, an emerging global health threat. This is going to be
a significant advance for MDR TB patients, who today must take multiple
types of drugs - including injectables - daily for up to two years.

The ANC supports and believes that it will assist and bring relief to those
who have been compelled to take treatment for longer periods. This new
treatment shortens the period of taking the treatment, which is one of the
main reasons for patients’ defaulting. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    FEEDBACK ON VISITS TO SCHOOLS IN 2010

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Hon Speaker, at the end of 2009, correspondence was sent
from the Minister of Basic Education, Mrs Angie Motshekga, Member of
Parliament, to all Members of Parliament in this House, urging members of
the House to visit schools at the beginning of the 2010 academic year.

I duly visited 10 schools over a three-day period and submitted a
comprehensive report of my findings to the Ministry on 14 April 2010. This
report advised the Ministry on issues that required urgent attention at
these schools. I further requested in my correspondence feedback from the
Ministry on issues that I addressed and the steps to be taken, so that I
could conduct follow-up visits towards the end of 2010.

To date, hon Speaker, and despite numerous requests by my office, the
Ministry of Education has not even responded to my April correspondence,
save for a telephonic call of acknowledgement, let alone effected any
changes to the above-mentioned schools as per my request.

I submit that this, Mr Speaker, is administrative and political negligence
of the worst kind. I therefore urge the Minister of Education to take
immediate disciplinary and corrective action to ensure that instances of
negligence such as this do not occur again. Thank you. [Applause.]

                     NEGLECT OF WORKERS AT PAMODZI MINES

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr P D DEXTER (COPE): Speaker, Cope supports the call by the National Union
of Mine Workers and Solidarity, for Enver Motala the lead liquidator, who
was charged with winding up Pamodzi Mines, to step down because of the
social crisis caused at the mines which is a result of his failed efforts.

Cope also supports the demands for Aurora to be taken to the Labour Court
for its failure to pay the salaries of its employees for the past 18
months, leaving them utterly stranded. The situation that has developed is
an absolute travesty of justice. The government, self-proclaimed champion
of the workers and the poor, has done nothing.

Reports suggest that R4 million’s worth of pension and provident fund
contributions deducted were not paid over to the relevant funds and no pay-
as-you-earn or unemployment insurance payments were made to the
authorities. Life cover policies were also cancelled as a result of
nonpayment of contributions by Aurora.

Both the Department of Labour and the Department of Mineral Resources have
failed to act against the company, which is headed by politically connected
individuals. Workers have been literally mugged by the employer.

Furthermore, due to the neglect of management, the problem of acid water
has been exacerbated in the mines, and assets of the mines have allegedly
been stripped and sold off to pay the liquidators. As the government looks
the other way, the rich continue to be rich, while the poor workers are
left destitute. It’s a disgrace, Speaker. [Applause.]

                  AGM OF LAW SOCIETY OF NORTHERN PROVINCES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J B SIBANYONI (ANC): Hon Speaker, the Law Society of the Northern
Provinces is commended for having held its annual general meeting on 13
November 2010 at Pilanesberg, Sun City. The opening session was addressed
by the Chief Justice, Mr Sandile Ngcobo. He said that the attacks on the
judiciary, either from academics, politicians or political analysts, are a
threat to the independence of the judiciary.

At the AGM attorneys who have been practitioners for 50 years in this noble
profession, the legal profession, were recognised. The AGM is commended for
having grappled with the Legal Practice Bill and the Constitution 18th
Amendment Bill in its deliberations.

The Law Society of South Africa has submitted its views to the Department
of Justice regarding the Legal Practice Bill. The Justice Committee looks
forward to receiving the Law Society of the Northern Provinces’ resolutions
and its submissions before the above-mentioned Bills are debated in
Parliament. These Bills have been prioritised by all interested
stakeholders. [Applause.] Thank you, Speaker.

                     ADMINISTRATION OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS
                   IN THE NORTH WEST PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J R B LORIMER (DA): Speaker, provincial governments are given power over
traditional communities. That power carries a duty of trust that the best
interests of traditional communities will be followed at all times.

There is one instance where that duty of trust is being flagrantly
violated. The North West provincial government has allowed the situation
where the Bapo ba Mogale traditional community faces losing out on a
massive business deal that could help lift many of its 35 000 members out
of poverty.

The North West provincial government has placed the affairs of the
community under administration. The administrator’s appointment is being
challenged in court. In the meantime the premier refuses to act. The
community’s affairs have been left to stagnate. Community bills are not
being paid and decisions involving the administration of the community’s
wealth are not being taken. One result is that the community may now lose
out on being able to increase its share in a potentially lucrative Pandora
platinum mine.

The leadership of the community believe officials want to keep control of
the community’s wealth, so that they can give dodgy contracts to their
friends. The DA has appealed directly to the premier, but the premier has
not acted. I have written to the Minister, but he has done nothing. I am
sorry to see that the Minister is not here - perhaps he’s out buying
flowers! This begs the question: do these elected officials care about
their responsibilities to traditional communities? Aren’t they bothered by
reports of corruption? South Africans will draw their own conclusions. They
are not likely to be kind. [Applause.]

           ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY FOR COMMUNITIES IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Umntwana B Z ZULU (ANC): Somlomo,uhulumeni we-African National Congress
oholwa ngumhlonishwa uMongameli uMsholozi, usefinyelele nakubantu abahlala
ezindaweni zasemakhaya ukubalethela ukukhanya kwentuthuko. Umhlonishwa
woMnyango Wezamandla,umhlonishwa uPeters usebenza ngokukhulu ukuzinikela
nokuzikhandla ezindaweni zasemakhaya kwaNongoma, lapho esefakele khona
ugesi ezigodini eziningi ezahlukeneyo.

Ukwazile ukufakela ugesi imizi eyizi-2569 okumanje ikhanyisa ugesi kule
ndawo. Imali uhulumeni aseyifakile ukwenza lo msebenzi omkhulu noncomekayo
iyizigidi ezingama-R35. Abantu abaningi abahlezi emakhaya bengasebenzi
bakwazile ukuthola amathuba emisebenzi ngenkathi kufakelwa ugesi emakhaya
abo. Izingane ezifunda ezikoleni ezikulezi zindawo nazo sezizokwazi
ukusebenzisa amakhompyutha ukufundisa izingane ebezingakaze zilithole
ithuba lokufundiswa ezobuchwepheshe.

Abantu bayancoma bathi bayakubona okushiwo nguMongameli uMsholozi ukuthi
ufuna intuthuko ifinyelele nasezindaweni zasemakhaya. Ukukhanya kufike
nohulumeni we-African National Congress kwaNongoma. Imisebenzi yakhe
yentuthuko iyabonakala. Inselelo enkulo uMnyango obhekene nayo ukwebiwa
kukagesi yilabo abangafuni ukuwukhokhela. Lokhu kukhinyabeza imizamo
emikhulu kahulumeni yokuqhubeka afakele ugesi kulabo abasawudingayo.
Ngiyabonga Somlomo. (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Prince B Z ZULU (ANC): Speaker, the government of the African National
Congress, which is led by the hon President, Msholozi, has also reached out
to the people who live in the rural areas to bring them the light of
development. The hon Minister of the Department of Energy, hon Peters, has
worked with great dedication and commitment in the rural areas of Nongoma,
where she has supplied electricity to many districts.

As of now, she has managed to provide electricity to about 2569 households
in this area. The government has allocated a sum of R35 million to do this
commendable job. Many unemployed people benefited during the
electrification of their homes. The children attending schools in these
areas will now be able to use computers, and those learners, who have never
had the opportunity, will be exposed to technology.

People are appreciating it and are saying that they can now see what the
President, Msholozi, means when he says that he wants the development to
reach the rural areas. The improvement came with the government of the
National Congress in Nongoma. Her developmental works are evident. The
great challenge faced by the department is the stealing of electricity by
those who do not want to pay for it. This hinders the government’s great
efforts of continuing to supply electricity to those who need it. Thank
you, Speaker.]

           ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY FOR COMMUNITIES IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Speaker, I rise to thank the hon Zulu for taking
the opportunity to raise in the House the matter of the electrification of
the area of Nongoma, and also to convey, through him, a message to the
entire community of KwaZulu-Natal that we are aware that there are major
backlogs in that province, and in particular in the areas around Ulundi and
Nongoma, which do not have electricity.

We have plans to continue with the electrification programme. As you know,
government set itself the target of ensuring access to electricity for all
formal households by 2012 and universal access by 2014. We believe that,
with the support of communities and Members of Parliament like him, we will
be able to meet the target.

Hon Zulu raised the important point of paying for electricity. I want to
indicate that, as members of portfolio committees, you should also help the
municipalities to get the necessary amounts of money that they are owed by
consumers of electricity like government departments, individuals who can
afford it, and industry and businesses.

The challenge we have is that the lack of payment for electricity results
in the inability of municipalities to pay Eskom and then Eskom ends up
cutting off the supply to communities and to municipalities in particular.
The end result is that those unfortunate members of the community who are
supposed to have access to free basic electricity cannot have access to it
because the total supply has been cut off.

There are quite a number of government departments that owe municipalities
and Eskom. Through this House, I would like to make a special appeal to
them to pay. You will remember that earlier this year electricity to
communities in the Free State was cut off, primarily because of the huge
debts that state-owned enterprises, as well as government departments, had
to pay to municipalities. I want to say to hon Zulu that we are on track to
ensuring that we popularise the need for payments, but we also need your
support to ensure that. Thank you. [Applause.]

                  AGM OF LAW SOCIETY OF NORTHERN PROVINCES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, I
would like to associate myself with the statement made by the hon Sibanyoni
in relation to the annual general meeting, AGM, of the Law Society of the
Northern Provinces. I want to say that we agree with the statement made by
the Chief Justice at that meeting, that South Africa’s courts need to
improve efficiency in order to promote access to justice, that the
cumulative effect of trial delays is denial of justice, and that we need to
re-examine the fundamentals of our justice system.

In that regard, we thank the Law Society of the Northern Provinces,
together with the entire organised legal profession, for the very
constructive inputs that they have made in the development of the Legal
Practice Bill and the Superior Courts Bill. Both pieces of legislation are
designed exactly to improve the efficiency of our courts and access to
justice.

We would also like to say that we are working together with and in support
of the judiciary, led by the Chief Justice, to ensure that this is achieved
through the implementation of, amongst others, judicial case management and
improved management of our courts generally, as well as embarking upon a
review of our civil justice system. I thank you.

                   KILLING OF BRITISH TOURIST ANNI DEWANI
                   CONDOLENCES TO FAMILY OF SHRIEN DEWANI
                    DEATH OF BRITISH TOURIST ANNI DEWANI
                 ARMS DEAL INVESTIGATION BY BRITISH COMPANY
         FESTIVE SEASON CRIME-FIGHTING CAMPAIGN OPERATION DUTY CALLS
                          CASH INJECTION INTO ESKOM
                           TUBERCULOSIS TREATMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Hon Speaker, I think we should all
join the hon Gumede, the hon Ndlovu and the other hon members who have
referred to the tragic murder of the young British tourist who was visiting
our country. The killing of any person is a crime and a tragedy. In this
particular instance we are saddened that this has dented the positive image
that South Africa has accrued in recent months, to which the hon Gumede
referred. So, we join all members who have expressed condolences and
sadness at this tragic event.

Secondly, with respect to the robust statement by the former Minister of
Defence, the hon Lekota, the leader of Cope, we would all, of course, agree
with the hon member that those who have transgressed must be dealt with by
the law. However, we believe that we would benefit greatly if the hon
member who provided robust declarations of no transgression previously
would come forward with what he knows so that action can be taken against
those who have transgressed. [Applause.]

We would agree with the hon member from the Portfolio Committee on Police
that indeed we must all support the police in the anticrime campaign that
they have launched for the festive season and that all of us should become
active supporters of members of the Police Service as they seek to make our
country and our communities and streets safer.

On the matter of Eskom and the allocation referred to by the leader of the
DA, I hope, hon Speaker, that you will allow my hon colleague the Minister
of Public Enterprises, when he so requests, to make a statement to the
House so that this matter can be properly clarified, because I believe that
that is what is best to address this matter.
Finally, on the matter of research with respect to TB treatment, which was
raised by colleagues from the ANC, this is indeed a very exciting and
positive breakthrough. We hope the scientists will be successful in finding
a means of treating TB that will assist us to eradicate this blight on
many, many communities and members of our society. Thank you. [Applause.]

                          CASH INJECTION INTO ESKOM
           INVOLVEMENT OF POLITICIANS IN CONTRACTS WITH GOVERNMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Hon Speaker, I wish to apologise for omitting to
respond to the statement on the R20 billion guarantee. I want to reassure
members of this House that this is not additional funding, as was indicated
by the DA leader. It is a R20 billion guarantee from government to allow
us, Eskom, to raise loans from the market. This will allow for the building
of the Kusile Power Plant, and we will therefore be able to bring about the
security of the supply of electricity to South African industry and
households.

I want to ask, since I know that the DA is not a member of Cabinet and none
of them is a Minister, which Ministers were not consulted, because the
support that government lent to Eskom through Cabinet was a product of the
Department of Public Enterprises, DPE, the National Treasury and the
Department of Energy. We co-authored the memo which solicited the support
of Cabinet, which was duly given, as reported by the GCIS Director-General
last week. So, I just want to put that to rest.

I also want to say that the issues ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, take your seat. There is a point of
order.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, the Minister is asking me a
question. Am I entitled to respond to her question about which Ministers
were not asked or informed? In her response she asked me a question.

The SPEAKER: It is a rhetorical question, hon member. [Laughter.] Continue,
hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: I want to say that the issue of the link of
Chancellor House to Eskom is like a record that has got stuck, on one note.
We believe that that matter has been addressed and there is no way that we
can keep on bringing it back. Chancellor House is an independent company
that has a right to do business with any entity that they want to ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: ... and no amount of howling will stop Chancellor
House from doing business in this country. [Applause.]

       16 DAYS OF ACTIVISM FOR NO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Mr Speaker,
hon members, we are making this statement against the background of our
country’s having been affected by a number of shocking incidents of murder,
abuse and rape of women and children.

Just this weekend, a woman tourist from the United Kingdom was killed in
what is believed to be a hijacking incident in Gugulethu. Over the past few
weeks, we visited the scene of the gruesome murder of women and children at
Ntshongweni and Marianhill in KwaZulu-Natal. We further visited the family
of a young schoolgirl who was raped at her school, allegedly by fellow
learners. There is also information about the rape of an 11-year-old child
in Cape Town.

We want to express our deepest sympathy to the family of the deceased
British citizen, especially her husband, a newlywed, and also to the
families of the deceased in Ntshongweni and Marianhill.

We are receiving reports of an increase in the number of children abandoned
by their parents. Equally, we are concerned about missing children who
might be victims of child trafficking.

All of these incidents require us to approach the 16 Days of Activism for
No Violence against Women and Children with much more resolve and
determination, in order to mobilise all the people of our country to act
against abuse during this time.

The 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children is an
international initiative endorsed by the United Nations. It takes place
annually, beginning on 25 November, which is International Day of No
Violence against Women and Children. It runs to 10 December, which is
International Human Rights Day. Other key commemorative days during this
period include World Aids Day on 1 December and International Day for
Persons with Disabilities, which falls on 3 December of every year.

In the Southern African Development Community, SADC, region, the campaign
has gained significant momentum through the adoption of the Addendum on the
Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women and Children by the
SADC heads of state. Since 1999, our government has run this campaign and,
in addition to women, it has included issues relating to violence against
children.

This campaign focuses primarily on generating an increased awareness of the
negative impact of violence on women and children, as well as on society as
a whole. This campaign has served as the main social mobilisation tool
against the prevalence of acts of abuse against women and children in South
Africa.

Over the past 11 years, the campaign has grown exponentially, making it the
second most known government event in South Africa, after the state of the
nation address, according to a Government Communication and Information
System Tracker Survey. The Tracker Survey also indicates a significant rise
from 9% in 2003, to 33% in 2009, in public awareness levels in rural areas.

It is also worth noting that the 16 Days of Activism Campaign is again
nominated for this year’s Public Sector Excellence Award, which is
supported by Avusa, the Brand Leadership Academy and TNS Research Surveys.

The campaign also serves as a catalytic mechanism to support government
outcomes on gender equality and the protection of children and other
vulnerable groups. The campaign cuts across the five key priorities of
government, with a particular focus on crimes committed against women and
children.

While the levels of awareness have been increased, we face the reality that
child abuse, murder, rape, statutory rape, domestic violence and
trafficking of women and children continue to occur at a rate that is
unacceptably high.

The latest crime trends report of the SA Police Service for the period
April 2009 to March 2010 indicates a decrease of 4,4% in the ratio of
sexual offences. There is, however, a concern with regard to increases in
the incidence of attempted murder, sexual offences and murder of children
in particular. According to various previous analyses pertaining to crimes
against children according to age, most of the crimes are committed against
children between 15 and 17 years old. However, it is disturbing to notice
that there are now a significant number of cases of sexual offences
affecting children below the age of 15, including those aged between zero
and 10 years.

In implementing the campaign this year, we have taken into consideration
the outcomes of the Ten-Year Social Impact Assessment and the 2009
Stakeholders Summit, where various stakeholders assessed the campaign and
made recommendations going forward. This is where we came out with the 365
days plan of action on violence and abuse of women and children.

The corporate image and theme of the campaign has been well established in
society and amongst participating stakeholders nationally. It is for this
reason that we continue with the theme “Don’t look away; act against
abuse!”

The international theme of the campaign this year is: “Structures of
violence: Defining the intersections of militarism and violence against
women”. We will co-operate with the Departments of International Relations
and Cooperation, and Defence and Military Veterans in regard to
incorporating this international theme into our programmes and structures
and in relation to South African peacekeeping missions and other foreign
policy interactions abroad.

We have already had some activities which serve as a build up to the 16
Days of Activism. We had the celebration of National Children’s Day in
Rustenburg in the North West on 6 November, where we launched the campaign
to improve access to sanitary towels for vulnerable and orphaned girls.

Last week, we launched the Disability Awareness Campaign which should also
highlight the vulnerability to abuse of women, children and people with
disabilities. The campaign will culminate in a Disability Summit to be held
in Bloemfontein from 2 to 3 December in order to finalise the process of
domesticating the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

On 20 November in Daveyton, Gauteng, the Ministry, in partnership with the
SA National Aids Council, Sanac, Ekurhuleni Metro and other civil society
organisations, will co-ordinate the commemoration of International Men’s
Day on the twenty-first anniversary of the adoption of the UN Convention on
the Rights of the Child.
The key events of the 16 Days of Activism include the media launch that
will take place here in Parliament on 23 November 2010. Together with other
Ministers, we shall highlight the response to the challenge of the abuse of
women and children. We will be outlining our focus of this year’s campaign.

The opening event takes place in Khayelitsha, in Cape Town, on 25 November,
and will focus on the links between alcohol, substance abuse and the
scourge of the abuse of women and children. This event will be addressed by
our President, His Excellency, President Jacob Zuma.

From 25 November to 10 December there will be a number of activities
focusing on various aspects of the challenge of violence against women and
children. A calendar of these events organised by government, civil society
and other sectors will be published on our website.

The closing event on 10 December takes place in KwaZulu-Natal, where, we
hope, we will be able to relook at the horrible incidents of the murders of
innocent families and children in Ntshongweni and Marianhill.

Our focus will be on profiling the whole package of victim support services
that government and other partners are implementing to mitigate the impact
of violence on women and children. The closing event of the campaign will
be addressed by His Excellency, Deputy
President Kgalema Motlanthe.

It is therefore my belief that we will be able to take the 16 Days of
Activism campaign to even higher levels this year, as we implement the 365
days plan of action adopted after the 10-year review of the campaign last
year. Through this plan, we shall address key factors underlying the high
prevalence and vicious nature of the recent incidents of violence against
women and children.

It is my sincere hope that, as Parliament rises this week, all
parliamentarians will use their constituency period to highlight the
challenge of abuse of women and children in our communities. Let us use
this opportunity to encourage reporting, effective investigation and
appropriate interventions against incidents of violence and abuse against
women and children.

Let us visit police stations in our constituencies and speak to those in
authority to find out their levels of understanding, sensitivity and state
of readiness to tackle this scourge that faces our community.

Let me take this opportunity to invite the Members of Parliament,
especially men in the House, to participate in the international Men’s
March on 20 November in Daveyton, Ekurhuleni. It is a very important day on
which parents can teach boys, their sons, to respect girls from their
formative years. The central message for that day must be that real men
don’t rape; real men don’t beat their wives, and real men don’t abuse
children.

I therefore hope that we shall ensure that we pass on these messages to our
communities, organisations, volunteer groups, traditional leaders,
religious leaders and all in our communities, to ensure that we form a
formidable army of committed citizens of this country that will speak with
one voice and say to the whole country: let us not look away; let us all
act against the abuse of women and children.

I would also like to caution some of our journalists and media houses to
remember to protect our children. They also have rights; they also have the
right to privacy. We want to ask them to protect the children from
unnecessary exposure, especially those that have been highly traumatised
and are still under age and undergoing counselling because of the brutality
of the rape and abuse. We believe that members of the press are also
parents and patriots and will therefore put the interests of our children
first, before they go out and look for a scoop for the front page.

It is a matter of concern that details of the video which was taken at
Jules High School were published in what is tantamount to promoting child
pornography in our country. This may have a devastating impact on children
who are already traumatized by these occurrences.

In closing, allow me to say that a society that does not respect its women
and children is a dysfunctional society. As South Africans, let us declare
that we refuse to be part of such a society and that we do care for women
and children. Let us all march together, forward against woman and child
abuse. Thank you.

Mrs D ROBINSON: Hon Deputy Speaker, Ministers, members and also our special
guests in the gallery, Minister, I would like to congratulate you on your
appointment to office. I trust that our relationship will be a cordial one
and that we will work together in the interests of women, children and
persons with disabilities.

I’m convinced that we can put some action to the platitudes that have been
uttered in the past year of inaction. Apart from expressing sympathy, we
need to see action and change. The Ministry needs real leadership to
promote the interests of women, who are still denied the rights that they
are guaranteed by our Constitution and the many protocols that have been
signed. We will hold the Ministry accountable for implementing a human
rights culture, for gender rights are human rights.

A lot of women have improved in many ways but, 16 years into democracy, why
do we still need the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and
Children? While women rightly celebrate their new freedom, they do not feel
liberated or empowered in every sphere of life. In their homes, as wives
and daughters, domestic violence against women is far too common. In their
neighbourhoods they are vulnerable to rape and attack, and when they turn
to the police or to the courts for protection, their concerns are often
shrugged off. Many victims of crime point out that they are victimised
twice: first by the criminals and then by the criminal justice system.

The much acclaimed Victims’ Charter was meant to take care of the needs of
all victims, but government is failing to ensure that the rights are
upheld. Women do not always have access to the special Family Violence,
Child Protection and Sexual Offences Units or victim support rooms.

There is a desperate need for psychologists and social workers at police
stations, at courts and in communities to deal with the scourge of rape and
abuse of women, children and babies. Not only are the victims traumatised,
but also the families who witnessed the atrocities, as well as the police,
doctors and nurses who have to deal with the indescribable scenes they have
to witness. At eleven o’clock last night I heard of a three-month-old child
that had been victimised and abused in the most horrendous way.
I quote Colleen Lowe Morna of Gender Links, who said:

    ... we (need) to do much more to reach out to men who are imprisoned by
    the emotions that society, for whatever reason, has never allowed them
    to process.

Many of our families are dysfunctional and counsellors are needed. This
cannot be left to the NGOs alone, who are already suffering from lack of
funding. Government has to take financial responsibility for providing the
funds to deal with the problems. So I appeal for more gender-sensitive
budgeting.

The lack of maintenance payments is often a trigger for family violence.
Why should women have to go to court to beg that fathers pay maintenance
for their children? The courts are often grossly understaffed, and justice
is not served.

I challenge all hon Ministers and members to behave with honesty, to set
the example, to pay up and to encourage others to take responsibility for
the children that they fathered. In a modern constitution there is no place
for patriarchal attitudes that regard women as mere objects to be used at
the pleasure of men.

Probably the single most important marker of a country’s progress is how it
treats its women. If its women have the same education as its men, and are
given the same opportunities and status, the country will prosper and
advance, but we need to break down the patriarchal attitudes for this to
happen.

“Finding a way to preserve traditional wisdom while promoting human rights
is the challenge of our age.” Those are the words of Helen Zille. I agree.
Don’t look away; act against violence! These 16 days serve as an important
reminder of how far we still have to go. Let us put words to action. Let us
not have T-shirts, let us not have caps, let us have ongoing action.
Feasting is not enough; we need to work hard. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Hon Deputy Speaker, may I begin by congratulating the
Minister hon Lulu Xingwana on her appointment as Minister in the Department
of Women, Children and People with Disabilities. We wish her luck and
success in her work. [Applause.]

Hon Deputy Speaker, once again South Africans and the international
community will campaign for 16 days, calling for the elimination of all
forms of violence against women.

Violence against women takes many forms: sexual assault, wife beating,
prostitution, trafficking, sexual violence, sexual harassment and date
rape. Violence against women also takes many other forms such as
psychological, emotional and financial abuse, and also intimidation. All
are unacceptable violations of human rights. Together they form a huge
obstacle to gender equality and genuine human progress.

In South Africa, the sexual violation of children, women in general, women
living with HIV/Aids, and lesbians is endemic. This heinous crime does not
end there but, in some instances, leads to murder. The latest case is that
of the murder of the British bride on honeymoon in South Africa. It’s sad.
It is very sad.

Women in South Africa are not safe anywhere. Recently, a doctor was gang-
raped at her workplace and a schoolgirl was drugged and raped by school
pupils. The sad part about the latter incident is that the alleged
perpetrators were set free by the police because of questions from her
peers about whether it was rape or not, as she was drunk. The question is:
How could she not be drunk when she was drugged?

Women are scared to report sexual violence because they will be insulted
and victimised in public. Women’s rights are under threat and something
needs to be done urgently.

Cope believes women have a right to report sexual violence and harassment
without fear, no matter who the perpetrator is. It is also critical that
women are able to speak out and share their ideas in order to challenge
attitudes and beliefs that sustain violence against women.

Cope also calls for action to defend women’s rights to freedom of
expression and information which are the basic building blocks for women to
be able to come together, organise for change, inform public debate, define
culture, build safe spaces and end violence against women.

Cope invites all to take action to defend women’s rights and the gains that
we have made so far. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP strongly aligns itself
with the objectives of the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against
Women and Children campaign. The reason we do this is primarily because, in
spite of the wonderful strides we have made as a country in moving away
from the horrors of this country’s apartheid past, and in spite of the
strides we have made in embracing a culture of human rights and democracy,
we note with regret that women and our children are still at the receiving
end of violence, meted out to them by those who should be protecting them.

Even though this year is the 10th anniversary of this campaign, rampant and
unforgivable violence against women and children is indeed a cause for us
to hang our heads in shame. We recognise that the objectives of this
campaign should not be confined to only 16 days, but should be pursued
every day until the battle is won.

The campaign should be viewed as a means of pricking the consciences of our
people so that they take up the fight to defeat this ugly phenomenon. We
call on all the men and women of our country to join hands in defeating
this demon which continues to corrode and blight the very soul of our
nation. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs S U PAULSE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the campaign of 16 Days of Activism
for No Violence against Women and Children is a very important period on
our events calendar. It proves that we are united with the rest of the
world.

Geweld teen vroue en kinders moet tot ’n einde kom. Die OD wil beklemtoon
dat dié soort geweld in werklikheid ’n skending van menseregte is. Die
demonstrasie ter ondersteuning van vroue in die wêreld is nie genoeg nie,
maar ongelukkig is dit die enigste tyd van die jaar wat aan dié saak gewy
word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Violence against women and children has to end. The ID would like to
emphasise that this kind of violence is in fact a violation of human
rights. The demonstration in support of women the world over is not enough,
but unfortunately this is the only time of the year dedicated to this
cause.]

Violence against women is not only common but often fatal. It is an extreme
manifestation of gender inequality and human rights violation. It is not a
South African problem or shortcoming; it is, in fact, a global problem.

Die uitskakeling van alle vorme van geweld teen vroue en kinders moet nie
’n jaarlikse demonstrasie wees nie; dit behoort ’n prioriteit van hierdie
regering te wees, omdat ’n groot getal vroue in die Suid-Afrikaanse
nasionale Parlement verteenwoordig word. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The elimination of all forms of violence against women and children should
not be an annual campaign; it ought to be a priority for this government,
because a large number of women are represented in the national Parliament
of South Africa.]

The ID strongly believes that a strategic way to prevent violence is to
introduce and enforce laws that protect women. In doing so, there must be
no room for tolerance of acts of violence against women and children. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Deputy Speaker, the UDM calls on the nation to mobilise in
support of this worthy campaign. In my brief time I would like to make two
points. Firstly, the UDM expresses its outrage and dismay at the recent
brutal killing of a British woman on honeymoon in South Africa. Her death,
like the recent Jules High School gang rape incident, emphasises the
brutality and violence that women and children face in this country. The
men who commit these atrocities must be found and punished. Every such
incident must be dealt with swiftly and unequivocally. Enough is enough!

Secondly, this is another year in which this campaign will be conducted
without the late hon Cheryl Gillwald at the helm. We would like to make use
of this opportunity to salute this activist whose energy and dedication was
a driving force behind the establishment and growth of the campaign. We
hope that the campaign will continue to grow from strength to strength and
serve as a monument for her and many others who are fighting against gender
violence. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, dit is met afgryse en skok dat ’n
mens in die media moet lees van skoolkinders en skoolmeisies wat verkrag
word, en die dade dan gerieflikheidshalwe op video opgeneem en op die
internet verkoop word.

Dit is met afgryse en skok dat ’n mens moet lees van ’n klein baba, Marzaan
Kruger, wat wreed deur haar aanvaller sodanig vermik is dat sy breinskade
opgedoen het. Dis ’n kind wat nog nie eens kan praat nie; ’n kind wat nie
in ’n hofsaak getuienis kan lewer nie.
Ons sê die gemeenskap het siek geword. Die vraag is, wat doen ons as ouers
om die voorbeeld te stel en ons kinders reg op te voed? Die standpunt van
die VF Plus is duidelik. Ons gemeenskap het so siek geword dat, as dit by
kinderverkragters en moordenaars kom, ons die terugbring van die doodstraf
bepleit, want dit sál werk om ons gemeenskap weer reg te kry. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, it is with shock and horror that
one must read in the media of schoolchildren and schoolgirls who are raped
and that the rapes are then video-taped and sold on the Internet.

It is with shock and horror that one must read of a little baby, Marzaan
Kruger, who had been maimed so brutally by her attacker that she was left
brain-damaged. This is a child who was too young even to speak; a child who
cannot give evidence at a trial.

We are saying that the community has become ill. The question is: What are
we as parents doing to set an example and to give our children the correct
education? The argument of the Freedom Front Plus is very clear. Our
community has become so ill that if it comes to the rapists and murderers
of children, we are pleading for the reinstitution of the death penalty,
because that is the only way to cure our community. I thank you.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, the debate on 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence against Women and Children today takes place under the shadow of
the tragic killing of a newlywed British tourist who was on honeymoon with
her husband. The ACDP is concerned that this criminal act may have a
negative impact on the number of tourists that we are expecting in our
country this year.

We believe that more should be done to stop the unabating sexual assaults
and violence against women and children in our country. We also believe
that we must move away from 16 days of activism to 365 days of activism
against all forms of violence in our country. As the ACDP has stated in the
past, it is time for government to move beyond trying to create awareness;
it needs to start solving the problem.

If government wants to see results in their fight against violence against
women and children, we recommend that the following should also be done.
Firstly, they must ensure that minimum sentencing legislation for convicted
abusers is applied. Secondly, they must provide courts and personnel to
deal speedily with these issues. Lastly, they must provide better training
for police, and better forensic services and victim care centres. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, women and children are subjected daily
to traumatisation and abuse. The devastating rise of criminal activity is
becoming a negative force, destructive to building a caring and peaceful
society. Women are, more importantly, involved every day of their lives.
They have become victims of barbaric behaviour.

I agree with you, hon Minister, that all the incidents that have been
mentioned, including the two rape incidents of the elderly in Chatsworth,
are indeed heartbreaking. The perpetrators must face the strong arm of the
law. It is incumbent upon all of us, hon members of this House, to ensure
the safety, security and protection that are truly desired by all.

The MF says: “Creative communities are progressive communities.” We call on
all to fight and put an end to physical, social and mental abuse endured by
all women and children. The campaign must be intensified throughout the
year. I thank you. [Applause]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Deputy Speaker, the past few weeks have witnessed a rise in
the number of incidents of the violation of the rights of children and
women. We were shocked by reports of the alleged gang rape of a schoolgirl.
Even more shocking were reports that the incident had been videotaped and
that her teachers had laughed at her, saying that she deserved it. There
were many other reports, including that of the rape of a Bloemfontein
doctor.

We are worried that society may gradually get used to such reports and
accept the abuse and rape of women as part and parcel of everyday life.
That is why Azapo supports the launch of 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence against Women and Children, as it will go some way towards
resensitising South Africans. Our message to men and young boys is: Real
men do not abuse; they protect and love women. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B N DLULANE: Sekela-somlomo, mandithabathe eli thuba ndivuyisane
noNkosazana Xingwana ngokunikwa lo msebenzi umkhulu kangaka wokukhokela eli
sebe. Sikho sonke, siza kukuxhasa. [Deputy Speaker, let me take this
opportunity to congratulate Ms Xingwana for being given this important task
of being the Minister of this department. We are all here and we will
support you.]

Hon Deputy Speaker and hon members, we are urged this afternoon, as we have
been urged for the past 11 years, not to look away, but to act against
abuse. For most of the past few weeks the news headlines that have captured
the attention of the entire nation have revolved around unspeakable acts of
violence against not only women, but also children. The acts of rape
committed against helpless old women, young women whose lives are
negatively impacted upon, and vulnerable children who are placed under the
care of their relatives, unfortunately seem to be the order of the day in
our communities.

Hon members do not need to be reminded of the plight of the 12 women who
fell victim to a serial rapist in Johannesburg, the two women who were
raped in a temple in Chatsworth, Durban, and the girl child who was raped
by her grandfather in Balfour, an incident of horror.

What is clearly intolerable is the lack of action by school authorities and
teachers who have been made aware of rape, violence and intimidation
involving young men and schoolgirls, but have done nothing to stop these
evil deeds. We call on our government, civil society and the private sector
to take harsh action against the school authorities and teachers who are
implicated in these cases, so that we can send a strong, clear message that
we shall not tolerate any form of violence and abuse against anyone,
especially women and children, who are the most vulnerable members of our
society.

A few lessons can be learned from the events of these past few days. Every
day we are faced with some form of sexual and physical violence,
victimisation, abuse and disrespect directed at women and children, which
has the impact of wearing them down. The question we have to ask ourselves
is whether or not we as individuals are to blame for perpetrating many of
these actions, and how we offer support to those amongst us who are
suffering. Related to that, we should be asking ourselves how far we go in
celebrating successes achieved by women, especially girl children, as well
as how we encourage each other and rally around those amongst us who are
striving to achieve something better.

Today, as we prepare ourselves to respond to the call made by the Minister,
hon Xingwana, we have to congratulate members of the SA Police Service on
the sterling work done by them in apprehending a suspected serial rapist
outside Durban on Friday. The SA Police Service were able to achieve this
through the assistance of the members of the public who provided
information on the alleged serial rapist. The participation of community
members can be made possible by, for example, creating neighbourhood
watches in all communities.

When putting emphasis on the theme for this year’s campaign - which is,
“Don’t look away; act against abuse!” - all of us are called upon not to
watch from the sidelines and do nothing, but to speak out and take a stand.
When we hear screams and shouts of abuse around us, we must make it our
business to act.

There are many organisations and activists who are selflessly involved in
mobilising men to fight violence against women and children. In many
instances these men and women are working hard, away from the limelight and
with inadequate resources. I will mention only a few of them today, but
there is no shortage of information about these organisations and the work
that they do.

The Brothers for Life, with their slogan “Yenza Kahle” [Do the right thing]
send their message to us on television all the time. Sonke Gender Justice,
who say, “One Man Can” and can be seen during episodes of the soapie
Generations on television, is another such organisation. There is also
Hearts of Men, whose project is aimed at lifting men out of unemployment
and poverty hands-on, and which teaches young men and fathers not to
perpetrate violence against women. Last but not least there is the Movement
for Good, whose rallying philosophy is, “It starts with you.”

The role of Parliament and its members, in particular the role and
responsibility of male parliamentarians, is of outmost importance in
upholding and taking forward the seeds that have been sown by these
organisations. Of equal importance are the role and responsibilities of
female parliamentarians in speaking out about the abuse of women and
children in all spheres of our lives and interactions. The responsibility
that must be taken up by all Members of Parliament is also to find ways of
strengthening support to men’s groups in order to sustain the work that
they do.

The activities supporting the 16 Days campaign have been communicated to
you today. It is incumbent upon each of us to ensure that we do not remain
on the sidelines; that we participate, and even take the lead, in ensuring
that the abuse of women and children is completely eradicated during our
lifetime. It is our collective responsibility to send out the message that
men are capable of loving passionately, respectfully and with sensitivity;
that women wish to feel safe in their neighbourhoods and are prepared to
build trust between themselves and their partners.

We must commend our government for stepping up and sustaining the 16 Days
of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children as an annual
campaign. The campaign should not end in December every year, but we should
be vigilant and guard against all forms of abuse throughout the year.

We can achieve a lot if we can also direct our attention to the
ratification of the Southern African Development Community, SADC, protocol
on gender development. South Africa has to ensure that efforts by all
communities are supported by the ratification of the protocol without
further delay.

In the name of collective action, together we can do more to eradicate the
scourge of violence and abuse against women. Enkosi. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, that concludes the party responses to the
Minister’s Statement. We move on to the next item. Permission has been
granted to the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans to make a
statement on the final report of the Interim National Defence Force Service
Commission. I am advised that parties have been made aware of this and will
have an opportunity to respond to the Statement. Before I call on the
Minister, hon members, I want to acknowledge the presence here in the
gallery of the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission, led by
Judge Bosielo. You are welcome as we receive you here. [Applause.]

      FINAL REPORT OF INTERIM NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE SERVICE COMMISSION

                                 (Statement)

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, can I just ask whether the Minister
perhaps issued us with a copy of the statement?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon member, the Minister is going to make the
statement. There is no issuing of the statement.

Mrs J D KILIAN: But according to the Rules, if it was possible, she could
just present it to we members.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, she did not.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Madam Deputy Speaker, for
the benefit of the member of Cope, there is a statement available and it
can be photocopied and distributed as I speak. Thank you very much.

Madam Deputy Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. On 24
August 2010, the Speaker summoned me to his office to discuss the matter of
the Report of the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission and he
insisted both to me and to the Deputy President as the Leader of Government
Business that the finalisation of the report should be done and it should
be presented as speedily as possible. I gave my word, as did the Deputy
President, that we would comply, and I am now able to confirm that after an
initial extension of the period requested and granted to the commission,
this morning I had the honour and privilege of receiving the Report of the
Interim National Defence Force Service Commission.

It is important at this point to remind ourselves of the purpose or
objective of this exercise, and perhaps the best place to start is at the
beginning. The concept of the commission owes its existence to the policy
intention of my first Budget Vote in 2009, dated 3 July 2009, in this
Parliament. I stated at that point, and I quote:

    ... we are considering making a request for a separate dispensation for
    the Department of Defence that would allow us to creatively deal with
    our own needs and the specificities (and uniqueness) of the security
    requirements (of the Defence Force).

I emphasise this, as it is so often deliberately misinterpreted in some
circles, fuelled by other corners of the House. The intention to establish
the National Defence Force Service Commission was expressed long before the
shameful conduct by a small group of ill-disciplined members of the Defence
Force at the Union Buildings.
It should be obvious, then, that we were alive to the challenge of
addressing the concerns of the S A National Defence Force, SANDF, after
years of the hon Lekota’s being at its helm, a member here who stands up
and pretends that he is perhaps new to these matters. These steps also
preceded the whimper from some corners of the opposition benches. They bay
and howl at the wind, for no other reason than to preen their wet wings.

The interim commission was established on 9 September 2009, after the
Cabinet's approval of the creation of the new dispensation for the Defence
Force. The brief of the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission
was clear and well spelt out in the terms of reference that they were
given. These were to:

      1. advise and make recommendations on a unique service dispensation
         outside the ambit of the Public Service;


      2. advise on the regulatory framework for the unique service
         dispensation; and


      3. investigate and provide advice on remuneration and conditions of
         service of members of the SANDF.

The interim commission was advised to deal with these terms of reference
both in the short term, that is, legislation, and in the long term, which
is what we have today in the report. The commission dealt with these as
three separate terms of reference. Each one is a stand-alone and very
separate from the others. I introduced the commission to the portfolio
committee, because the short term aspect, which was the drafting of
legislation, needed some kind of co-operation with the portfolio committee.

I want to take this opportunity, therefore, to thank the members of the
Interim National Defence Force Service Commission for the sterling work
they have done. They have not only criss-crossed the length and breadth of
this country, interviewing various stakeholders, but they have also found
time to benchmark their work by visiting the United Kingdom, the United
States of America, and the Russian Federation in order to learn from other
countries the international best practice in a number of issues that have a
bearing on us. I trust that in time we will benefit from the lessons and
insights derived from these visits. They have done us proud in contributing
to the effective and efficient management of the Defence Force as it
fulfils its constitutional responsibility.

The work done by the interim commission is outstanding and I commend it.
Could the hon member allow hon Groenewald to listen because he is an
affected party? Their dedication and commitment are clearly shown by their
hard work in producing the report that they handed over to me this morning.
They gave of their time and energy, despite the fact that most of them were
in full-time employment.

It is now my honour and privilege to acknowledge members of the interim
commission and use the opportunity to thank them most sincerely for their
hard work, commitment, tenacity and single-mindedness in the midst of the
noise and attempts to divert them.

The interim commission consists of people of outstanding calibre who have
brought a great deal of integrity to the work that they have done. It
consists of men and women who have distinguished themselves in their own
right in South African society. These members are Judge Bosielo, who is a
Judge of the Supreme Court of Appeal; Mr Ismail, who is the Deputy
Chairperson; Lieutenant General Moloi, otherwise known as Comrade A;
retired Major General Bantu Holomisa whose exploits in the Transkei are
very well-known to all of us; Ms Mgabadeli, who is unfortunately not with
us here; returning to General Holomisa, we thought that perhaps he might be
the best placed person to ensure that we are in the safe hands and the
Defence Force does behave; Dr Mokgokong, who was the deputy chairperson of
the commission that allowed a hike in our salaries as Members of
Parliament; Professor Christie, a well-known Western Cape academic; Mr
Ngcakani, the retired Inspector-General of Intelligence; Bishop Mpumlwana,
the Bishop of the African Episcopal Church, and hon Groenewald, whose
attention I’ve been trying to obtain and who is possibly the longest-
serving member of the Defence Committee in this House. [Applause.] Thank
you very much. I would like, on their behalf, to acknowledge your applause.

In their handing over of the report this morning, it was touching to hear
them say that they did this and for them it was an honour to serve the
country. They stressed that the report is the foundation of their
observations and should be regarded as work still to be completed by the
permanent commission.

Appointing members from such diverse backgrounds allowed us, for the first
time in this dispensation, to have a bird’s-eye view of the SANDF since
1994. The observations therefore span a period of 15 years. The importance
of the commissioners is that they are drawn from disparate backgrounds; two
of them are currently members of opposition political parties in this
House, showing that the responsibility of the Defence Force cuts across
political lines. There was a deliberate effort to include members of the
opposition political parties on the interim commission to draw as wide a
range of experience as was possible.

It must have been very hard for them to sit here as members of this House
and listen to distortions of certain sections of what is purported to be
their work, a deliberate distortion of their hard work. The SANDF is a
national asset and these members understood that they could effectively
contribute while in the opposition to ensuring that our sovereignty is in
the hands of people who are looked after.

I would like to say to the Leader of the Opposition, hon Trollip, that when
his member stands here to quote selectively on ongoing work in order to
create an impression of “time bombs”, which exist only in his imagination,
then it begs the question where he was when all the changes were happening
in the Defence Force. He quoted from a purported report of September last
year and brought it here and pretended that he had just unearthed it, as
something that was written yesterday. Where was he all this time when all
these changes were taking place in the Defence Force?

Together with the interim commission, we worked tirelessly to ensure that
there were changes. The most important fact that they established, and what
must be established in this House, is that it is possible to be in the
opposition to ensure that the governing party is accountable but to do it
responsibly, especially when we are dealing with a national asset such as
the Defence Force. [Applause.]

There are always two choices in life, hon Trollip: you are either part of
change or you are working against it. Your member has chosen not to be part
of the change but to work against the change. The immense improvements that
have occurred in the Defence Force were very ably articulated the other day
by the hon Minister Pandor. Next time, instead, of spending his time in
newsrooms and feeding the press, perhaps your hon member will be in the
House so that he understands and is part of the change. What it has done to
him right now, hon Trollip, is that he has defined himself outside the
changes that have occurred in the Defence Force. In fact, if I had been in
his position, I would have made sure that I claimed credit for the changes
that have taken place in the Defence Force. But, very clearly now, for all
of South Africa to know, he was sleeping right through these changes as
they happened.

The report will now undergo the normal process of being submitted to
Cabinet – I’ve made a request to the President to make sure that it can
serve in Cabinet at the earliest possible time. Then it will be handed over
to the Speaker of the National Assembly. As I have stated before,
Parliament will have an opportunity to read the recommendations emanating
from this report. I commend the report.

I would, finally, like to thank those members of the portfolio committee
who co-operated with the commission. I’d like to thank the members of the
SANDF who made the work of the commission possible. I’d like to thank the
Chief of the Defence Force, who made it possible for us to get this report
today. Hon Deputy Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity.
[Applause.]

Mr D J MAYNIER: Speaker, I was not furnished with a copy of the Minister’s
statement and for that reason it is difficult to provide a comprehensive
response to the announcement in Parliament this afternoon.

However, let me begin by welcoming the announcement made by the hon
Minister of Defence and Military Veterans that she has now received a copy
of the final report of the Interim National Defence Force Service
Commission, and that the report will be fast-tracked through Cabinet and
tabled in Parliament at the earliest opportunity. This, I am sure all
members of the House will agree, is very welcome news indeed.

I would like to thank Judge Ronnie Bosielo, who headed up the commission,
as well as all members of the commission, for their hard work in preparing
the final report of the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission.

We also owe a special debt of gratitude to our colleagues, the hon Bantu
Holomisa, the hon Hlengiwe Mgabadeli and the hon Pieter Groenewald, who
were members of the commission, for their contribution to the final report
of the Interim National Defence Force Service Commission. I hope that when
we look back, the work of the commission will be a turning point in the
history of our Defence Force.

Speaker, the events surrounding the Interim National Defence Force Service
Commission triggered an almost unprecedented political battle between the
executive and the legislature. Today’s announcement goes some way, I
believe, toward digging the hon Minister out of the parliamentary quagmire
she finds herself bogged down in.

But the whole question of the interim reports of the Interim National
Defence Force Service Commission remains. One of the many reasons why the
Minister refused to make the interim reports available was that there was
no link between the interim reports and the Defence Amendment Bill. But the
fact is that there is a link between the interim reports and the Defence
Amendment Bill.

The primary objective of the Defence Amendment Bill was to establish a
permanent National Defence Force Service Commission. And what does one find
when one reads the interim reports? One finds that the interim reports
themselves recommend the establishment of a permanent National Defence
Force Service Commission; several pages of the interim reports are devoted
to recommendations covering the appointment, terms of reference, functions,
staffing, and reporting responsibilities of the National Defence Force
Service Commission. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Am I allowed to put a point
of order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a point of order, ma’am?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Yes.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, will you sit down, please? There is a point
of order.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Speaker, on a point
of order: The hon member is not allowed to mislead Parliament. The
commission was accepted by Cabinet. It has nothing to do with what you are
talking about. That is for the record. Cabinet accepted it in August.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, on a point of order: This is
not a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Continue, hon member.

Mr D J MAYNIER: And what does one find when one reads these interim
reports? This is the clincher! One finds that the interim report itself
contains the Defence Amendment Bill.

At some point the hon Minister is going to have to explain how it is that
an interim report, which contains a Draft Defence Amendment Bill, is not
linked to the Defence Amendment Bill? In my view, the hon Minister owes
this House an apology - and I choose my words carefully – for not providing
all the relevant information to this House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mna L J TOLO: Mohlomphegi Motlatša Seboledi sa Ngwako, go bolela nnete re a
thaba lehono go kwa dipoelo ka bokopana go tšwa go Sehlophatšhomo se se
dirilego mmereko. Seo ke nyakago go se laetša ke se, bengbaka. Go na le
mangwalo a mararo ao ke a swerego. Lengwalo le lengwe ke la Tona, le lengwe
ke la Seboledi gomme le lengwe ke la Bapela. Lengwalo la Tona ga le kwane
le la Seboledi. Mo lengwalong la gagwe, Tona o laeditše gore Molaokakanywa
wa Phetošo le Lekgotlatšhomo ga di amane. O laeditše gape gore o be a re
kgopetše gore re tle re thušane, fela a lemoga gore ga re na bokgoni.
Bjale, go bolela nnete Tona o tšea ke maikutlo. Rena re le maloko a ANC a
photefolio komiti re be re kwana ka dikgopolo. Yo a bego a re swarišitše
bothata kudu ke Tona.

Go ya ka polelo yeo e bolelwago ke mohlomphegi wa DA, Seboledi se ntšhitše
lengwalo la go re fetola. Seboledi se laeditše gore ka di31 tša Agostose
2010, Tona o tiišitše gore pego le Molaokakanywa wa Phetošo ga di amane.
Bjale, go laetša gore di a amana, ke rena ba re bolela ka tšona.

Rena re le ba Cope re re Tona o swanetše go lemoga gore Kgoro ya tša
Tšhireletšo le Bagale ba Sešole ga se ya gagwe a le noši, eupša ke ya rena
kamoka ga rena. Re na le maikarabelo go yona kamoka ga rena.

Tona o swanetše go ithuta gore a se tšee ke maikutlo. Ge ke be ke na le
sebaka, ke be ke tla bala lengwalo le, bengbaka; o a lwa. Gape re duma gore
Tona a lemoge gabotse gore ... [Tšhwahlelo.] [Nako e fedile.] (Translation
of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr L J TOLO: Hon Deputy Speaker, we are glad to hear a brief report from
the members of the interim commission. I have three letters with me and
they are from the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, the Speaker
and the hon Bapela. The contents of the letter from the Minister do not
correspond with the contents of the letter from the Speaker. The Minister
indicated in her letter that there is no link between the reports of the
interim commission and the Defence Amendment Bill. She further indicated
that she wanted us to work together, but we could not. We shared the same
ideas as ANC members in the portfolio committee. The Minister was the only
one who disagreed.

According to the hon member from the DA, the Speaker indicated in his
letter that on 31 August 2010, the Minister made it clear that there is no
link between the reports of the interim commission and the Defence
Amendment Bill. But there is a link between them, hence we are now
deliberating on them.

The members of Cope want to make the Minister aware that the Department of
Defence and Military Veterans does not belong to her alone, but to all of
us. We are all responsible for it.

The Minister has to learn to be co-operative. I would read this letter if I
had enough time; she denies the link. We want the Minister to be aware that
... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sekela Somlomo neNdlu ehloniphekile, okokuqala, kufuneka
ngithokoze ukuthi umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe, ukwazile ukuthi azoma lapha
azokhuluma ngombiko esingakawucoshi. Kodwa ngoba useshilo ukuthi
sizowucosha umbiko ngoba usawudlulisele kuMongameli. Ngiyethemba ukuthi
sizowucosha masishane.

Okwesibili, lo mbiko sekukhulunywe kakhulu ngawo, kube kukhuluma abantu
abangakaze bawubone. Mina angikaze ngawubona-ke, angifuni ukukhuluma ngento
engingakaze ngiyibone.[Ihlombe.] Manje mhlawumbe Somlomo bekungakuhle
ukuthi ngelinye ilanga sike sixoxe ngalo mbiko uma sengiwubonile nami,
ngoba lokukhuluma lokhu sekwenze ukuthi kube khona umugqa phakathi
kukaKhongolose nabe-DA [Uhleko.] bese kuba ngathithi abaphakathi nendawo
bakhuluma ngoba bengazi ukuthi bafuna ukuthini.

Kanti okuseqinisweni kukhona la kuthiwa ngokomthetho ungakhulumi ngento
ongazange uyibone. Manje bengicela Somlomo, ukuthi lo mbiko njengoba
uzothulwa la namhlanje, kusewumlomo nje kaNgqongqoshe. Siyawufuna umbiko
uzothulwa ngokusemthethweni ukuze sikwazi ukuxoxa ngawo sesiwufundile.
Kulapho-ke la sizokhuluma khona. Angithokoze.[Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NLDOVU: Deputy Speaker and this august House, firstly, I am
grateful that the hon Minister managed to come here and speak about the
report we have not received yet. But because she said we will be getting
the report, as she had forwarded it to the President, I believe we will
receive it soon.

Secondly, a lot has been said about this report by the people who have not
seen it. I have not seen it; I do not want to talk about something that I
have not seen. [Applause.] Speaker, it might be better for us to debate
this report some other time once we have received it, because these talks
have caused a division between the ANC and the DA ... [Laughter.] ... which
makes those who are in between look like they do not know what they want to
say.

In actual fact, by law one should not talk about something one did not see.
My request, Speaker, is that since this report is going to be verbally
delivered here today by the Minister, we want the report to be formally
delivered so that we can debate it after we have read it. Then we can talk.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, it was a
privilege to have been invited to render my free services to the interim
commission. A special word of thanks goes to my fellow commissioners, and
our chairperson, Judge Bosielo, in particular, for his leadership in the
past year. May this report, when it is tabled here, serve as the basis upon
which to build a turnaround strategy for the SA National Defence Force,
SANDF, to restore its image and dignity. This will allow the SANDF to
recapture lost ground.

Finally, once this report is adopted, one envisions a process of the
Department of Defence, DoD, holding a bosberaad to discuss the report. Out
of that we hope that there will be a clear action plan determining who will
do what and according to what deadlines. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, die agb Tolo van Cope is korrek as
hy sê dat die Suid-Afrikaanse Nasionale Weermag aan ons almal behoort. Dit
is ook uit daardie perspektief dat my party besluit het om my beskikbaar te
stel om op hierdie kommissie te dien.

Ek wil die agb Minister bedank. Ek dink ons kon ’n bydrae maak. Ek wil die
Huis verseker dat hierdie verslag ’n objektiewe verslag is, sonder
vooroordeel, en dit is ook ’n kritiese verslag wat in belang is van al ons
lede in die Suid-Afrikaanse Nasionale Weermag.

Ek wil ook van hierdie geleentheid gebruik maak om die voorsitter, regter
Bosielo, te bedank en ook al die ander kommissielede. Dit was ’n voorreg om
saam met hulle op so ’n kommissie te dien en om in belang van ons mense op
te tree. Ek wil vir die agb Minister en die Kabinet sê, as u hierdie
verslag aanvaar soos hy is en die aanbevelings in die praktyk deurvoer, sal
ons ’n professionele en ’n baie beter Suid-Afrikaanse Nasionale Weermag hê.
Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Deputy Speaker, the hon Tolo of Cope is correct
when he says that the South African National Defence Force belongs to all
of us. It is also from this perspective that my party decided to release me
to serve on this commission.

I would like to thank the hon Minister. I am of the opinion that we were
able to make a contribution. I would like to assure the House that this
report is an objective report, without prejudice, and that it is also a
critical report that is to the benefit of all our members in the South
African National Defence Force.

I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the chairperson, Judge
Bosielo, and all the other members of the commission as well. It was a
privilege to serve on such a commission with them and to be able to act in
the interests of our people. I would like to say to the hon Minister and
the Cabinet, should you accept this report as it stands and carry through
the recommendations in practice we would have a professional and a much
improved South African National Defence Force. Thank you.]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Deputy Speaker, in Azapo’s book soldiers do not go on strike
or take part in industrial action. If they do, we call it mutiny. The
country was shocked to see what some members of the Defence Force did at
the Union Buildings. Many people, including the Minister, condemned them
and called them names.

As Azapo we know that some of those soldiers previously served in the armed
forces of the different components of the liberation movement. They did so
without pay and at great risk to personal security and life. They
sacrificed their youth and life because of their love for their people and
country. They are not greedy or ill-disciplined. They are desperate. They
cannot make ends meet. They must be paid living wages and their working
conditions must be improved. We owe it to them.

It is our hope and prayer that this report will help us to address the
needs of our armed forces so that we can restore their dignity. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Minister, the ACDP welcomes the
report of the interim commission and we look forward to further engaging
with the specific findings and recommendations of this report.

It is, however, significant, as the hon Minister has pointed out, that this
commission was intended before the ill-disciplined and unruly action of
certain members when they demonstrated outside the Union Buildings. Such
persons, we must emphasise, can claim no credit for today’s report. We need
to make that very clear.
The responsibility of the national defence force must cut across party-
political lines. This is clearly illustrated by the fact that members of
the opposition served on the commission and we as an opposition party will
also contribute as we consider the recommendations of this report. We trust
that the recommendations will address the frustrations of serving members
concerning benefits, and living and working conditions, and will serve to
prevent the further loss of skilled personnel so that we can have a
professional SA National Defence Force. I thank you.

Mr M S BOOI: Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Minister for
being able to come back to Parliament and make a presentation on this
thorny issue. I must say in earnest that we are floundering in the
information that is being thrown around, which is actually thumb-suck.
Sometimes this hurts and demoralises the soldiers, and we don’t understand
where the report has come from.

In the portfolio committee we were very emphatic that the report had to
come through the Ministry, and the Ministry would then present it to
Cabinet, and it would come to Parliament. We have never been able to
conceptualise how that type of report comes as it does. When it came to our
attention that there was a report that was being thrown around in the
streets that was when it came to our portfolio committee. That was when
unions were saying that there was a report.

Nobody knows the essence and contents of the report. The Speaker directed
us, saying that there was no link between the Bill that we had to prepare
and what was in the report. He was the only person in Parliament who could
give us the confidence in the work that we were doing. We thank the Speaker
sincerely for being able to give us direction.

The manner in which you played opposition politics and narrated your
stories has nothing to do with the portfolio committee. At no stage did we
commit ourselves to what the opposition member always said and explained in
the papers, saying that there was a report. In terms of our regulations,
performance and how we did our work in the portfolio committee, at no stage
did we ever find that link.

You were correct when you said it was a misleading act to come to
Parliament and tell us that there was a report, when nothing was ever
presented officially to the institution of Parliament. It would be quite a
disaster for us as a portfolio committee to say that that report was ever
placed. It has always been about gossip and rumours. I can honestly say
that none of the rumours and the gossip were correct.

As I stand here on behalf of the portfolio committee to thank the Interim
National Defence Force Service Commission for the work that they have done,
they and nobody else have ever been able to place the report. Today we have
stood again for matters of principle and the following of procedure, that
they will come to the institution and present it. They have to come and
tell us what is happening.

We have not played at the level of gossip and rumours that have been spread
around in regard to the issue. As the portfolio committee, at this
particular moment, without listening, narrating and playing to enthusiasms
about what the opposition leader said, we feel that the matter stands firm
that there is no report. I vouch for what I am saying, and I stand by the
oaths that I have taken in Parliament, that there is no report. You will be
misleading Parliament by coming to claim that there is a report that has
been placed somewhere. It has been rumours.

We told the South African National Defence Union, Sandu, to present the
report that they had to us. However, the report that they had was gained by
theft. We are saying to the union that the report they had was gained by
theft. The portfolio committee agreed that the union had stolen the report
from somewhere, but it did not know where. As a matter of fact, that is
what the records of our portfolio committee say: The union went and stole
that report. Who they got it from and what the contents of that report are
has never been deliberated before the portfolio committee. Again, it would
be misleading to say that that report has ever been presented. Under my
leadership, according to my knowledge, no report has ever been presented to
the portfolio committee.

It is really misleading to Parliament when an hon member claims things -
and tries to lead by all his activities and dancing - that there were
links. We have finished the Bill and nobody has ever been able to prove the
link and show us what was happening.

Let me thank the interim commission for the good work that they have done,
and the commitment that they have shown in the way they have conducted
themselves. The members have been able to stick to the mandate that they
have been provided with. The level of transparency with which you have
conducted this particular development, Minister, has been very valuable.
You were the first one to come to Parliament and introduce the mixture of
the opposition, our party and different people who would be able to take
this responsibility. You have done very well and have been able to keep us
informed.

If those members had gone against the discipline that you provided them
with when dealing with issues of confidentiality, I must say that hon
Holomisa, hon Groenewald and even hon Ntsiki were not able to break that
form of discipline. We must really thank them for the way they conducted
themselves. Even in times when we were very pressured and we feel that
there was the responsibility of trying to confide and tell us what was
going on in the report itself, they maintained that discipline. Hon
members, we really want to thank you. You have done a very good job. From
your own experience you have heard us telling you in the committee that you
have had a variety of experiences which have been able to make their way
into the report itself. Therefore, we would like to thank you very much.

You know, hon Holomisa, if I can repeat what I said to you at some stage
when I met you, your experience is very valuable. Nobody can tell us that
you have never gone through building up a defence force. We have also told
hon Groenewald that his experience has added a lot of value to the report
that has come out.

I must say, Minister, we have heard members speaking today and we have had
a reflection of the navy from them. People from the navy know it better and
are able to tell you the truth about it, show it as in a mirror. One of our
members has been trained there. They would have a better understanding of
how a navy functions. We have heard a very good presentation from the
landward section today. There is the issue of the combat-readiness which
never suffices. Those members who are there and are committed to our
country have today been able to stand firm and explain to hon members about
the conduct and the challenges that the SA National Defence Force is facing
in regard to its landward, air force and maritime areas.

Tomorrow we are taking an observation from the Air Force and one from
Health. Both sectors and components have an influence on the combat-
readiness of the SANDF. They have been able to present to us,
unambiguously, the progress that has been made within the SANDF. I thought
that hon members would appreciate that type of development because it
speaks to our patriotism and how we should conduct ourselves, based on the
information regarding the institution which has been provided.

Again, we would like to thank General Door for the way he conducted himself
and also the Admiral for being able to give the navy a proper report on how
we can look at the institution again. There is a lot of progress that has
been made. We are quite confident that the improvements that we have put in
place and the commission itself will be able to improve the conduct of the
SANDF.

The Interim National Defence Force Service Commission’s very experienced
people have not come just to play games. They have made it very clear that
they are good South Africans and they have taken on other responsibilities
outside of their own responsibilities. When the Minister called upon them
to come and help with giving South Africans a better view of the type of
defence that should be built and the type of capacity that there should be,
we must say that they were able to comply with that. They have been able to
perform like honourable and professional people, as has been expected of
them. Today, it has been able to put the matter that we keep on speculating
on to rest.

We have been very, very clear in the portfolio committee, even in the
recent past, and we are very emphatic about this, that what one hon member
says to the media is not on behalf of the portfolio committee. Most of the
time, that person speaks on behalf of himself, and not the institution
itself, the portfolio committee. The portfolio committee does not have any
other spokesperson. If there are issues that have to be raised and brought
to the public, I do it in a very transparent way. I allow the media to
participate in the institution and I have never understood at what stage
hon members feel that it has to happen in a totally different way.

Nobody has an input in this matter. In the ANC appointments are made. There
is no stage when I will come to you and solicit you to tell me what to do,
or how our people should be appointed in the organisation. In that regard I
am fairly well informed. I am telling you that there has been a misleading
of Parliament and the broad public regarding how we handle reports within
parliamentary precincts. That failure has been proven again today, even at
the stage when the Minister has come and informed the institution about how
she has handled the report.

Those things were all said in public, and they have been said quite a lot
of times to the different members, in order for them to be able to
understand. I must say that that was a failure of our own system. It is
when individuals take it upon themselves to think that they are above the
system itself. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.
REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS AND PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION-
                     RELATED INFORMATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

            CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF ACCESSION TO
           AFRICAN CHARTER ON DEMOCRACY, ELECTIONS AND GOVERNANCE

Mr H T MAGAMA: Deputy Speaker, the Portfolio Committee on International
Relations recommends that the House approve the ratification of the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance.

This is a clear and deliberate decision by the government of the Republic
of South Africa to be amongst the countries taking the lead on the
continent, demonstrating our commitment to good governance, popular
participation, respect for the rule of law and the promotion and protection
of human rights.

The charter seeks to entrench and consolidate on the continent a political
culture of change of power through the holding of regular elections which
are free, fair and transparent, and which are conducted by a competent,
independent, impartial, national electoral body. It thus provides for the
enhancement of the role of election observation and monitoring in
contributing towards the credibility of elections.

South Africa has proudly put in place all the necessary institutions for
the effective implementation of this charter. Its ratification, therefore,
will confirm our country’s resolve to lead by example and encourage fellow
African countries to do the same and embrace this instrument. This
instrument has the potential to address the political and socioeconomic
situation in Africa by deepening peace and security which, by themselves,
constitute the necessary preconditions for development, progress and
prosperity in Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Declaration of vote:

Ms S V KALYAN (DA): Deputy Speaker, the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance was adopted at the 8th Ordinary Session of the AU
Assembly of member states of the African Union in January 2007.

The charter was developed as part of the AU’s emphasis on promoting
democracy and good governance in member states. As such, it has the
potential to serve as a guide and reference point for sustained and ongoing
political reform on the African continent. It also places emphasis on women
and youth.

However, it must be ratified by 15 states before it takes effect. In July
2010 only five states had ratified it. South Africa was not one of them,
which is most unfortunate.

The Pan-African Parliament, PAP, was given the responsibility through
article 45 of the charter to promote it. It was thus decided to launch the
“11 Before 2011” campaign in order to get as many countries as possible to
ratify it ahead of the AU’s Heads of State Summit in 2011.

As the Pan-African Parliament delegate to the Central Africa regional
meeting in early September, I undertook to write to the Minister and was
delighted when she referred the charter to the portfolio committee. South
Africa will be the second Southern African Development Community country to
ratify the charter after Lesotho. We should have been the first. As the
host country of the Pan-African Parliament, we need to lead by example and
promote democracy. Nevertheless, we support the charter fully and the next
step will be to encourage compliance by the member states.

Accession to the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance
approved.
  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
  COMMITTEE ON MINING ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES FOR
                           2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
     COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES ON
  PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
                         FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
   COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
                   ENTERPRISES FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
     COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES ON PERFORMANCE OF
              DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES
                         FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

   CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF STANDING
    COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL TREASURY FOR 2009-10
                               FINANCIAL YEAR

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON PERFORMANCE
  OF THE DEPARTMENT OF CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS FOR
                           2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR
  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON TOURISM ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
                   AND TOURISM FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

   CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF STANDING
               COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON STATISTICS SOUTH AFRICA

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON SPORT AND RECREATION ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF SPORT AND
                    RECREATION FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS FOR
                           2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

         CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT
             OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE ON PERFORMANCE OF
               DEPARTMENT OF POLICE FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

         CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT
             OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR ON PERFORMANCE OF
               DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson I move:
   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
 REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF DEPARTMENT OF
                                   LABOUR

  CONSIDERATION OF FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
  REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF COMPENSATION
                                    FUND

  CONSIDERATION OF SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
  REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF COUNCIL FOR
                              BUILT ENVIRONMENT

 CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
  REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF BOXING SOUTH
                                   AFRICA

 CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
 REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF DEPARTMENT OF
                            CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

  CONSIDERATION OF NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
 REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE PRESIDENCY

  CONSIDERATION OF TENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
 REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF DEPARTMENT OF
           PUBLIC WORKS AND ITS PROPERTY MANAGEMENT TRADING ENTITY

  CONSIDERATION OF ELEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
 ON REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF GOVERNMENT
                               PRINTING WORKS

 CONSIDERATION OF TWELFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON
   REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON 2008-09 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF COMPANIES
                INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY OFFICE IN SOUTH AFRICA

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson I move:

    That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

                  WELCOMING OF THE consul general of India

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I wish to acknowledge the presence in the
gallery of Mr Kumar, the Consul General of India to the Republic of South
Africa in Cape Town, as well as Mrs Kumar - you are welcome. [Applause.]

               CELEBRATION OF 150TH ANNIVERSARY OF ARRIVAL OF
            INDENTURED LABOURERS OF INDIAN ORIGIN IN SOUTH AFRICA

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, on
this occasion of the 150th anniversary of the arrival of the Indian
community in South Africa, it is fitting that we express ourselves on unity
in diversity.

When the Indians arrived in the colony of Natal to work on the sugar cane
farms they were, in fact, no different from the African people, who were
hunted like animals, captured and forcibly transported to the Americas to
work on the farms, in households and in the construction industries that
produced the great civilisations of Latin and North America.

These Indians, like African slaves and workers in America, came from
diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds, but were united by their spiritual
traditions which nourished their self-respect, self-worth and self-esteem,
culture of self-help and self-reliance, and a sense of development and
progress. These values sustained their human dignity in adversity and
aroused the disposition to associate with one another for mutual benefit.

While working as slaves on sugar cane farms and in other industries the
Indians, like Africans in the diaspora, rediscovered their spiritual
traditions and harnessed them for spiritual growth and development. Thus
they conducted their lives according to sound moral and ethical principles,
despite the adverse conditions in which they lived and worked. The arrival
of Mahatma Gandhi provided them with a spiritual and political leader who
enriched all South Africans. We should note, in particular, the principle
of nonviolent struggle that Gandhi shared with Martin Luther King Junior.

The social and economic advancement of Indians in South Africa, like that
of Africans in the diaspora, proves correct the wise words of our icon,
Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, who said that social transformation cannot be
achieved without spiritual transformation. The Indian community built its
own temples, schools, mosques and cultural schools, through which they
preserved and practised their diverse cultures, religions and languages.

Similarly, Africans in the diaspora rediscovered their heliocentric, that
is, sun-centred, spiritual traditions which were taught by the African sage
Khem or Thoth Hermes. They built lodges for the preservation and
propagation of their solar culture and religion. They practised this solar
culture and religion in the Rosicrucian and Masonic Lodges, which could be
traced back to the land of Khem, including ancient Ethiopia and Egypt.

The devotees of Karaism, which is a sun-centred religion or Hermeticism,
collaborated with Ethiopian Christians who had seceded from colonial
churches and established their own churches and schools. These
institutions, like those of the Hindus and Muslims in South Africa, laid
the foundations for nation-building and social cohesion in these
communities.

The nationalist spirit kindled by these spiritual traditions and the
working-class consciousness led to the formation of the Natal Indian
Congress in 1894, and the Native Congresses of the four South African
colonies at the beginning of the 20th century. It could therefore be said
that spiritual traditions and worker consciousness catalysed the formation
of nationalist organisations which became motive forces for the liberation
of South Africa. The formation of the South African Native National
Congress, SANNC, in 1912, renamed the African National Congress in 1923 and
the South African Indian Congress, SAIC, was the product of spiritual and
worker consciousness. The pact of The Three Doctors, Xuma, Dadoo and
Naicker in the 1940s was the product of these people’s movements.

It could be said, therefore, that moral and ethical values have always
guided the founders of our nation, such as John Langalibalele Dube, Mahatma
Gandhi and Dr Abdullah Abdurahman, who founded the African People’s
Organisation in 1902. Abdurahman was a coloured nationalist who used the
words African and coloured interchangeably to include both black and
coloured Africans, thereby transcending present-day discriminatory
differentiation between Africans and coloureds, which borders on a new form
of racism.

The proliferation of incidents of moral degeneration, such as alcoholism,
drug addiction, the tragic killing of others, including foreign guests, and
the abuse of women and children, such as drugging and raping of girl
children at schools, shows that cohesive nations cannot be built without
value systems. Provision of social services, including water, electricity,
and social grants, without a value system underpinning them cannot produce
self-respecting, cohesive, caring and sustainable communities. Human
development has both spiritual and material aspects.

Politicians alone cannot achieve both; they need partnerships with faith
communities, including Hindus, Muslims, Karaites and devotees of African
religion who were marginalised under apartheid colonialism.

In our work as public representatives, community workers and leaders, we
must learn from the Indian community, the African diaspora and the founders
of our nation, that social transformation cannot be achieved without
spiritual transformation. Regardless of our cultural, religious and
linguistic diversity there is a common thread that makes all of us one in
diversity.

“Motho ke motho ka batho” is the maxim that says “I am through others” or
“I am because we are”. This “botho” or “ubuntu” philosophy was first echoed
in 1892 by John Langalibalele Dube, a founding president of the ANC, in his
public lecture titled, “Upon my Native Land”. Dube foretold the birth of a
new Africa that would be a spiritual, humane and caring society.

These values were embraced by Dr Pixley ka Isaka Seme in his 1905 oration
titled, “The Regeneration of Africa”. Seme highlighted the importance of
cultural heritage in nation-building, when he called for the creation of a
unique civilisation for Africa and Africans. In other words, nation-
building and heritage development could not be separated.

In his 1921 public lecture titled, “We are not Political Children”, Rev Z R
Mahabane, third president of the ANC, observed that Africans had been
degraded and dehumanised, and he made the recovery of African humanity a
prerequisite for the recovery of the humanity of all South Africans, both
black and white. Mahabane planted the seeds of nonracialism which found
expression in the Bill of Rights adopted by the ANC in 1923. The opening
paragraphs of this Bill of Rights asserted the humanity of African people
and demanded their right to participate in the economic life of the
country.

It is not surprising that in its 2007 Strategy and Tactics document the ANC
observed that the dark night of apartheid had been receding and called for
a nonracial, nonsexist, united, democratic and prosperous South Africa, in
which the value of every citizen is measured by our common humanity –
ubuntu or botho.

The adoption of a resolution for the establishment of a committee on nation-
building and heritage by this House is a recognition and acknowledgement by
the hon members of the House that Parliament has a major role to play in
nation-building and heritage development necessary for social cohesion.

The Muslim Ramadan, the Hindu Diwali festival and the African New Year and
Rain-Making ceremonies take place around September and October. All these
festivals, though not officially recognised are part of the living heritage
of these communities and their celebrations serve to cultivate moral and
ethical values within them.

The passage of a host of laws which were racially discriminatory evidenced
the danger of separating law and morality. These values of a just and
caring society should underpin our social and political order to prevent
moral degeneration which manifests itself in, inter alia, corruption and
related vices.

The establishment of the Parliamentary Interfaith Council by this
Parliament recognises and acknowledges the role that faith communities play
in the cultivation of moral and ethical values in our society. This council
will provide an interface between Parliament and faith communities to
ensure that there is no watertight separation between law and morality.

The strict observance of moral and ethical values within the Indian
communities offers great lessons to African communities, especially in
townships and informal settlements, who lost their cultural heritage under
apartheid colonialism. These values are particularly important, in fact,
indispensable, for nation-building and social cohesion. The interaction of
all our communities, both black and white, is particularly important, as it
affords South Africans opportunities to learn from one another, for mutual
understanding, tolerance and respect.

The national conference hosted by the National Heritage Council and the
South African Departments of Arts and Culture, Social Development, and
Education on 31 August 2010 called for the recognition of Ubuntu Day and
resolved to launch a campaign for the restoration of ubuntu values and
principles. Given the deepening moral degeneration in our society, such a
campaign is long overdue. It is hoped that all faith communities and civil
society in general will partner with government, Parliament and
legislatures to run the campaign for moral regeneration and in particular
the restoration of ubuntu values and principles.

The African Renaissance and Nepad, falling within the tenth strategic
objective of Parliament couched as African renewal, advancement and
development, should be an umbrella including a moral regeneration programme
driven by government, civil society and, in particular, the interfaith
movement.

In this regard, the classical Indian and African cultural heritage, which
was suppressed under apartheid, could make a great contribution to nation-
building and social cohesion. It is hoped that the new committee on nation-
building and heritage development will become a parliamentary mechanism for
the realisation of an activist parliament and the African Renaissance
renewal, advancement and development of the African continent.

As I conclude, hon Deputy Speaker, let me say that what we can learn from
the Muslim and Hindu communities is that values cannot be cultivated by a
plethora of charters without the necessary cultural institutions to teach
these values and integrate them into school programmes and out-of-school
programmes. African communities have a lot to learn from the Muslim
madrasah schools and Hindu temple schools. The establishment of African
cultural heritage centres along similar lines could contribute to moral
regeneration, mutual understanding and tolerance, social inclusivity and
development of South African and African identity.

Let us take this opportunity, as the ANC in this House, to send warm
fraternal greetings to the Indian community on the occasion of the
celebration of the 150th anniversary of their arrival in South Africa. My
wish is that they will continue to make valuable contributions to building
this nation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, it is indeed a privilege to participate in
the debate to mark the 150th anniversary of the arrival of indentured
Indian labourers in South Africa. It is an opportunity to honour the memory
of unsung heroes and heroines who through blood, sweat and tears
contributed to this country we know as home.

The history of how Indian indenture came about is worth repeating. When
slavery was abolished, the British needed a new source of labour. The
British, being rather creative with words, came up with the term indenture,
which in essence meant slavery. Historian and physicist P S Joshi said:

    The indentured labour system was introduced by the British as a
    substitute for “forced labour and slavery”.
    The indentured Coolies were half slaves, bound over body and soul by
    101 inhuman regulations.

The Immigration Department in Natal published a notice with regard to
coolies intending to immigrate to Natal. The notice promised that they
would be taken good care of and have clothing, food and medication. They
would be paid £5 a year and be indentured for five years, after which they
could return to India at their own expense, or after 10 years they would
get a free passage.

Sadly, many of these promises did not materialise and the reality is that
they were herded like animals into the holds of ships and food and water
were strictly rationed. Upon landing in Port Natal, they found their white
masters harsh. They worked long hours, lived in tin houses and were flogged
regularly.

The first ship to leave India was the SS Belvedere, which had 342 persons
on board. The first ship to land in South Africa was the SS Truro, which
had 340 persons on board. The SS Truro had 101 Hindus, 78 Malabars, 61
Christians, 16 Muslims, one Marathi and a few Rajputs.

The reason for my giving you the breakdown is to illustrate that once on
board, they all had to live and eat together and depend on each other.
Coming from a country where the caste system dominated and dictated status,
this in itself was a huge culture shock. Muslims had to eat nonhalaal food
and Brahmin Hindus had to mix with the Dalits, the untouchables. So, the
first lesson that we can learn from the indentured Indians is that
irrespective of class or caste, we are all equal and need each other to
survive.

What I find quite interesting is that when passenger Indians started to
arrive in South Africa, the caste system, based on the regional identities,
became firmly entrenched, so much so that the term Kalkatias was given to
the North Indians and the term Madrasis was given to the South Indians.
There was this unspoken convention that Kalkatias and Madrasis married
those of their own caste and intermarriage between the two was frowned
upon.

This convention persisted well into the 1980s and I speak from personal
experience. I am Hindi-speaking. My mom is Maraj from the Brahmin caste by
birth. My dad was a Sonar, which is a jeweller. My husband is Gujarati-
speaking. His mother is a Kshatriya or a warrior, and his father is a
Darjee or a tailor.

When we wanted to get married, we knew we were going to face some
difficulties and, boy, did we! If you think politics is rough, try getting
two families from different ethnic groups to agree to a marriage.
Fortunately, my dad was a good negotiator and we had a happy ending.

While caste was not an issue for the indentured Indians, the term “coolie”
was, and many took umbrage. Kuli, spelt k-u-l-i in Tamil, refers to payment
for menial work for persons from the lowest levels in the labour market and
without customary rights.

According to Breman and Darial, on the transformation of “kuli” to
“coolie”:


    The distinct humanity of the indentured individual was, in a single
    move, appropriated and eliminated the person collapsed into payment.

In India the word is applied to the lowest class, and regarded as a term of
approach. Nowadays, the term is seldom used and, if I hear it, I personally
don’t take offence. In fact, I sent a tray of eats to my colleague on
Diwali Day and he sent me an SMS thanking me and saying he had “flattened
the driehoek coolie koekies” first. [Laughter.] I burst out laughing,
because I knew he meant well.

Nevertheless, despite all the hardships, the indentured Indians endured,
and they made their impact on the production of sugar, or “white gold” as
it was then referred to. European public opinion had reacted favourably to
the value of the coolies and in January 1965, the Natal Mercury wrote:

    Coolie Immigration after several years experience is deemed more
    essential to our prosperity than ever. We certainly could not have
    boasted that our sugar exports increased four-fold in one year (sic).

Gandhi’s memorable ejection from a first-class train is well known and I
won’t dwell on it, but I would be failing in my duty if I did not focus on
his other roles. While in South Africa, he picked up that proposed
legislation in Natal in 1894 would deregister Indians as voters. He
gathered 10 000 signatures and forwarded the petition to Lord Ripon,
Secretary of State for the Colonies in London, and the law was disallowed.

In August 1894, he got hold of the passenger Indians to found the Natal
Indian Congress, which was the first organised challenge to the racist
status quo. In 1896 Natal passed the Immigration Restriction Bill and the
Dealers’ Licence Bill, which effectively denied trading rights to all
Indians.

Gandhi’s persistence managed to reduce the residential tax for Indians, who
chose to remain as free labourers in the colony on expiry of their contract
from a punitive £25 to £3.

When he went back to India to fetch his family, he wrote a pamphlet called
The Indian Franchise – an Appeal. His intention was to inform the world
about the sufferings of Indians in South Africa. The government of Port
Natal went berserk and proceeded with legislation to exclude Indians from
trading. The Europeans threatened to push every Indian into the sea. In
1913 the Immigrants Regulation Bill classified Indians as prohibited
immigrants and they were limited to Natal.

Gandhi published a newspaper called the Indian Opinion. Without this
newspaper, the Satyagraha movement would not have been possible. Gandhi’s
grandson, Satish Dhupelia, says that were Gandhi alive today, he would
personally have led the campaign against the Protection of Information
Bill, which seeks to curb media freedom.

In 1913 a court judgement ordered that all marriages, except those done
according to Christian rites were nullified in South Africa. It reduced the
rank of an Indian wife to that of a concubine and the children were
deprived of the right to inherit.

This incensed the Indian indentured women and galvanised them into action.
Thousands from Natal went to the Transvaal to hold protest meetings. They
were arrested, because they had crossed the borders without a permit.
Valliammai, a 16-year-old, died in detention.

Their sacrifice was not in vain and resulted in the £3 tax being abolished
by the Indian Relief Act of 1914 and Hindu and Muslim marriages were also
recognised. Today we commemorate their hardships, relive their history, and
acknowledge our roots but, at the same time, we claim our space and rights
as South Africans.

What lessons can we learn from the indentured Indians? Eighty percent chose
to remain in South Africa after their indenture was finished. Despite their
atrocious conditions and hardships, the strong spirit of determination to
succeed prevailed. They built places of worship and schools which still
stand as monuments, a testimony to them, and which benefit all of us today.
Gandhi said:

    We can learn a lot from our Indian brothers and sisters’ invaluable
    contribution to South Africa.

We have gained comfort from their pain and suffering.

One hundred and fifty years later no South African Indian should have any
doubts about their identity. We are South Africans. I am a third generation
South African of Indian origin. I live in a country where democracy
prevails and I can celebrate my mutual identity with freedom. I am proud of
my culture and religion and I’m regarded as an equal citizen. As a South
African Indian, I have a duty to preserve and protect our age-old sacred
cultural, moral and religious values.

On behalf of the DA, I would like to wish all my Muslim friends Eid
Mubarak. We all have a link to that first Indian indentured labourer who
came to South Africa or, as he is referred to, Coolie No 1, Devaram, and we
walk proudly in their footsteps.

In conclusion, I would like to leave you with a quote from the Bhagavad
Gita:

   Man is made by his belief. As he believes, so he is.

[Applause.]

Mr M G P LEKOTA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m on a weak footing on this
subject of celebrating the Indian community in South Africa because of the
province from which I come and its history with this community. I’m glad to
say, though, that I happily join in with others, knowing that all of us
have been part of the struggle that made the Free State also the home of
the Indian community, like all others.

Some 150 years ago the first Indian indentured labourers landed on the
shores of our country. They were brought to this country because Africans,
the original indigenous Africans of this country, were resisting working on
the sugar cane fields of Natal, as it was known at that time. As a result
of this resistance, the subcontinent of India, which had already been
subjected to British rule, made it possible for Indians to be imported here
as indentured labourers.

It’s an interesting bird’s-eye view to see that wherever there was
resistance to enforced labour, the colonial rulers of our country visited
other parts of the world and brought labour here, such as from the East
Indies to the Western Cape, or from China to strengthen the working force
in the Gauteng gold mines.

We celebrate this particular community – the Indian community – today, and
we have to look closely at the contribution they made to our history, and
not only to the industrialisation of the country, as elements of labour
here. At the same time they immediately joined in the struggle for equality
of status - for rights like everybody else. That is particularly important
because in 1860, with the founding of the All India Congress - what was
then called in India the Indian Congress - the struggle against British
imperialism in India started. They brought this to the shores of South
Africa, and, in fact, this led directly ... [Interjections.] ... I’m not as
small-minded as that. We are celebrating South Africa and we are
celebrating the communities here. It has nothing to do with the little
things that there are here; it has to do with the value of what the
community has done, and I will address that issue.

We want to say that we own this country, its history over the centuries,
and we would be less South African if we thought that there were certain
parts of the history of this country which belonged only to some and not to
all of us - South Africa is for all of us and it will always be so. If
anything, that is the kind of South Africa we want to build, a South Africa
that is for all of us, in which everybody is South African.
The fact that we may hold different views on this, that or the other does
not change that reality. Therefore, I say with pride that the Indian South
Africans who arrived at that time made history for all of us. They set a
timetable and a programme that has made all of us the product of this
country.

So, when they formed the Natal Indian Congress in 1894, they pointed the
way to the struggle in the future of a South Africa that was quickly
becoming a capitalist society, in which our own great grandparents from the
Transkei, the Free State and the North of this country were moving towards
Johannesburg to the mines, and to Kimberley. It was Africa’s labour force.
The working class of South Africa was taking root.

As that was happening, South Africa’s urban centres were developing, the
townships of Sophiatown and others, which led to the forming of Soweto. The
townships of Durban led to uMlazi and with the establishment of those
townships South Africa was growing. The township of Chatsworth and others
were born as a general movement of the development of the working class in
our country. At that time, none of the present political organisations were
there, not then. Therefore, we say that if we are to celebrate in full, we
must recognise the contributions made by these communities across decades
and centuries.

As we began the last century, the 20th century, just after 1910 we saw the
Indian community struggling to cross into the Transvaal against a vicious,
backward Republic of Afrikaners that did not want them to settle there. A
consequence of this was that at Volksrus in 1913 little Valliammai, at the
age of 13, was killed as part of that struggle to move into the Transvaal.
That explains that it was the success of that struggle that led to the
situation that we have today, a settled, very powerful part of the Indian
community in the Transvaal.

It’s a sad thing that happened in the Free State - there was not sufficient
economic development to lure them there in large numbers. It’s also a shame
that for so long a province like that sustained legislation that denied
them the right to make the Free State their home.

We must see both the good things and the backward things that we did to
each other in our history, and we must be ashamed that some of the things
were done in that way. I say with pride that if the death of little
Valliammai inspired the struggle, it was to be reignited much later in 1976
with the death of a little child of 13 years, Hector Pieterson. It was
history repeating itself, in different circumstances but at same time
generally driving in the same direction.

So, we can take pride in the fact that all of us made equal contributions,
and spilled our blood for the same cause. By the way, at the founding of
the first liberation organisation in Africa, the African National Congress,
an argument arose as to what it was to be called. The delegates who were at
that meeting argued from various angles, but they said that the name,
whatever it was, had to include the word “congress” because they were so
inspired by the performance of the Natal Indian Congress that they wanted
an organisation that would be capable of doing what the Natal Indian
Congress had already demonstrated, which was positive. That is the history
of our country.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Lekota, as this is very important political
education, I’ve given you two minutes extra already.

Mr M G P LEKOTA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to fast-forward in
history because I want to say that the Indian ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr M G P LEKOTA: I would like to say that the contribution of the Indian
community in our country was not limited only to struggle issues. The
Indian cuisine that has now become part of and characteristic of our
culture came with them.

In the area of sport, the Indian community has made incredible history. I
want to recall that fact in regard to sports such as hockey and golf. Let
me remind you of this, and this Parliament must take note of it. In 1964
Sewsunker “Papwa” Sewgolum, a self-taught Indian who did not hold a golf
stick according to what was taught in academies and so on, competed against
Gary Player and others, and he beat them! But, let me tell you something
that all of us must be ashamed of. When he won and the prizes were to be
given out, because of the Separate Amenities Act he was not allowed to go
into the club to receive his trophy; he was made to stand outside and it
was raining. He was given his trophy there in the rain, with somebody
holding an umbrella over him! But, he had won the championship! I see that
we honour Gary Player, who was honoured by the old order; fine, I also
honour him. But I do think that we must honour Papwa Sewgolum for the
example he set our country. I thank you, but I say, “Halala
[Congratulations], the Indian community! Halala! [Congratulations!]”
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Halala! [Congratulations!] Thank you, hon members. No,
hon member, I took into account the fact that hon Lekota has been here
since August. Since this is the last week, he really wants to put in
everything for this term now! So please excuse him. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the hon Lekota has taught us
all a lesson though, that if we want extra time we have to talk very loudly
into the microphone and you get to give us extra time! [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You won’t succeed in that!

Mr N SINGH: Deputy Speaker, I think hon Lekota certainly scored a hole-in-
one with his last suggestion. [Laughter.]

Hon Deputy Speaker, it is a great honour for me to pay tribute today to the
first Indians to arrive on South African shores exactly 150 years ago, on
16 November 1860. Amongst those I honour today is my grandfather who, as a
23-year-old, arrived on South Africa’s shores from North India on
14 April 1897, when he disembarked from a ship called the SS Umzinto.
Ironically, uMzinto is still the area where I reside today.

The contribution of my grandfather and the many other Indian migrants
between 1860 and 1911 is well documented but, I fear, the contribution of
the Indian community to our country has not yet been fully assessed and not
fully appreciated.

Amongst our country’s unsung heroes and heroines are undoubtedly the first
pilgrims from India who landed on our shores on board the SS Truro. The
Indian migrants came searching for greener pastures, but for many these
were the sugar cane fields of KwaZulu-Natal. My grandfather too found
employment in this industry, and as a young man made a living working for a
sugar cane company in Port Shepstone.

History records that from the many trials and tribulations of the Indian
migrants emerged as many triumphs, and a sense of purpose too. Indian
people lived cheek by jowl with their African brothers and sisters until
1966, when the Group Areas Act, which separated all South Africans, came
into effect.

However, this did not dampen the fighting spirit of the Indian people. It
was the South African Indian community who invested their originally very
scarce resources in the education of their children and the upliftment of
their social and economic conditions, so that each subsequent generation
could surpass their father’s one, not only in terms of economic prosperity,
but also in terms of education, knowledge and awareness. This led to the
establishment of almost 400 community-built schools, mainly in KwaZulu-
Natal.

Deputy Speaker, the arrival of our Indian brothers and sisters in South
Africa also led to a powerful relationship between India and South Africa.
Today, we laud the role of India in shaping the political landscape of
South Africa. India has left indelible imprints on the human race over the
course of centuries. Today, India is not only a rising 21st century
superpower, but the pace of change in the world’s largest democracy, with
its vibrant and open society, is simply inspiring.
History records that we – South Africa and India – share a common past.
Both of our countries were subjected to occupation by British imperialists,
and our hardships and experiences during our colonial periods bear striking
resemblances. I am proud that South Africa and India’s special relationship
was forged in the struggle against racial oppression and discrimination.

However, despite the commendable relationship between our two countries,
the fact remains that, 150 years after the arrival of the first Indians to
our shores, many challenges still remain for South Africa’s Indian
community.

The perception that all Indian people are rich businessmen and women is
false, and has created, in my opinion, the myth that there are no poor
Indians in South Africa. This is simply not true. A quick tour around
KwaZulu-Natal, in particular, will reveal that some of the poorest
inhabitants of KwaZulu-Natal are, in fact, people of Indian origin. It is
with this in mind that I believe that there is an urgent need for
government and NGOs to do more to assist those communities to access
housing and other basic services.

In addition, clearly not enough has been done to preserve and honour the
culture, religion and traditions of the Indian community. But, our
constitutional imperatives are a great step forward. Currently, the state
broadcaster – and I’m glad that the Minister of Communication will be
participating in this debate – only flights 102 TV programmes of interest
to the community per week, while there has been no concerted effort on the
part of government to promote Eastern languages. More schools, for example,
could offer Eastern languages as part of the curriculum. The issue of equal
job opportunities for young graduates is also a matter of concern.

It is my firm belief that it is important that we take advantage of this
moment in history to ensure the lasting and sustainable legacy of the
community. There have been many calls for national monuments like at
Curries Fountain in Durban and the Durban market, similar to the Afrikaner
Voortrekker Monument.

Professor Ashwin Desai, an author, suggests that such a centre, like a
memory bank or culture centre, should be constructed to bring together into
a central place a collection of photographs and artefacts of the history of
South Africans of Indian descent. Sadly, the only centre in Durban, the
Durban Documentation Centre, was closed down recently.

Curry and rice and bunny chows are today two of KwaZulu-Natal’s, and indeed
South Africa’s, most favourite dishes, but the legacy of the Indian
community of South Africa is far greater than that of food alone. South
Africans of Indian descent have greatly enriched our nation, especially so
the province of KwaZulu-Natal.

I want to end with the words of the president of our party, Prince
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, who has on numerous occasions paid tribute to South
Africans of Indian descent, and is on record as saying, and I quote:

   Simply and plainly put, without the blood, sweat, suffering and toil of
   the people of the Truro and the many more Indians who followed them,
   South Africa would not be what it is today and would not enjoy the levels
   of prosperity, development and stability which we now have, and which,
   albeit far below our intended goals and aspirations, are nonetheless
   superior to those enjoyed anywhere else in sub-Saharan Africa.

I also want to wish members of the Muslim community Eid Mubarak for
tomorrow.

We all know that when you speak to an Indian he says, “Nothing for
nothing,” because nothing does come for nothing. I stand here today as a
proud South African of the IFP, and also as a person who is proud of my
heritage, roots and culture. Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Deputy Speaker, as we gather today to celebrate the arrival
of Indians in South Africa 150 years ago, allow me to pay tribute to the
contributions made by the Indian community to all forms of our nation’s
development.
On this day 150 years ago, Indians arrived on the shores of Durban in
various ships. They were brought here for the sole purpose of working as
slaves on the sugar cane fields of KwaZulu-Natal.

I doubt that their colonial masters had any idea that within a short space
of time the very slaves they had imported would become wise and successful
business people. Less than three decades later, many Indians ventured out
from being cane cutters to being cane growers. Soon, several Indian slaves
were successful entrepreneurs in their neighbourhoods. Many of the slaves
had the option of returning to their motherland, but instead they remained
behind and joined the fight against oppression with their fellow South
Africans.

We are especially proud of the role that Indians played in the freedom of
our nation. Under the guidance of Mahatma Gandhi, through peaceful protest,
they helped change the face of our nation through nonviolent
demonstrations.

From the early 1900s onwards the Indian community recognised the evils of
apartheid rule and the impact that the inequality was having on their
fellow African brothers. It is for this reason that they stood side by side
with them in the fight against racial oppression and inequality.

The formation of the Indian Congress was a turning point in this struggle,
as the fight against the apartheid regime gathered more support from the
international community. However, whilst this formation was Indian in
identity, they remain to this very day proudly South African.

On behalf of the ID, I wish to congratulate all Indians in South Africa on
the role they played in transforming our country, and the ongoing
contribution they make to the development of our nation. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon members, the UDM joins the rest
of the House in paying tribute to the Indian people who arrived on our
shores 150 years ago.

Since the arrival of those first indentured labourers, they have left an
indelible mark on the shape of our history. There can be no denying that
people of Indian origin have been inextricably linked to the growth of our
country. They have witnessed and experienced the years of colonial rule and
the subsequent rise and fall of apartheid.

In that time their identity was reduced to a question of race without
regard to the richness of diversity among themselves. During those decades,
being an Indian meant being nonwhite and nonblack. This arbitrary and
immoral racial classification was the cause of endless suffering and
injustice. The former regime also mastered the art of divide and rule and
sought to inflame racial animosity between Indian people and people from
other racial and cultural groups.

Happily, those days are now behind us. Indian people played a very
significant role in bringing about democracy. For instance, one of India’s
greatest statesmen, Mahatma Gandhi, spent time in South Africa and
experienced our oppression at first hand.

Today, we can proudly celebrate the far-reaching role that the descendants
of those first indentured labourers have played, not only in politics, but
also in sport, culture, medicine, arts and industry. They have been active
contributors to the South African nation. We salute their contribution.
Without them our rainbow nation would be distinctly less bright and
colourful. Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, I believe that if you had given the hon
Lekota a further 15 minutes, he would probably have also lectured us on the
founding of another congress. [Laughter.] But he couldn’t get to that
point. Thank you, therefore. [Laughter.]

On behalf of the FF Plus, I would also like to extend a word of
congratulations and thanks to our compatriots of Indian origin and descent
who are South African citizens for the role that they have played over many
years.

I think it is also correct that we look at history from a different angle.
Even though it is true that a large majority, or the bulk, of Indians came
in 1860, it is also true that it is said that the first person of Indian
descent arrived in 1657. This was a lady known as Mooi Ansiela. She was
born in north-west India, and arrived with Pieter Kemp on board one of the
ships called the Amersfoort. She was an employee or a slave of Jan van
Riebeeck. In 1668 she was made a free burgher and she was then allowed to
do whatever she wanted in regard to her slavery.

It is also interesting to note that slavery and the whole thing that
happened here was in 1860. In the two Boer Republics slavery was abolished
in 1854 in terms of their constitutions.

Now, the Chief Whip referred to the whole issue of unity and diversity, and
I have also listened to what our colleagues have said today. I remember
something from when I was a child. I was brought up on the West Rand in
Gauteng, and I remember many Sunday afternoons in the early 1960s when
there was not much to do. We would get into our cars and drive to have a
look at the beautiful double-storey houses in Azaadville, where our Indian
compatriots were living.

Today things are different. Today Indians are, in terms of the Employment
Equity Act and affirmative action, considered as black. Things have
changed, but the important point I would like to make is this: No minority
in a plural society will ever in the long-term survive by claiming
credentials through supporting the majority in that sense. What we need in
South Africa in terms of the constitutional dispensation is the recognition
of the rights of different communities in terms of their cultural and
linguistic heritage, and to make provision for that in our constitutional
dispensation. That is where your future will lie, not in trying to suck up
to any majority, regardless of who that majority may be. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP joins in celebrating the 150th
anniversary of the arrival of the Indian community in South Africa,
beginning in 1860 with approximately 152 000 ... [Interjections.] ... if
I’ve got time. It began in 1860 with approximately 152 000 Indians coming
to Natal between that year and 1911.

Many were made outrageous promises about luxurious living conditions and a
better life, whilst others were physically abducted and placed on board
ships. Families were torn apart through this process and, as indicated by
previous speakers, a five-year contract was offered, renewable after five
years with a sweetener of a return ticket.

The conditions on these ships were deplorable, with many succumbing to
diseases that spread. When they arrived here, they were subject to a
physical examination in a manner very similar to how cattle were examined
before they were purchased.

There were no schools, churches or temples in place to allow some degree of
normality in their daily existence. Ironically, the first Indian couple
that stepped onto South African soil were a Christian couple by the name of
Mr and Mrs Devaram.

From humble beginnings the South African Indian community has progressed to
a point where, despite small numbers, they are playing a leading role in
the sociopolitical and economic life of South Africa. This, against the
background of being discriminated against by whites who perceived them as
an economic threat during apartheid. Regrettably, the current policy of
affirmative action is perceived by many Indians as a means of marginalising
them in favour of other previously disadvantaged persons.

How did they then succeed? It was by implementing a simple yet highly
effective ethos under which they lived, namely a strong focus on education
and a solid family value system. This we should all learn from.

The ACDP acknowledges the significant contribution that the South African
Indian community has made to the country. They brought colour, spice and
dance to South Africa that, it is argued, cannot be replicated by anyone
else in the world, except possibly by Indians in India itself.

We in South Africa owe a similar vote of gratitude to the South African
Indian community who are first and foremost loyal and dedicated South
Africans. I thank you.

Mrs F HAJAIG: Deputy Speaker, comrades and colleagues, the following text
is a salute to all women who fought valiantly in our struggle for
liberation, and to celebrate the outstanding freedom fighters, especially
women of Indian ancestry, who have inspired us with their bravery and
commitment in the fight for justice and peace.

Today commemorates the 150-year anniversary of Indians’ arriving on South
African soil. The first Indians from Madras arrived on the ship the
SS Truro on 16 November 1860. On 4 October 1860, the ship SS Belvedere had
left Calcutta with 310 passengers. Great Britain had introduced a new
system of slavery in the form of indenture to serve the needs of its
developing colonial economies. Famine in the north-western province of
India contributed to 17 899 people emigrating from Calcutta. On account of
severe famine in South India, 428 000 people left from Madras. Between 1860
and 1911, some 152 184 indentured labourers from across India came to South
Africa.

The Indians signed a ludicrous statement of contract. It said:

    We, the undersigned male immigrants, do hereby agree to serve the
    employer to whom we may respectively be allotted by the national
    government under the Natal Act No 14 of 1859, and we all understand the
    terms under which we are engaged, wages for the first year to be 10
    shillings, ...


... not £10 ... [Interjections.] ... it was 10 shillings ...
[Interjections.] ... it was 10 shillings per year for the first year -

    ... concluding with 14 shillings for the fifth year.

Many died on board the ships due to harsh, unsatisfactory conditions, and
those who arrived worked as cheap labour and lived in inhumane conditions
completely controlled by their employers.

Later, in the 1870s, the free Indians or so-called “passenger Indians” who
paid their own passage to Natal, the majority of whom came from Gujarat as
traders, artisans and workers, arrived.

For Indians, the laws treated them as migrants, and it was the intention of
the law to discourage them from staying longer in South Africa. One measure
was that the colonial government did not provide any schooling for Indian
children.

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi - the Mahatma - a young lawyer educated in India
and England, arrived in 1893 to start work in Pretoria on a lawsuit. During
his journey from Durban to Pretoria, a white passenger complained about
sharing a compartment with an Indian. He was asked to go to the third-class
compartment. He refused to do so and was forcibly and unceremoniously
thrown out of the train in Pietermaritzburg.

In 1894, a year after Gandhi arrived in South Africa, the Natal Indian
Congress, NIC, was founded. Numerous discriminatory laws, harsh taxation
and unbearable conditions experienced by both free and indentured Indians
continued. The NIC’s aim of satyagraha was to improve the rights of Indians
in South Africa and to end the practice of indentured labour. The Transvaal
Indian Congress, TIC, and Cape Indian Congress, CIC, were later formed.
Three years later, in 1919, the South African Indian Congress was born.

The British government rushed the Franchise Bill through Parliament in
1898, followed by two more Bills aimed at passenger Indians, the
Immigration Restriction Bill and the Dealers’ Licences Bill, curbing
migration and trading. The white community obviously saw them as a threat.
In 1906, the Transvaal government passed a law making it compulsory for
Indians over eight years of age, children, to carry a pass bearing their
thumbprint. This caused outrage among the Indian population. By the end of
January 1908, 2 000 Asians had been arrested for failing to register.
Eventually Gandhi and the leader of the Chinese population in South Africa,
a Mr Leung Quinn, reached an agreement with Jan Smuts, the Transvaal
Colonial Secretary, whereby the Act would be repealed if everyone
registered voluntarily, but Smuts denied any promises made to Gandhi and,
on his way to the Registration Office, was duly assaulted.

Gandhi and members of the NIC and TIC were in and out of prison on an
ongoing basis as they led campaigns against unjust laws. In less than a
month, 300 Hindus, Muslims, Parsis and Christians became members. Sohrab
Rustomjee, Ahmed Cachalia, Ebrahim Asvat, Mohamed Nagdee, Mr P K Naidoo and
numerous other leaders were imprisoned. In 1913, Thumbi Naidoo succeeded in
mobilising about 5 000 miners to down tools to protest against the ₤3 tax
imposed on them.

Unfortunately I have only four minutes left and I would like to recognise
the role of Indian women. I would quickly like to say that little is known
of their role in the Indian resistance movements, for example, as they
fought alongside the men to change the course of history. Only recently did
the Indian government honour a young 16-year-old martyr, Valliammai
Munuswamy Mudliar for her role as a first-generation freedom fighter
alongside Gandhiji, as Mr Lekota, who has left, said.

Although Indian women have always played an important role in social and
communal life, much of their work in households and in their families,
supporting their men and children, was unrecognised. It was Gandhi who
fought for this dramatic change in the role and status of women in South
Africa and India when, at his request, they came out in large numbers from
the shelter of their homes. Indian women first embraced the struggle in
1913 by way of an open invitation from the satyagraha association to join
men in retaliation for the Searle Judgment which invalidated all non-
Christian marriages. All Hindu, Muslim and Zoroastrian marriages were
declared null and void. This meant that all Indian married women in South
Africa were reduced to the status of concubines, while the children were
classified illegitimate and deprived of all rights of inheritance, property
assets and legal claims.

This was a hugely emotive cause; the very honour of Indian womanhood had
been insulted. By engaging in these activities, women broke out of their
traditional boundaries and challenged the images of the passive and docile
Indian woman and other issues such as the onerous permit system and
immigration laws, that is, prohibition of Indians’ moving from province to
province. It was not so long ago that Indians were not allowed to stay over
in the Orange Free State. I remember Chief Justice Ismail Mahomed of the
Constitutional Court was not allowed to sleep over while working on a
judgment in Bloemfontein.

In the 1920s and 1930s Indian women confined their work to culture and
charitable work, but by the beginning of the 1940s, confronted by changing
social and economic conditions, Indian women became politically motivated.
Both professional and working-class women began to take an active interest
in politics. A comparative assessment by the government’s Social and
Economic Council revealed that 70,6% of Indians, 38,2% of coloureds, 24,8%
of Africans and 5,2% of white families were living below the poverty line.
That means that 70,6% of Indians as compared to 5,2% of white families
lived below the poverty line.

A large number of working-class households were dependent on female
breadwinners. During the war, the Communist Party of South Africa, CPSA,
sought to mobilise women around food supplies. In 1946, 1 000 Indian
demonstrators led by the CPSA engaged in protest marches against food
controllers and black marketeers in Durban. Trade union activity also
served as a polarising agent as Indian women, especially Hindu and Tamil
women, were mainly employed in the clothing, textile and food industries.
For example, Rahima Moosa and Fatima Seedat entered politics through their
jobs with the food and canning industry. Dr Goonam and Ms H Naidoo,
together with NIC members, mediated with management and contracted
concessions for Indian workers.

The struggle in India resulted in the imprisonment of Kasturba Gandhi,
Sarojini Naidu, Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit and Meera Ben. These women served as
role models for activists such as Zainab Asvat, Dr Goonam, Zohra Bhyat,
Manuben Sita, Mrs Amina Pahad, Mrs Zubeida Patel, Ms Badat, Mrs R Jinn, Mrs
Chella Chetty, Mrs Pillay, Mrs Pather, Mrs Nair, and the list goes on.

The Passive Resistance Campaign 1946 to 1948 involved women from different
socioeconomic, religious and linguistic groups. The women who assumed
leadership roles in most instances were educated and wealthy, came from
politically active families and were victims of racial and gender
discrimination. They were in the main predominantly Gujarati-speaking
Hindus and Muslims. In Natal, the majority of resisters were Tamil and
Telugu-speaking Hindus, mainly descendents of indentured labourers.

Mrs Rathamoney Padayachee was elected the secretary for the 1946 Women’s
Action Committee ... Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Deputy Speaker, the celebration of 150 years of our history
has for the first time highlighted for other communities the struggles, the
sacrifices and the massacres of indentured labourers. We must not make the
mistake of looking only at people after Mahatma Gandhi, because there were
other great heroes and heroines of the struggle.

I would like South Africa to know that for 101 years in this country the
policy of successive white governments was: “Coolies, go back to India!” In
1961 H F Verwoerd had the courage to stand up in Parliament and say that
that policy had been abandoned and that the Indians were now part of the
permanent population of South Africa.

One should look at the concerns of the minorities, the concerns of the
Indian community. The manner in which policies are applied is hurting them,
yet they are South Africans. What we undoubtedly require is Madiba’s
definition of blacks, meaning Africans, coloureds and Indians. The members
of the Indian community are hurt and they are wounded.

What we require is the assurance of the hon President of our country to the
Indian community that we will be treated as equal citizens within the
spirit of the Constitution, which grants every citizen equality. The time
has now arrived for a drastic change in the policies relating to equality
and affirmative action. They should be replaced by another formula where
there can be the levelling of the playing fields. There is no sense in
telling the Prime Minister of India that Indians have made enormous
contributions to the country, and that we were doing well, when we are
treated as second-class citizens. Stand up in this Chamber and put Dr
Verwoerd to shame!

As we continue to commemorate this historic event, let us never forget the
incredible contributions that the Indian indentured labourers made in every
facet of life. Let us remember the profound words of Mohandas Karamchand
Gandhiji, who said:

    Happiness is when what you think, what you say, and what you do are in
    harmony.

The true strength of an Indian is not derived from his physical form, but
from his inner spirit. Today let us all commit ourselves to delivering our
people from the shackles of poverty, irrespective of race, colour and
creed, and march forward with courage, conviction and determination. I
thank you and also wish the Muslim community Eid Mubarak for tomorrow.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to say that we should notice that the hon
Bhoola is the only hon member who is always on the dot. If he is given two
minutes, it is going to be two minutes or less. Thank you, hon Bhoola.
[Applause.]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the history and record of the
indentured labourers of Indian origin in South Africa are a classic example
of how people can defy the odds and rise above their circumstances. Their
story can only be compared to that of the Africans who were captured and
transported across the Atlantic, and sold as slaves in the Americas.

The comparison is relevant because in our view the difference between
indentured labour and slavery is insignificant. Of course, as we tell this
story, we are saying very little about those who could have perished on the
way, and we think there were many. Those who brought them to South Africa
had possibly hoped that they would forever be drawers of water and hewers
of wood.

Azapo says they defied the odds, because they have become part and parcel
of South Africa. Many of them identified themselves with the oppressed
during the struggle for liberation. They rejected the pseudo freedom of the
tricameral system, and fought for true and genuine freedom. We thank God
that, despite the intentions of those who transported them across the seas,
we now have successful businesspeople, lawyers, doctors, teachers, sports
persons, and so on.

We are paying tribute to them for the role that they have played in
bringing about democracy in South Africa. If we had the time and space, we
would mention some of them by name. I am paying tribute to one of my
political mentors, the late Cde Strini Moodley. We are looking forward to a
day when we will refer to these patriots just as South Africans, without
any reference to where they came from, just as we do not refer to others as
South Africans of German, Dutch, English or Italian descent. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon
members, I think the debate today is indeed an historic moment for us. I
listened carefully to the responses of the various political parties, and
it is outstanding how all of us have come together with a common view in
celebrating this historic moment of the 150th anniversary of the arrival of
the Indian indentured labour in South Africa. I was struck by the absence
of any attempt by the political parties to use this debate to score
political points. They have rather paid tribute to the common recognition
that all our people are giving to this historic event.

I must say that I was rather surprised that the hon Bhoola from the MF
still tried to be a bit of a tiger by bringing in a little bit of politics,
when he made comments about the feelings of the Indian people towards the
policies of the ruling party, which I did not think was quite true.

The last speaker referred to Strini Moodley and I am reminded of what
Strini experienced when he was sitting on the beach in Durban and dipping
his feet into the sea, alongside his friend Steve Biko. A white constable
came up to Strini and said, “Hey you, what do you think you are doing?
Don’t you know this beach is reserved for whites?” Strini looked at Steve
Biko and then said, “Steve, tell him - he doesn’t know.” The policeman
looked very puzzled and asked Steve what Strini was talking about. Steve
said, “Well, don’t you know that this is the Indian Ocean?” [Laughter.]

Sumit Chakravartty, in a foreword to a book called Gandhiji’s vision of a
free South Africa - a collection of articles by Enuga Reddy - said that the
establishment of a nonracial, democratic government in South Africa under
the leadership of Nelson Mandela - the vision of Gandhi - in a spirit of
reconciliation remained a binding source of strength and an inspiration to
all South African people. In 1908 Gandhi said:
    If we look into the future, is it not a heritage we have to leave to
    posterity, that all the different races commingle and produce a
    civilisation that perhaps the world has not yet seen?

In paying a special tribute to the historic contribution of Gandhi and his
vision for the future of humanity, President Mandela said in September 1992
that Gandhi was a South African and his memory deserved to be cherished
then and in post-apartheid South Africa. We must never lose sight of the
fact that the Gandhian philosophy may be a key to human survival in the
21st century.

Connecting Gandhi’s contribution to national developments in South Africa,
Gandhi repeatedly emphasised until the end of his life that he was both an
Indian and a South African. He did not consider himself as belonging to
Indian South Africans alone, but to all South Africans. He asserted without
any trace of ambiguity that the spirit of Gandhi lived not only in the
hearts of Indians struggling against racism and for a nonviolent democratic
society, but also in those of Nelson Mandela, Oliver Tambo, Archbishop
Tutu, the Rev Beyers Naudé and indeed many others.

In recognition of the contribution that his South African experience gave
to the evolution of his ideas, Gandhi told the Kanpur Congress in 1925:

    Indians of South Africa claim that they have given me to you. I accept
    that claim. It is perfectly true that whatever service I have been able
    to render ... to India, comes from South Africa.

Despite being born in India he, Gandhi, was certainly made in South Africa.

Another feature of the special significance of his influence was the
friendship that emerged between Mahatma Gandhi and the Rev John
Langalibalele Dube, who was to become the first President General of the
ANC. Both men were involved in work for their communities; Gandhi founded
the Natal Indian Congress and Rev Dube founded the Natal Native Congress,
which was the precursor of the ANC.

Many historians have argued that this friendship and collaboration inspired
the joint co-operation between Indians and Africans in the years of the
freedom struggle that followed. History also gives credit to the
outstanding contribution of Dr Yusuf Dadoo, who focused his attention on
the building of an alliance of Indians and Africans as the basis for the
widest unity of the people against racism. Dr Dadoo became an architect of
the unity of all oppressed people in the struggle to end racist tyranny, so
much so that the ANC honoured him in 1955 with the award of the decoration
of Isitwalandwe/Seaparankoe.

In his recent state of the nation address, President Zuma stated that our
country would mark the 150th anniversary of the arrival of Indians. He
affirmed that the celebration provided an opportunity to recognise the
important contribution of the Indian community in the fields of business,
labour, science, sports, religion and culture, and the achievement and
consolidation of our democracy.

From humble beginnings as cane cutters in the sugar cane fields in KwaZulu-
Natal to a significant presence in virtually every economic facet of human
lives, the Indian community have made an outstanding contribution to the
evolution of our democratic society. Today, the sugar industry in South
Africa ranks as one of the major manufacturers of sugar and sugar by-
products.

Whilst South Africa can boast that it is perhaps with humility, people of
Indian origin can also boast of the fact that their labour pioneered this
industry. Today, as we celebrate, we also recognise the very perilous
circumstances that these pioneers from India faced. So, when we look at the
economy today and the sugar industry, viewed against the background of the
conditions of work, one sometimes does get angry, but by celebrating their
arrival we salute them for having made the contributions that they did even
though they lived under circumstances which were like slavery.

One can also not discount the role played by indentured labourers of Indian
origin in the transport sector in Natal. Their labour, together with
British technology, successfully built the railway network that we have
today inherited in our country.

It is in the coal mines and the sugar fields that the seed of modern day
trade unionism was born in South Africa. Indian workers formed their own
unions, mainly in the sugar industry, and by the 1930s gravitated towards
the SA Communist Party. Nonracial industrial unions were formed in the late
1930s with largely Indian leadership. In some ways it is not without
significance that Harry Naidoo, the trade unionist, was about the first
trade unionist to unionise African workers in the sugar industry.

In 1952, when the Group Areas Act was passed, it was designed to break both
the economic and social fabric of people of Indian origin. Notwithstanding
all of this, among several activities, the Indian leadership became a
central part of evolving the resistance movement in unity with African
people and other democrats.

In 1955 the Indian leadership, together with the community, made their mark
at Kliptown in their participation in the development of the Freedom
Charter at the Congress of the People. Today their presence is evidenced in
significant numbers in the professional and commercial stratums in society.
They have had significant achievements in the medical, legal and education
fields and the Public Service, and indeed in academia. The significance far
outweighs their numbers in relation to the size of the population.
They built in the spirit of the pioneers, who built their own churches,
schools, temples, mosques and churches, and in the spirit of sacrifice and
service. They are also respected and admired for their exceptional
entrepreneurial energy and enterprise, and for always being ready to take
the gap first.

The history of South Africa’s liberation struggle documents the outstanding
contributions made by many Indian compatriots to the freedom struggle.
Names such as Yusuf Dadoo, Monty Naicker, Dr Goonam, Ahmed Kathrada, George
Sewpersadh, Billy Nair, M J Naidoo and Mewa Ramgobin stand out. In the ANC,
the SA Community Party and uMkhonto weSizwe names such as Mac Maharaj,
Essop and Aziz Pahad, Laloo Chiba and Ebrahim Ebrahim stand out as legends
for the contribution that they have made.

Today, as we mull over the struggles and tribulations of Indians in South
Africa, the insights bring home the poignancy of their enslaved exile. Torn
from their moorings, through sheer depth of hardship and diligence they put
down new roots, turned barren land verdant and metamorphosed into loyal and
abiding nationals of their country of adoption.

Indians growing up in Africa have had a rich and challenging life of
immigration, indenture and struggle politics. I am a product of this
heritage. My forefathers came from the South of India, having left behind a
way of life, relations, culture, cuisine, music, language, religion and
rich ethic tradition. When Indians left India’s shores, mainly for economic
reasons, either as indentured labourers or passenger traders, they brought
along with them a fearless determination to succeed and take on the
character of the country of their adoption, while retaining their religious
and cultural roots.

I am a living example of this testimony of a proud heritage that my
forefathers built for me 150 years ago with their blood, their sweat and
their tears. And out of their toil I emerged, having metamorphosed from
various historical designations of coolie, ikula, iNdiya, Asiatic, Indian,
charra to the pinnacle of my new identity as a fully-fledged South African.
[Applause.]

I am a unique creation, unlike my counterparts in the rest of Africa. I
have a proud heritage of tilling the soil, picking up the garbage, planting
the vegetables, sweeping the streets, selling fruit and vegetables in the
marketplace, waiting at tables in hotels, working in the coal mines,
selling newspapers and driving buses.

Though a victim of apartheid, I have a proud heritage of fighting for
justice and being in the vanguard against oppressive regimes with the
higher-order principle of nonviolence. Now, after four generations, I can
proudly say: Mother Africa has defined me, embraced me and moulded me into
this unique product aptly described as “conceived in India, but made in
South Africa”. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:48.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          FRIDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

 1. Recommendations on salaries, allowances and benefits of public office
    bearers

     1) The annual recommendations of the Independent Commission for the
        Remuneration of Public Office Bearers in respect of the salaries,
        allowances and benefits of public office bearers for the fiscal
        year commencing 1 April 2010 were submitted to Parliament on
        11 November 2010 in accordance with section 8(5) of the Independent
        Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Act, 1997
        (No 92 of 1997), along with recommendations on the pension and
        pension benefits of former President K P Motlanthe in terms of
        section 2(5)(a) of the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Act,
        1998 (No 20 of 1998).
National Assembly


  1. Replacement of ICD annual report for 2009-10 with reprinted report

     1) At the request of the Minister of Police, in a letter dated 1
        November 2010, the Independent Complaints Directorate Annual Report
        for 2009-10 [RP243-2010], tabled on 30 September 2010 (ATC, p
        2900), is hereby replaced with a reprinted report [RP243-2010]
        submitted on 13 October 2010, along with Erratum submitted on
        5 November 2010.
        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Police for consideration and
        report.

                          MONDAY, 15 NOVEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     General Notice No 991 published in Government Gazette No 33660
        dated 15 October 2010: Codes of Good Practice on Broad Based Black
        Economic Empowerment: Invitation to submit comments: Black Economic
        Empowerment Act , 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.924 published in Government Gazette No
        33615 dated 15 October 2010: Regulations in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).
    (c)     Government Notice No 898 published in Government Gazette No
        33621 dated 11 October 2010: Determination of threshold in terms of
        the Consumer Protection Act, 2008 (Act No 68 of 2008).


    (d)     General Notice No 917 published in Government Gazette No 33581
        dated 23 September 2010: Notice to defer the general effective date
        in terms of the Consumer Protection Act, 2008 (Act No 68 of 2008).


    (e)     General Notice No 827 published in Government Gazette No 33559
        dated 16 September 2010: Amendment: For written comments in terms
        of the National Gambling Act, 2004 (Act No 7 of 2004).


    (f)     General Notice No 799 published in Government Gazette No 33459
        dated 18 August 2010: Notice in terms of section 23 of the
        Counterfeit Goods Act, 1997 (Act No 37 of 1997).


    (g)     General Notice No 800 published in Government Gazette No 33459
        dated 18 August 2010: Notice in terms of section 23 (1) and (2) of
        the Counterfeit Goods Act, 1997 (Act No 37 of 1997).


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the  Public  Service  Commission  (PSC)  on  the  Key
        Drivers of Citizen Satisfaction with Public Service Delivery: Pilot
        Report 2009/2010 – April 2010 [RP 123-2010].
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the South
    African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17B - 2010] (National Assembly –
    sec 75), dated 12 November 2010:

    The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the subject
    of the South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17B - 2010]
    (National Assembly – sec 75) and proposed amendments of the National
    Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 3
    November 2010, page 3662) referred to it, reports the Bill with
    amendments [B 17 C – 2010].


    Report to be considered.

 2. The  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  of  the  Portfolio
    Committee on Economic Development on the performance  of  the  Economic
    Development  Department  for  the  2009/10  financial  year,  dated  02
    November 2010.

    The Portfolio Committee on Economic Development,  having  assessed  the
    service delivery performance of the  Economic  Development  Department,
    reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Economic Development Department (EDD)  was  formally  established  on  7
July 2009, following the President of the Republic  of  South  Africa’s,  Mr
Jacob Zuma, announcement of a new structure  for  national  government.  The
President stated on 10 May  2009  that  “Cabine  has  been  re-organised  to
achieve better alignment between the structure, our  electoral  mandate  and
the developmental challenges that need to receive immediate  attention  from
government”.

During the Presidency Vote on 24  June  2009,  the  President  stated:  “The
Economic Development portfolio will have a strong domestic  focus  and  will
address, amongst others, matters of  macro  and  micro-economic  development
planning.” The new Department is, therefore, part of a new configuration  of
government that  centres  on  the  four  inter-connected  areas  of  policy-
development, planning, effective implementation  and  continuous  monitoring
and evaluation.

The Department will be responsible to develop economic policy with a  broad,
cross-cutting focus so that macro and micro-economic policy  reinforce  each
other and are both aligned to the electoral  mandate.  The  Department  will
also  be  responsible  for  economic  development  planning  and  will  work
collegially  with  other  departments  to  ensure  coordination   around   a
programme that places decent work at the  centre  of  government’s  economic
policies in order to secure better employment outcomes.

   1. The Mandate of the Committee, including the Provision of Section 5  of
      the Money Bills Amendment Procedures and Related Matters Act, No. 9 of
      2009

According to Section 5 of the Money Bills Amendment  Procedure  and  Related
Matters Act, the National Assembly, through its  committees,  must  annually
assess the performance of each national department. Committees  must  submit
an annual Budgetary Review and  Recommendations  Reports  (BRRRs)  for  each
national department that falls  under  its  oversight  responsibilities  for
tabling in the National Assembly.

These reports should be considered by the Committee on  Appropriations  when
it is considering and reporting on the Medium Term Budget  Policy  Statement
(MTBPS) to the House.

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Economic  Development  (the  Committee),   in
undertaking the  process  of  compiling  this  report,  has  interacted  and
engaged with the Department and considered the following:
    • Strategic Plan briefings, in terms of the Money Bills  Procedures  Act
      by both the EDD and its entities;
    • Annual Report briefings, in terms of Section 65 of the Public  Finance
      Management Act, No. 1 of 1999, which requires that Ministers table the
      annual reports and financial statements for the department and  public
      entities to Parliament; and
    • First and Second Quarter Performance Report (2010/11) briefings by the
      EDD.

   2. The Mandate and Aim of the Department

Following the pronouncement of responsibilities of the Economic  Development
Department by the President, the mandate of  Economic  Development  includes
economic policy development as well as economic planning functions.

The aim of the  Economic  Development  Department  is  to  promote  economic
development through participatory, coherent and coordinated economic  policy
and planning for the benefit of all South Africans. It will therefore:
    • co-ordinate  the  economic  development  contributions  of  government
      departments, state entities and civil society;
    • contribute to efforts  that  ensure  coherence  between  the  economic
      policies and plans of the state and state entities on  the  one  hand,
      and the government’s political and economic objectives and mandate  on
      the other; and
    • promote  government’s  ability  to  achieve  its  goals  of  advancing
      economic development with decent work opportunities.

EDD  will  achieve  its  aim  and  mandate  by  promoting  economic   policy
development, coordination, planning, coherence and alignment:
    • on national economic policy development challenges and programmes;
    • through spatial economic development programmes;
    • through the mandates  and  work  of  state  entities  responsible  for
      economic regulation and financing of economic development;
    • in interactions with business and organised labour to  develop  social
      consensus on economic development challenges, policies and responses;
    • in policy work that maximizes the economic development impact  in  the
      domestic economy in its interface with the global economy

1. Department’s Strategic Priorities and Measurable Objectives

2.1.  Strategic Priorities of the Department

Four critical programmes determine the work of the Department.  Within  each
of  the  programmes,  the  Department  identified  a  number  of   strategic
priorities, which relate specifically to the purpose:
Programme 1: Administration
The purpose of this programme is to co-ordinate and  renders  an  effective,
efficient, strategic support and administrative  service  to  the  Minister,
Deputy Minister, Director-General, the EDD and its agencies.

Programme 2: Economic Policy Development
The overall functions of this programme are to:
    • develop South Africa’s path for economic growth and  the  creation  of
      decent work;
    • undertake work to ensure macro and micro economic  policies  that  are
      coherent and aligned to the broader economic objectives;
    • co-ordinate the economic development programmes of government;
    • draw the links  between  different  policy  and  programme  areas  and
      economic development objectives;
    • engage with civil society and manage their contributions  to  policies
      for economic development; and
    • conduct economic policy research that informs the formulation of
      appropriate economic policies.

Programme 3: Economic Development – Planning and Coordination
The purpose of this programme is to develop economic planning proposals  for
consideration by  Cabinet  and  for  submission  to  the  National  Planning
Commission to be incorporated in the wider national plan.

It will contribute the above-mentioned by:
    • contributing to the coordination and coherence between macro and micro
      economic policies. This will be achieved through  the  development  of
      these  plans  for  the  consideration  of  the  Economic  Sectors  and
      Employment Cluster of Cabinet;
    • providing oversight and strategic  direction  to  certain  development
      finance and related institutions and economic regulatory bodies;
    • contributing to the work of other departments that  are  participating
      in African and regional institutions, international economic  agencies
      and multilateral institutions; and
    • building economic opportunities including the job  creation  potential
      of green economic activities.

Programme 4: Economic Development and Dialogue
The purpose of this programme is to promote  social  dialogue  in  order  to
foster economic development. The Department envisage to:
    • lead government in its dialogue with the social  partners  on  matters
      pertaining to economic development  and  attempt  to  build  consensus
      with, and acquire the active  support  of  Labour,  Business  and  the
      Community on government’s economic development policies, plans,  goals
      and growth path for economic development;
    • represent government in the discussions about  the  implementation  of
      the Framework Agreement on South Africa’s  Response  to  the  Economic
      Crisis:
    • develop the capacity of  the  social  partners  to  engage  in  social
      dialogue, including at sectoral and workplace level; and
    • enhance productivity, entrepreneurship and innovation.

2.2.  Measurable objectives of the Department

    • Administration - The purpose of this programme is to  co-ordinate  and
      render an effective, efficient, strategic support  and  administrative
      service to the Minister, Deputy Minister,  Director-General,  the  EDD
      and its agencies.


      Key activities from the operational plan include:
         o Implementation of the recruitment plan
         o Accommodation, furniture and equipment
         o Planning and reporting


    • Economic Development Policy - to develop economic  policies  that  (a)
      transform the structural economic problems in pursuit of  decent  work
      and green economy outcomes; and (b) address the  negative  growth  and
      employment impact of the global economic crisis

      Key activities from the operational plan include:
         o Development of a paper  on  the  Growth  Path  and  consultation
           thereon
         o Policy/analytical papers on economic policy challenges
         o Policy platforms on economic policy challenges
         o Development of an economic model
         o Establishment of an economic development index
         o Establishment of database on the real economy
         o Proposal for  the  establishment  of  the  Economic  Development
           Institute


    • Economic Development: Planning and Coordination - The purpose of  this
      programme is to develop economic planning proposals for  consideration
      by Cabinet and for submission to the National Planning  Commission  to
      be incorporated in the wider national plan.
      Key activities from the operational plan include:
         o Strategic engagements with DFIs and ERBs
         o Strategy to enhance investment for economic development
         o Oversight of special financing for  small  businesses,  targeted
           growth sectors and companies in distress
         o Interventions to leverage state expenditure and procurement
         o  Engagements  with  international  agencies   and   multilateral
           institutions
         o Submission of economic planning proposals
         o Engagements with provincial and local government
         o Production and review of sector plans
         o Production and review of spatial plans


    • Economic Development and Dialogue - The purpose of this  programme  is
      to promote social dialogue in order to foster economic development.

      Key activities from the operational plan include:
         o Implementation of  and  reporting  on  the  Framework  for  SA’s
           Response to International Economic Crisis
         o Social dialogue engagements
         o Capacity building engagements
         o Sectoral/workplace/national agreements facilitated with partners
         o Establishment of Advisory Panel on Economic Development
         o Annual Conference on Economic Development

2. Departmental Allocations and Expenditure 2009/10
As an entirely new department formed after the 2009 elections, there was  no
budget in place for EDD in May 2009  and  the  DTI  established  a  division
within their financial systems for EDD. This division within  the  DTI,  was
allocated a budget of R29 million for the remainder of  the  financial  year
and the DTI was reimbursed for the expenditure it has already  incurred.  It
was agreed with National Treasury  that  the  DTI  Director-General  be  the
Accounting Officer for these funds for the  2009/10  financial  year.  EDD’s
transactions are reflected in the DTI’s Annual Financial Statements.

In addition to expenditure of R16.654 million incurred and paid  for  during
the 2009/10  financial  year,  commitments  were  made  for  expenditure  on
capital assets amounting to R1.107 million. The  total  of  expenditure  and
commitments for 2009/10 was  R17.761  million  or  61.24%  of  the  adjusted
budget allocation.

Commitments represent goods and services that have  been  ordered,  but  not
delivered and paid for at the reporting date. This amount of R1.107  million
was not recognised in the statement of financial position as a liability  or
as expenditure for 2009/10  because  the  annual  financial  statements  are
prepared on a cash basis of accounting, but are however included as part  of
the disclosure notes.

Table 1: Management accounts for EDD for 2009/10
|Economic           |Adjusted    |Expenditure and variance 2009/10     |
|Classification     |Budget      |                                     |
|                   |2009/10     |                                     |
|                   |            |Budget   |Expenditur|Varianc|%      |
|                   |            |         |e         |e      |Varianc|
|                   |            |         |          |       |e      |
|                   |R’000       |R’000    |R’000     |R’000  |R’000  |
|Compensation of    |12.644      |12.644   |7.865     |4.779  |37.79% |
|employees          |            |         |          |       |       |
|Goods and services |10.355      |10.355   |6.349     |4.006  |38.69% |
|Capital Assets     |6.001       |6.001    |2.439     |3.562  |59.35% |
|Total budget       |29.000      |29.000   |16.654    |12.346 |42.57% |

3. Analysis of the Department’s Annual Report 2009/10
The Minister of  Economic  Development,  Mr  Ebrahim  Patel,  presented  the
Annual Report 2009/10 to the committee, which is the first Annual Report  of
the Department, since its establishment  in  May  2009.  The  Annual  Report
2009/10 outlines the setting up of a new department of government, the  work
and activities it undertook between May 2009 and March 2010.

EDD was accounted for as  a  division  within  the  Department  of  Trade  &
Industry (DTI), with an allocated budget of R29m.

The Annual  Report  2009/10  included  the  following  work  and  activities
undertaken by the EDD from  May  2009  to  March  2010.  The  Annual  Report
2009/10 reported the following:

Establishment of the Department
    • As it was a new  Ministry,  it  was  necessary  for  the  Ministry  to
      establish a basic infrastructure and staff support  immediately  after
      taking office. Accommodation was secured on the DTI Campus,  Pretoria.
      A process  of  rapidly  procuring  furniture,  telephones  and  office
      equipment was undertaken. Basic office supplies  were  also  purchased
      for the new Ministry.
      Office accommodation was also secured in the Parliamentary precinct at
      120 Plein Street. The Ministry appointed an Establishment Manager  for
      the remainder of the financial year.
      Work on the Strategic Plan of the department started in June 2009. The
      final draft was completed in September 2009. The  draft  informed  the
      organisational structure and the  medium  term  expenditure  framework
      (MTEF) budget of the Department. The  Strategic  Plan  was  tabled  in
      Parliament on 03 March 2010 as required by  Parliament  in  accordance
      with the Money Bills Amendment  Procedure  and  Related  Matters  Act,
      2009.
      The Minister held consultations with colleagues regarding the agencies
      that should report to EDD in view of its mandate. It was  subsequently
      agreed that six (6) agencies should be transferred from the DTI to the
      EDD:  three  regulatory  bodies  (The  Competition   Commission,   the
      Competition Tribunal and the International  Trade  and  Administration
      Commission (ITAC) and  three  development  finance  institutions  (the
      Industrial Development Corporation  (IDC),  Khula  Enterprise  Finance
      Limited  (Khula)  and  the  South  African  Micro-finance  Apex   Fund
      (Samaf)).
      On  10  December  2009,  the   Minister   for   Public   Service   and
      Administration determined, in terms of section 3(4) (b) of the  Public
      Service Act, 1994, that the  oversight  functions  relating  to  these
      entities be transferred from the DTI to EDD  with  effect  from  April
      2010, subject to the transfer of the  relevant  legislation  from  the
      Minister of Trade & Industry to the Minister of  Economic  Development
      in terms of section 97 of the Constitution of the RSA, 1996.

Responding to the recession
    • Much of the EDD’s work during the period under review  was  addressing
      South Africa’s response to the global economic crisis. In  July  2009,
      the Minister of Economic Development  was  requested  to  convene  and
      chair  the  Leadership  Team  of  business,  labour,   community   and
      government representatives that was created in the Framework.
         o One of the instruments  to  deal  with  the  challenges  of  the
           recession was the National  Jobs  Fund,  which  is  utilized  to
           finance  a  Training  Layoff   scheme   to   support   companies
           experiencing weakening demand for their products,  by  providing
           an alternative to retrenchments. A sum of R2, 4b was drawn  from
           the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) and  the  National  Skills
           Fund to pay allowances to workers on special training schemes. A
           further R500 million was committed by a consortium of  SETAs  to
           pay for the costs of funding  the  training  offered  under  the
           scheme.
         o The second instrument was a Fund for companies  in  distress  as
           result of the crisis. The money was made available  through  the
           Industrial Development Corporation.
         o The third instrument was a development bond placed  by  the  IDC
           with the UIF, of R2b.
         o  A  range  of  measures  to  combat  customs  fraud  were   also
           introduced.
         o  The  Competition  Commission   launched   investigations   into
           collusive practices on food prices.

Developing dialogue
    • This Chapter set out seven workstreams, which included: The Leadership
      Team’s work in response to  the  recession;  Policy  Platform  of  the
      global economic crisis; KwaZulu-Ntal Platform  on  Rural  Development;
      Policy Platform on income inequality; Next Economy National  Dialogue;
      Engagement  in  Nedlac  and  the  Ministerial  roundtable   with   the
      pharmaceutical industry.

The New Growth Path
EDD has coordinated government work on a  new  growth  path.  The  following
three workstreams sum up the work to date.
    • Research and policy work  –  Research  towards  the  new  growth  path
      commenced in 2009. A framework for the growth path was developed,  the
      approach was adopted of identifying key “job drivers” in the  economy,
      i.e. sectors with a high employment potential. Research was undertaken
      in these areas and initial estimates on the numbers of jobs that could
      be realised were made. EDD consolidated this  research  into  a  draft
      Growth Path document.
    • Workshops and policy sessions – Following the broad conceptual work on
      the growth path, EDD hosted a number  of  Departmental  workshops  and
      consultations to draw in external expertise and tap into the work that
      has been done elsewhere. A workshop focusing on the exchange rate  was
      held on 7 December, which identified a range of interventions used  by
      governments across the world to address exchange-range competitiveness
      challenges. The EDD also conducted  workshops  with  the  IDC  on  the
      Growth  Path,  which  identified  areas  of  data  and  research,  and
      considered the outcome of IDC work sources of new job growth.
    • Processes in the Economic Cluster and  within  government  –  the  EDD
      worked closely with the Economic Cluster in developing key  issues  in
      the growth path.

Provincial Coordination
    • Economic Development MinMEC - On 11 August 2009,  the  first  Economic
      Development MinMEC was held with 6 provincial MECs and their  Head  of
      Departments. The MECs tabled their provincial  priorities,  challenges
      and  opportunities.  The  meeting  agreed  to  convene   an   economic
      development symposium.
    • The Economic Cluster Research Forum – EDD co-hosted a  research  forum
      on 30 September 2009 to encourage greater research cooperation amongst
      provincial and national economic development departments.
    • MinMEC Symposuim – A MinMEC economic development  symposium  was  held
      over 16-17 November 2009 in Pretoria.

Parliament
    • Presidency Budget Vote – the Minister participated in  the  Presidency
      Budget Vote debate on 24 June 2009 and spoke on international economic
      relations.
    • Global economic crisis – Due to the keen interest in the  progress  in
      responding  to  the  international  economic  crisis,   the   Minister
      addressed the National Assembly on 20 August 2009.
    • Budget Vote No. 27 – Minister Patel made his first Budget Vote address
      to the National Assembly on 23 March 2010.

International work
    • During the period under review, the Department’s work on international
      matters  largely  focused  on  policy  development,  particularly   on
      regional economic integration. In addition,  bilateral  meetings  were
      held  with  Ministerial  counterparts  on  bilateral  visits  to   SA,
      ambassadors  from  a  number  of  countries  and  representatives   of
      international economic institutions and  organizations.  The  Minister
      launched the Employment Creation Fund during the European  Union/South
      African bilateral Summit.

4. First and Second Quarter Performance Reports of the  Department  for  the
   2010/11 Financial Year


Expenditure in the first six months of  2010/11  is  R  171.003  million  or
40.9% of the main appropriation of R 418 million for the year  as  a  whole.
Spending is  marginally  below  the  norm  due  to  the  high  vacancy  rate
associated with the start  up  and  initiation  of  operations  in  the  new
department.







Table 2: Programme 1 (Administration)

|YTD EXPENDITURE                                                    |
|Per       |Q1        |Q2        |YTD       |% Spent  |Main        |
|Sub-progra|          |          |          |         |Appropriatio|
|mme       |          |          |          |         |n           |
|Ministry  |5, 807    |5,539     |11,346    |69,64%   |16,292      |
|Office of |615       |942       |1,556     |33.54%   |4,640       |
|the DG    |          |          |          |         |            |
|General   |198       |1389      |1,587     |6.65%    |23,870      |
|Management|          |          |          |         |            |
|Services  |          |          |          |         |            |
|          |6,620     |7,870     |14,490    |32.34%   |44,802      |


Table 2 above indicates Programme 1 (Administration), from  a  budget  of  R
44,802 million, Year to Date (YTD) expenditure as at 30 September  is  at  R
14.490 or 32.3% of the budget. The spending is below the 50% norm  by  17.7%
due to slow spending arising out of the current vacancy rate.







Table 3: Programme 2 (Economic Policy Development)
|YTD EXPENDITURE                                                 |
|Per         |Q1        |Q2        |YTD  |%     |Main            |
|Sub-programm|          |          |     |Spent |Appropriation   |
|e           |          |          |     |      |                |
|Growth Path |-         |168       |168  |3.52% |4,789           |
|Economic    |64        |468       |533  |8.12% |6,555           |
|Policy      |          |          |     |      |                |
|BBBEE       |-         |-         |-    |0.00% |4,738           |
|2nd Economy |-         |-         |-    |0.00% |2,068           |
|            |64        |637       |701  |3.86% |18,150          |

The expenditure of programme  2  (Economic  Policy  Development)  (Table  3,
above) amounts to R700 000 or 3.9% of the budget of R 18.150 million,  which
is much less than the main  appropriation  budget.  Slow  spending  in  this
Programme is largely informed by the rate at which posts are filled  because
EDD is in its first year of operation.







Table 4: Programme 3 (Economic Planning and Coordination)
|YTD EXPENDITURE                                                      |
|Per Sub-programme      |Q1     |Q2       |YTD      |% Spent|Main    |
|                       |       |         |         |       |Appropri|
|                       |       |         |         |       |ation   |
|Spatial, Sector and    |-      |195      |195      |1.57%  |12,409  |
|Planning               |       |         |         |       |        |
|Economic Development,  |-      |-        |-        |0.00%  |3,806   |
|Financing and          |       |         |         |       |        |
|Procurement            |       |         |         |       |        |
|Investment for ED      |32,432 |39.792   |72,224   |46.11% |156,634 |
|Competitiveness and    |60,085 |23,309   |83,394   |48.61% |171,552 |
|Trade for decent work  |       |         |         |       |        |
|                       |92,517 |63,296   |155,813  |45.24% |344,401 |

The actual spending of programme  3  (Economic  Planning  and  Coordination)
(Table 4, above) indicates that from a budget of R 344.401 million,  a  year
to date expenditure for programme 3 is R 155.813 million  or  45.2%  of  the
budget.






Table 5: Programme 4 (Economic Development and Dialogue)
|YTD EXPENDITURE                                                        |
|Per           |Q1        |Q2        |YTD       |% Spent   |Main        |
|Sub-programme |          |          |          |          |Appropriatio|
|              |          |          |          |          |n           |
|National      |-         |-         |-         |0.00%     |7,862       |
|Social        |          |          |          |          |            |
|Dialogue      |          |          |          |          |            |
|Sector and    |-         |-         |-         |0.00%     |400         |
|workplace     |          |          |          |          |            |
|social        |          |          |          |          |            |
|dialogue      |          |          |          |          |            |
|Capacity      |-         |-         |-         |0.00%     |1,710       |
|building for  |          |          |          |          |            |
|ED            |          |          |          |          |            |
|Productivity, |-         |-         |-         |0.00%     |1,451       |
|Entrepreneursh|          |          |          |          |            |
|ip and        |          |          |          |          |            |
|Innovation    |          |          |          |          |            |
|              |-         |-         |-         |0.00%     |11,243      |

There is no spending to date  for  programme  4  (Economic  Development  and
Dialogue) (Table 5) from a budget of R 11.243 million.  The  under  spending
here is also caused by reasons that officials  in  the  Branch  of  Economic
Development and Dialogue have been erroneously paid under Programme 1.  This
will be corrected by correcting Persal allocations and effecting journals.

Overview of Revenue
The departmental revenue collection in the first six months of 2010/11 is  R
67.659 million or 29% of the estimated revenue of  R  230  million  for  the
year as a whole. There is no comparison with  mid-year  revenue  collections
in 2009/10 since EDD is currently in its first financial year  of  operation
as a budget vote. The main revenue generator for  the  department  is  fines
from penalties from the Competition Commission.

   5. Auditor-General’s Report

EDD was accounted for as  a  division  within  the  Department  of  Trade  &
Industry (DTI), with an allocated  budget  of  R29m.  The  Auditor-General’s
Report, on these funds was thus included in the financial statements of  the
DTI.

   6. Consideration of reports of the Committee on Public Accounts

The Department did not appear before the Committee on Public Accounts.

   7. Entities reporting to the committee

The committee interacted with the entities on their Annual Reports  2009/10.
Some of the highlights of these interactions include the following:

   1. Competition Commission


The Competition Commission is a statutory body constituted in terms  of  the
Competition Act, No 89 of 1998 by the Government of South  Africa  empowered
to investigate, control and evaluate restrictive business  practices,  abuse
of dominant positions and mergers in order to achieve equity and  efficiency
in the South African economy.

Committee observations:
    • AG’s Report -  The  Competition  Commission  received  an  unqualified
      Auditor-General’s Report for the 5th consecutive year.
    • Investigating cases brought by the public - Members of the public  may
      approach the Competition Commission if they suspect that  there  might
      be collusion in any sector, where the Commission will investigate  and
      a decision have to be made whether to pursue with the case or not. The
      Commissioner can also initiate cases (pro-actively).
    • Processes of Appeal against the decision of the Tribunal - There are 3
      processes of Appeal against the decision of the  Tribunal:  First  the
      Tribunal Appeal Court, then the Supreme Court of Appeal and  then  the
      Constitutional Court.
    • Budgets of the Commission (2009 and 2010) - In  2009,  the  Commission
      received a government grant of R44m and in 2010, R80m.
    • Fines/penalties paid by companies  -  The  fines/penalties  which  the
      companies pay are not reflected in the  financial  statements  of  the
      Commission. The fines/penalties go to the national fiscus.
    • Fee income amounts - Fee income amounted to R50m in 2009, and R30m  in
      2010.
    • Financial planning by the Commission: The  Commission  were  initially
      ambitious in their planning, where more  funding  was  requested  from
      Treasury, but the result was that they received less  than  what  they
      requested.


   2. Competition Tribunal

The Competition  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  throughout  South  Africa  and
adjudicates competition matters in accordance with the Competition Act  (Act
89 of 1998).   It is subject to  the  Constitution  and  the  law  and  acts
independently. When a matter is referred to it the Tribunal may:
    • grant an exemption from a relevant provision of the Act
    • authorise a merger, with or without conditions, or prohibit a merger
    • adjudicate in relation to any conduct prohibited in terms of  the  Act
      by determining whether prohibited conduct has  occurred,  and  if  so,
      impose a remedy provided for in the Act
    • grant an order for costs.
Committee observations:
    • Disabled employees: The Tribunal does not currently employ any  person
      with disability.
    • Staff promotion – there have been instances  where  staff  (especially
      Case Managers) was successful in applying for higher positions at  for
      example the  Competition  Commission.  Staff  generally  gain  initial
      experience at the Tribunal and  then  they  move  on  to  more  senior
      positions at the Commission.
    • Job losses of possible mergers –  All  stakeholders  are  involved  if
      there are any job losses due to mergers especially the trade unions
    • Fruitless and wasteful expenditure  of  R3  368  –  according  to  the
      Tribunal, the South African Revenue Service (SARS) indicated that  the
      Tribunal owed them the amount for a  PAYE  shortfall  in  March  2007.
      According to the Tribunal they paid this  amount  in  April  2007  and
      therefore disputed the liability. The Tribunal expects this  liability
      to be reversed.
   3. International Trade Administration Commission of South Africa
International Trade Administration Commission of  South  Africa  (ITAC)  was
established  through  an  Act  of  Parliament,   the   International   Trade
Administration Act 71 of 2002, which came into force on 1 June 2003.

The aim of ITAC, as stated in the Act, is  to  foster  economic  growth  and
development in order to raise incomes and promote investment and  employment
in South Africa and within the Common Customs Union Area by establishing  an
efficient and effective  system  for  the  administration  of  international
trade subject to this Act and the  Southern  African  Customs  Union  (SACU)
Agreement. The core functions  are:  customs  tariff  investigations;  trade
remedies; and import and export control.
Committee observations:
 • Aluminium investigations – It is a review of tariffs,  which  has  arisen
   from IPAP 1, who identified intermediate inputs which included  aluminium
   with regard to a review by ITAC, with a view of reducing  the  costs  for
   downstream value added goods. A recommendation was made to  the  Minister
   and the duties were reduced. After this,  producers  came  back  to  ITAC
   indicating that some of the raw materials had to be imported,  which  has
   then increased their input costs. The investigation had  to  be  reviewed
   and ITAC is at an advance stage to make a recommendation to the Minister.
 • Import permit for vehicles – Import permits are for second hand  vehicles
   and no permits is issued for new vehicles. Permits are  also  issued  for
   vehicles which are utilized by people with disabilities.
 • Struggling Textile and Clothing industry – one of  the  problems  is  the
   under valuation of imported  clothing  and  textiles,  which  erodes  the
   tariff protection. Tariff  protection  for  clothing  has  recently  been
   increased from 40 – 45%, fabrics extended to 22%. There is a unit  within
   SARS that deals with under-invoicing.
 • Replacement of  the  Textile  and  Clothing  Incentive  Development  Plan
   (TCIDP) – the TCIDP has been replaced by the Production Incentive Scheme,
   which is part of the  DTI  strategy,  which  is  in  full  implementation
   including skilling and upgrading.
 • Promotion of local goods produced – where there is  domestic  production,
   especially downstream there are tariffs. Domestic production is supported
   with tariffs.
 • Relationship with SARS – Once a recommendation is made  by  ITAC  to  the
   Minister of Trade and Industry, the Minister  requests  the  Minister  of
   Finance to implement. The implementation is performed by SARS.  SARS  and
   ITAC also work very closely on import and export permits.
 • Skills of employees – in order to perform the functions at ITAC you  need
   to gain the necessary experience within ITAC  itself,  and  the  tertiary
   institutions will not be in a position to offer this.
 • Investigation on wheat and sugar – An investigation was  performed  which
   resulted in the protection of domestic producers, especially the farmers.
 • ITAC’s link with IPAP II – IPAP II states  that  ITAC  must  continue  to
   conduct applications for selective tariff increases  or  decreases.  ITAC
   therefore takes a developmental approach to tariffs. Where the  focus  is
   on the  outcomes  e.g.  domestic  production,  employment,  international
   competitiveness etc.
 • Investigation on tyres from China – ITAC did undertake  an  investigation
   into the issue of tyres from China. No evidence was found of dumping  and
   injury. ITAC was challenged by tyre  manufacturers  in  the  High  Court,
   where the manufacturers were successful,  but  ITAC  appealed  which  was
   granted.
 • Exceeding targets  for  export  and  import  permits  –  the  reason  for
   exceeding the target is because it is  based  on  historical  data.  ITAC
   under estimated, because there were more applications then expected.
 • Irregular expenditure – The irregular expenditure amount is R155 000  and
   the amount (loss to fraud) directly related to the official, is R12  000.
   The official was on suspension for 6 months while the  investigation  was
   conducted.
 • Surplus of R4.3m in 2008/9 – Interest  received  was  initially  budgeted
   conservatively, but R1.5m was received as interest and another big driver
   of this surplus was the fact that at the start  of  that  financial  year
   there was a staff compliment of 130 and at the end of the financial  year
   114.
 4. Industrial Development Corporation
The Industrial Development Corporation of South Africa Ltd (IDC) is a  self-
financing,  national  Development  Finance   Institution   (DFI).   It   was
established in 1940 to promote economic growth  and  industrial  development
in South Africa. The mandate of the IDC, includes the rest  of  the  African
continent and they are active throughout the entire region. They operate  in
a broad spectrum of industries and  with  their  specialized  knowledge  and
experience;  they  are  able  to  offer  valid  and  appropriate   financial
assistance to a wide variety of individuals and companies.
Committee observations:
 • People’s reluctance to  invest  –  people  are  reluctant  to  invest  in
   businesses during the recession. If the country wants to be  competitive,
   it would need to invest on best practices and bet processes.
 • UIF Development Bond – The IDC borrows  money  from  various  sources  of
   which the UIF is one and the rates that the IDC is paying in relation  to
   these loans is lower than the markets.
 • Progress on the Joulle project – The  Joulle  project  is  still  in  its
   development phase, where the prototype has been  produced.  The  IDC  has
   however not taken a decision to invest on a commercial scale. The IDC  is
   still  in  the  process  of  assessing  the  risks  and   exploring   the
   possibilities of partnerships. If the IDC finds that the project  is  not
   viable, that it would “walk away” from the project.
 • Investments in bio-fuel – The IDC’s approach are one that underlines non-
   competitiveness with the food industry.
 • IDC’s role in steel pricing –  The  IDC  is  a  minority  shareholder  in
   ArcellorMittal, with the result that it has  little  influence  as  these
   decisions are taken by the majority shareholder.
 • Automotive components – last year the main focus  on  components  was  on
   survival. There are however signs that the in  terms  of  motor  assembly
   plants are moving in the direct direction, where there is an upswing  and
   where  the  IDC  is  in  the  process  of  funding  a  number  of   local
   manufacturers.
 • Developments at Coega – Coega did not develop as expected. The  IDC  does
   not deal with industrial  development  zones  (IDZs).  One  of  the  core
   projects of Coega was the Aluminium Smelter, but due to  the  electricity
   crisis the project had to be canned. The IDC is however looking at  other
   investments in the region. Coega would need more critical mass  in  order
   to be successful as an IDZ.
 • Funding to companies in distress – The uptake of the funding is below the
   expectations of the IDC, with R1.4 billion approved of the  R6.1  billion
   allocated for the period to March 2011. Twenty eight  (28)  companies  in
   distress has been assisted by the IDC.
 • Advocacy campaign regarding funding to companies in distress  –  The  IDC
   had several interviews in a variety of media; it also  had  a  number  of
   workshops, and 20 of these were held with the relevant sectors.
 • Investments in the rest of Africa – according to  the  IDC  there  is  an
   increased demand and the target was exceeded due to the  projects,  which
   required large capital  investments,  for  example  the  sugar  plant  in
   Tanzania.
 • IDC’s percentage of the 500  000  jobs  to  be  created  -  The  IDC  was
   responsible for 8% of the 500 000 jobs to be created. Within this  number
   the IDC only focused on long  term  employment  and  not  on  short  term
   employment.
 • Bonuses to staff – Bonus offered to staff costs in 2009/10 is much  lower
   than what was expected and this affected the figures.
 • The committee noted that more time to scrutinize the Annual Report of the
   IDC should be made as there are still outstanding issues to be  discussed
   with them. A follow-up meeting need to be scheduled with IDC.
8.5.  Khula Enterprise Finance Limited
Khula Enterprise Finance Ltd (Khula) is dedicated  to  the  development  and
sustainability of small businesses in South Africa.  A leader in its  field,
it has a proud history of more than 13 years' service of involvement in  the
rapidly growing and economically vital, small and  medium  enterprise  (SME)
sector.
The company is a wholesale finance institution  which  operates  across  the
public and private sectors, through a network of channels  to  supply  much-
needed funding to small business.  Khula's channels include  South  Africa's
leading commercial banks, retail financial  institutions,  specialist  funds
and joint ventures.  Its primary aim is to bridge the "funding gap"  in  the
SME market not addressed by commercial financial institutions.
Committee observations:
    • Khula’s existence since being established – since Khula’s inception it
      disbursed R2,5 billion. In 2002 the loan book was R34m and in 2010  it
      grew to R640m. Bad debt stood at R40% in 2002 and in 2002 it  declined
      to 12%. The institution grew but  maintained  risk  at  an  acceptable
      level.
    • Mentorship provided by Khula – Khula emphasised  that  the  mentorship
      provided will be intensified, where mentorship  will  become  critical
      with the loans provided. Khula has an agreement with Seda, with regard
      to pre-loans and once these loans are approved Khula will assist.
    • Footprint of Khula – A Memorandum of  Understanding  has  been  signed
      with Seda, since they have a bigger footprint  than  Khula.  The  Post
      Office is also a possible partner in order to extend Khula’s footprint
      throughout the country.
    • Implementation of Khula Direct – The Business Plan  for  Khula  Direct
      was approved in 2008  and  in  2009,  the  modelling  and  design  was
      developed as well as the implementation plan.  It  is  envisaged  that
      Khula Direct will be rolled-out at the beginning of next year.
    • Recovery of debts (‘Bad debts”) – According to Khula, “bad debts” is a
      market wide challenge, and the global economic crisis  contributed  to
      this and when making loans available, it is a systemic risk that Khula
      have to take.
    • Khula’s relationship with Retail Financial Institutions (RFIs) – Khula
      acknowledged that the relationship with RFIs need  to  be  reinforced.
      Khula have developed a booklet which  have  been  distributed  country
      wide, which informs members of the public on how to access  funds  for
      SMEs.  Khula  reiterated  that  it  was  established  as  a  wholesale
      financier, which means it does not lend directly but  where  it  lends
      money to intermediaries, who in turn lend money to businesses.  It  is
      exactly for this reason that the implementation  of  Khula  Direct  is
      fundamental, where they will have a greater impact on SME  development
      in the country.
    • Meetings of the audit committee – the committee  met  four  (4)  times
      during the period under review (in accordance with the PFMA).
   5. South African Micro-finance Apex Fund
The South African Micro-finance Apex Fund (Samaf) is a wholesale  fund  that
distributes its funds through Retail Financial Intermediaries  (RFIs).   The
term  “financial  intermediary”  refers  to  a  wide  range   of   Financial
Institutions dedicated to the provision of small  scale  financial  services
to  the  Enterprising  and  working  poor  households.   It   includes   Non
Governmental  Organizations  (NGOs),   Savings   and   Credit   Cooperatives
(SACCOs),  Financial  Services  Co-operatives  (FSCs),  Co-operative  Banks,
private commercial banks, and non-bank financial institutions (MFIs).

Committee observations:
    • Report of the Auditor-General – Samaf received a qualified report from
      the Auditor-General. The basis for the qualified report referred to: A
      number of  journals  were  passed  during  the  system  implementation
      process; and. Management failed to provide sufficient and  appropriate
      explanation to substantiate journals.
    • Credibility of the information  provided  –  Samaf  acknowledged  that
      certain information needed a survey mechanism, which was lacking,  and
      that certain information was not credible, but they  noted  that  they
      are in the process of putting systems in place to rectify and  address
      these issues.
    • Comments by the Auditor-General’s report – On the  Management  letter,
      Samaf created a matrix  where  employees  are  responsible  for  their
      actions on a  monthly  basis.  They  expect  improvements  after  this
      intervention and assured members that they will  have  an  unqualified
      report.
    • Irregular expenditure by employee – the irregular expenditure occurred
      when an employee went outside of the tender processes to procure,  but
      highlighted that the specific employee  was  unaware  of  the  correct
      procedures to be followed.
    • Material impairments as a write-off – The material impairments were  a
      provision and not a write-off.
    • Capacity building of institutions – Capacity building of institutions,
      by Samaf, will be fundamental in the sustainability and  viability  of
      these institutions.
    • Appointment of 14 interns – Samaf intends  employing  14  interns  who
      will assist with administration work.
    • Revised Human Resource structure proposed – Samaf have reviewed  their
      current structure and new one has been  developed  which  is  awaiting
      approval and one of the reason for the reviewing of the  structure  is
      because provinces need additional staff.
    • Legal action against intermediaries to recover debt – Legal action has
      been taken by Samaf against intermediaries to  recover  debt  owed  to
      Samaf, but Samaf acknowledged that if they do go the  legal  route  to
      recover money owed, that it will certainly be to the  disadvantage  of
      institutions, as this will lead to the closing down of some of them.
    • Information gathering from Financial Intermediaries (FIs) –  Gathering
      the necessary information from FIs remains a challenge for Samaf.
    • Risk  Management  Audit  –  The  Risk  Management  Audit  function  is
      management by an external service provider, whose  services  has  been
      terminated and this function now resides in the office of the CEO.
    • Skills and competencies of the Samaf staff – the initial  staffing  of
      the agency was people who  had  good  social  skills  but  lacked  the
      necessary financial and developmental skills. Samaf is in the  process
      of implementing Project Bokomoto to improve the competencies of staff.
    • Lack of support to institutions in the poorer provinces – Some of  the
      institutions might be in a particular province, they had  distribution
      channels in the other provinces e.g. Marang, which is based in Gauteng
      is also present in 6 other provinces.
    • Committee’s view on the presentation document  –  The  committee  felt
      that the report had to interpretable, supported by reliable  evidence,
      that there should be no incongruent information, and that  Samaf  must
      go back and rework the document, where a  follow-up  meeting  will  be
      scheduled.

8. Findings of the Committee

    • Public awareness of the mechanisms implemented, as agreed to  in  the
      “Framework agreement” remains a concern.
    • Many companies and businesses are unaware of  the  existence  of  the
      Training labour lay-off  scheme  and  the  funding  to  companies  in
      distress provided for by the IDC.
    • While conducting its oversight visits the committee noted that  there
      was little or no coordination between the  funding  to  companies  in
      distress (as provided by the IDC) and the labour lay-off scheme.
    • Members of the public (especially the poorer provinces)  are  unaware
      of  the  existence  of  Khula  and  Samaf  as   development   finance
      institutions.
    • There is a lack of monitoring and evaluation by the  IDC,  Khula  and
      Samaf to institutions/companies it provided funding to.
    • Capacity building initiatives by Samaf and Khula will  be  imperative
      for the sustainability and viability of SMMEs.
    • The Competition Commission still relies to  heavily  on  applications
      received by the public and other stakeholders to  investigate  issues
      of possible collusion.
    • The Competition Commission lacks the necessary  capacity  to  perform
      its mandate optimally.
    • Members of the public are unaware of the work and outcomes  of  cases
      by the Competition Commission.
    • Cooperation and coordination between the Competition  Commission  and
      the Competition Tribunal and other stakeholders will be  critical  if
      the Commission is to work efficiently.
    • The cumbersome process of applying for funding from the DFIs, remains
      an obstacle for funding to broader communities.
    • The public lacks the necessary information relating to the activities
      of  the  Competition   Commission   and   the   International   Trade
      Administration Commission of SA (ITAC).
    • Tender-rigging remains a challenge.
    • There are signs  that  provinces  are  endeavouring  to  align  their
      Provincial Growth and Development Strategies (PGDSs) with that of the
      national plans.
    •  There  is  a  lack  of  coordination  and  cooperation  between  the
      Provincial Department of Economic Development and  municipalities  on
      the development of the Provincial Growth and  Development  Strategies
      (PGDSs)  and   the   Local   Economic   Development   plans   (LEDs),
      respectively.
    • The  establishment  and  creation  of  viable  cooperatives  will  be
      fundamental in eradicating poverty and creating jobs.
    • Khula’s impact will be greater once Khula Direct is implemented.
    • The recapitalisation of Khula Direct will be critical.
    • Coordination and cooperation between the different DFIs is imperative
      for poverty alleviation.
    • The presence and existence of Khula and Samaf in the local  areas  is
      vital for economic development.
    • Khula Direct will be implemented initially as a pilot.
    • The EDD is experiencing challenges with regard  to  the  roll-out  of
      their official website.
    • It takes the EDD 3-4 months to fill a position. The committee  is  of
      the view that this period is too long.
    • The financial performance of the department  (for  the  1st  and  2nd
      quarter) is a concern to the committee.
    • The Green Economy is a sector which will provide jobs to the  poorest
      of the poor, e.g. waste recycling.
    • The EDD is working with the National Treasury on the revision of  the
      Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act.
    • EDD will underspend this financial year.
    • EDD will lead policy issues on e.g. the Green Economy and the  Second
      Economy.
    • A media statement was  made  on  Tuesday,  26  October  2010  on  the
      Framework for the New Growth Path.
    • Information between the EDD and IDC are skewed. Members are concerned
      that  there  might  be  a  communication  gap  between  the  two   as
      information between them does not correlate.
    • Working  relations  with  the  MECs  and  Provincial  Departments  of
      Economic Development is unfolding very positively.
    • With regard to agricultural and rural development, the EDD is working
      closely with the Department of Rural Development, where many jobs  to
      be created in this sector will be in the second economy, according to
      the EDD.
    • The committee commended the EDD for not utilizing  consultants  on  a
      large scale.
    • The EDD has developed a dashboard of  indicators  for  measuring  the
      performance of entities.
    • Initial  research  was  undertaken  by  the  EDD  on  a  Cooperatives
      strategy, where engagements were  held  with  National  Treasury  and
      further consultations with  the  DTI  and  the  International  Labour
      Organisation (ILO).
    • A MOU was drafted with an academic institution to  develop  a  policy
      and monitoring tool relating to the Cooperatives strategy.

9. Conclusion

The Committee is mindful that the department did  not  have  Strategic  Plan
and Budget Vote for the period under review. The first  Strategic  Plan  and
Budget Vote of the newly established Department of Economic were  tabled  in
Parliament during March 2010.

The Committee is however satisfied with  the  progress  and  development  to
date regarding the work and  activities  of  the  EDD  during  this  period,
taking  into  consideration  the  lack  of  human   resources   within   the
department.  The  committee  is  of  the  view  that  the  staffing  of  the
department must be priority area for the department.

The committee is concerned about underspending in the 1st and 2nd  Quarterly
Performance Reports, due to the non-filling of vacancies, which resulted  in
some of the programmes not spending at all.
11.   Recommendations of the Committee in respect of the Department
The Committee recommends the following to the Department:
With regard to the Green Economy
    • The possible expansion of the Green  Economy  should  not  unnecessary
      impact negatively on jobs in the sectors of the economy  that  can  be
      categorised as carbon intensive.
    • Focus should not only be on the impact by individuals and  households,
      but on big industry that have a major impact on the carbon emissions.
    • A major focus of the Green Economy should be towards  development  and
      job creation whilst preserving the economy.
    • The role of Research  and  Development  (R&D)  should  be  to  develop
      technology that will enable/gear towards accelerated economic  growth,
      employment creation and  development  of  our  people  especially  the
      working class and the poor.
    • Emphasis should be placed on incentivised usage of green products  and
      services
Lack of information
    • There is a necessity for the Economic Development Department (EDD) and
      the entities to ensure that information flows to the various levels of
      society and stakeholders.
    • The advocacy campaign of the IDC, relating to its funding to companies
      in distress should be strengthened and reinforced in all provinces.
    • There is a necessity for Khula and Samaf to be located in  all  areas,
      especially rural areas.
Capacity building
    • The Department and its entities should fill vacancies as a  matter  of
      urgency in order to fulfil their mandate as required.
    • The recruitment processes (3-4 months) of the department are too  time
      consuming, and should  be  reduced  to  be  able  to  meet  indicative
      timeframes.
Coordination and Cooperation
    • The department must ensure that coordination and cooperation among the
      three  spheres  of  government  to  be  prioritised  relating  to  the
      alignment of the national plans with that of the Provincial Growth and
      Development Strategies (PGDSs)  and  the  Local  Economic  Development
      plans (LEDs).
    • The department should ensure the  integration  of  its  programmes  is
      prioritised.
    • Better coordination and cooperation must be  fostered  among  all  the
      entities of EDD.
    • The department should ensure that  interdepartmental  cooperation  and
      coordination is addressed, as this will be critical  relating  to  the
      achievement of the Competition Commission’s mandate.
    • The department should ensure that the activities performed by the DFIs
      are duplicated, in other words activities must be streamlined on their
      specific areas of focus.
Finance
    • The department should ensure that  appropriate  measures  are  put  in
      place to ensure that there is no underspending by the end of financial
      year 2010/11.
    • Development Finance Institutions should allocate more funds  to  focus
      on the establishment of cooperatives in the various provinces.
    • The department, in conjunction with the IDC  should  examine  lowering
      the cost of  funding,  specifically  the  interest  rates  charged  to
      companies.
    • The department should ensure  that  programmes,  as  set  out  in  its
      Strategic Plan, be adequately funded.
    • The department should assist  and  guide  Khula  with  regard  to  the
      recapitalisation of the Khula Direct model.
    • The department should ensure that  transfers  to  entities  are  fully
      spent towards its allocated purpose.
    • Development Finance Institutions should ensure that  the  disbursement
      of funds is biased towards the poorer provinces  in  order  to  ensure
      equity in the distribution thereof (balance should be  struck  between
      the richer and poorer provinces).
General
    • Those companies funded should be monitored and assisted with mentoring
      and coaching programmes.
    • The dashboard of indicators developed by the EDD should be simplified.
    • DFIs should relax the bureaucratic processes associated  with  funding
      application criteria in order to enable broader access.
    • The EDD with the DTI, through the IDC, should address the  high  steel
      prices.
    • The EDD should assist in ensuring  that  the  IDC  remain  within  its
      primary mandate, i.e. industrial development with  a  major  focus  on
      rural and urban areas.

Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

     1) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 16 November 2010:


          a) Geoscience Amendment Bill [B 12B – 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


          b) Division of Revenue Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).

National Assembly

The Speaker
   1. Referral of Bill to Committee

        a) The Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B34-2010] is hereby referred
           to the Standing Committee on Appropriations in terms of section
           12(19) of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters
           Act, 2009 (Act No 9 of 2009).

2.    Membership of Committees

      The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees:

      National Assembly Rules Committee


      Discharged: Chohan, F I
      Appointed: Malale, M I


      Discharged: Martins, B A D
      Appointed: Mdakane, M R


      Discharged: Sotyu, M M
      Appointed: Sibhida, N N


      Discharged: Thabethe, E
      Appointed: September, C C


      Discharged: Thomson, B
      Appointed: Gaum, A H

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Draft notice and schedule determining the rate, with effect
        from 1 April 2010, at which salaries, allowances and benefits are
        payable to Constitutional Court Judges and Judges annually, for
        approval by Parliament in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges’
        Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of
        2001).

    (b)     Draft notice and schedule determining the rate, with effect
        from 1 April 2010, at which salaries, allowances and benefits are
        payable to magistrates annually, for approval by Parliament in
        terms of section 12(3) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
        1993).

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development for consideration and report.

2.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Debt
        Collectors for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.

     b) Proclamation No R.54 published in Government Gazette No 33576 dated
        17 September 2010: Commencement in terms of the Reform of Customary
        Law of Succession and Regulation of Related Matters Act, 2009 (Act
        No 11 of 2009).


    (c)     Proclamation No R.57 published in Government Gazette No 33605
        dated 1 October 2010: Commencement in terms of the Criminal
        Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 65 of 2008).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.868 published in Government Gazette No
        33605 dated 1 October 2010: Designation of correctional facilities
        in terms of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51of 1977).


    (e)     General Notice No 800 published in Government Gazette No 33459
        dated 18 August 2010: Notice in terms of section 23 (1) and (2) in
        terms of the Counterfeit Goods Act, 1997 (Act No 37 of 1997).


    (f)     Proclamation No R.45 published in Government Gazette No 33550
        dated 10 September 2010: Commencement  of sections 10, 13, 14, 15
        and 16 of the Act in terms of  the Judicial Matters Amendment  Act,
        2008 (Act No 66 of 2008).


3.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Government  Employees
        Pension Fund for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
        for 2009-2010.


National Assembly


1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Public Protector Report No 22 of 2010-11  on  an  investigation
        into complaints relating to  misconduct  and  maladministration  in
        connection with the affairs of the Commission for Gender Equality.


        Referred to the Ad Hoc  Committee  on  the  Commission  for  Gender
        Equality Forensic Investigation for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Standing Committee on  Finance  on  the  2010  Medium  Term
   Budget Policy Statement, dated 16 November 2010
The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered the  2010  Medium  Term
Budget Policy Statement, reports as follows:

1. Introduction and Background

The Minister of Finance (the Minister) tabled the 2010  Medium  Term  Budget
Policy Statement (MTBPS) before Parliament on 27 October  2010.  In  tabling
the MTBPS, the Minister met his obligation under section 28  of  the  Public
Finance Management Act 1 of 1999 (PFMA) that requires the Minister to  table
multi-year budget  projections  for  revenue,  expenditure  and  key  macro-
economic projections on an annual basis. In addition to that,  the  Minister
also met his obligation under section 6(1)  of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act 9 of 2009 (henceforth referred to  as  the
Money Bills Act) that requires the Minister  to  submit  to  Parliament  the
MTBPS.

According to section 6(5) of the Money Bills Act, the Standing Committee  on
Finance and Select Committee on Finance (the Committees) must 30 days  after
the tabling of MTBPS report to the National Assembly (NA) and  the  National
Council of Provinces (NCOP), respectively, on the proposed fiscal  framework
for the  next  three  financial  years.  In  line  with  section  6(2),  the
Committees report on a revised fiscal framework for the 2010/2011  financial
year and the proposed fiscal framework for the following  three  years;  and
an explanation  of  the  macro-economic  and  fiscal  policy  position,  the
macroeconomic  projections  and  the  assumptions  underpinning  the  fiscal
framework.

Following the tabling  of  the  2010  MTBPS  and  the  engagement  with  the
Minister,  the  Committees  held  hearings  on  10  and  11  November  2010,
receiving submissions from a  panel  of  economists,  organised  labour  and
organised business. This report reflects the main themes emerging  from  the
engagement with the Minister, economists,  organised  labour  and  organised
business. This report includes two main sections, namely:  Economic  Outlook
and Policy, and Fiscal Trends  and  Policy.  The  former  section  gives  an
overview of economic outlook and  policy  with  specific  reference  to  key
macro-economic indicators within the context of the current global  economic
environment. The latter section provides details of fiscal policy  over  the
Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF)  with  specific  reference  to  the
fiscal stance adopted by government.

2. The 2010 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement
Basically, the 2010 MTBPS provides an  account  of  current  trends  in  the
economy, the medium-term  outlook,  overview  of  macroeconomic  and  fiscal
considerations, and a summary of government’s spending plans for the  period
ahead. The MTBPS therefore sets out  Government’s  spending  plans  for  the
next three fiscal years, based  on  certain  macroeconomic  assumptions.  In
doing so, there is usually  a  wide  range  of  aspects  to  be  taken  into
account.   The  2010  MTBPS  covered  six  broad  themes,  namely:  economic
assumptions, fiscal framework, spending  priorities,  division  of  revenue,
changes to conditional grants and the mid-term report on spending.
3. Job Creation and Economic Growth

In order to meet the developmental needs of  South  Africa  a  new  economic
growth path needs to be developed in consultation with all  social  partners
across several frontiers;  which  includes  education,  skills  development,
national  health  insurance,   land   and   agrarian   reform,   residential
settlements  and  urban  renewal,  environment  management,   infrastructure
investment  and  maintenance,  enterprise  development,  and  public  sector
service delivery. However, before the implementation, there will be  a  need
for some ground work to be done in the public sector and private  sector  in
terms of coordinating public policy and market regulations.  The 2010  MTBPS
indicated the need to raise the economy onto a more labour intensive  method
to create jobs across the board. The economic growth  does  not  assist  the
economy when there are less job  opportunities  being  created.  This  means
that  the  policy  debate  goes  beyond  the  macroeconomic  and   financial
challenges to include the social component.

The 2010 MTBPS outlines the macroeconomic,  fiscal  and  public  expenditure
dimensions of the proposed development path.  It  emphasised  the  need  for
the increase on infrastructure investment spending for faster growth and  to
reduce the budget deficit over the next period. The discipline in  financial
management in the public sector and improved education,  health,  and  other
infrastructure programmes is crucial. There is  a  need  for  the  following
factors to be agreed upon by government and its social partners:

 • Strengthening labour market  institutions  should  include  improved  and
   expanded further education and training opportunities, placement services
   and to increase the demand for labour;
 • An integrated approach in financing some of the  economic  infrastructure
   investment such as development enterprise, housing and farming support;
 • The enhanced industrial policy action plan which incorporates  industrial
   development and promotion, support for small businesses and  other  local
   opportunities;
 • More competition is required for certain industries  such  as  transport,
   communication and electricity;
 • The economic development of South  Africa  needs  to  be  linked  to  the
   African continent for improved economic performance; and
 • Improved service delivery is of great importance and  this  can  only  be
   possible  through  good  financial  management,  control  systems,   good
   governance, proper budgeting and well managed contractors to deliver  the
   agreed output or targets.

Crucial issues to be addressed  during  this  MTEF  period  include  how  to
increase job-creating growth. Other issues are promoting appropriate  budget
balance and to deal with capital flows and  the  resultant  appreciation  of
the rand.

The 2010 MTBPS re-affirms the  important  role  of  the  private  sector  in
growth and employment creation. While social  grants  provide  an  important
safety net for about a quarter of the population, South  Africa’s  long-term
prosperity depends on more people being drawn into work. The private  sector
accounts for 75 per cent of all economic  activity  and  a  slightly  higher
share of employment, and will remain the primary driver  for  job  creation.
The public sector plays a complementary role in this  process.  Alongside  a
range of initiatives to increase training and skills  development,  specific
government interventions to raise  employment  include  an  expanded  public
works program and a youth job imitative.

4. Macroeconomic Forecast

National Treasury reports  that  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  growth  is
expected to moderate in the second half of the 2010/11 financial  year.  The
2010 MTBPS indicates that, although the economy has  gained  strength  since
the budget was tabled at the beginning of the 2010/11  financial  year,  the
growth outlook has so far improved. This is evident from the  new  projected
economic growth, which is expected to be between 3 to 3.5 per  cent  in  the
2011 calendar year. The recovery in revenue and moderate  growth  in  public
spending is expected to  decrease  the  fiscal  deficit.  For  example,  the
estimated deficit  of  5.3  per  cent  of  GDP  projected  for  the  2010/11
financial year is projected  to  decline  to  3  per  cent  in  the  2013/14
financial year. The 2010 MTBPS  also  projects  that  government  debt  will
stabilise to 40 per cent of GDP by the  2015  calendar  year.  It  was  also
noted that  expenditure  has  increased  by  R67  billion  relative  to  the
baseline over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).   This  increase
in expenditure has been informed by the 12 outcome policy  priorities  which
include education, health, infrastructure, and job creation.

Inflation is expected to remain below  6  per  cent  over  the  Medium  Term
Expenditure  Framework  (MTEF)  while  private  investment  and   employment
recover gradually. Business Unity South Africa (BUSA) agrees that  inflation
forecasts with headline Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation is expected  to
remain below 6 per cent  over  the  next  three  years  are  realistic,  but
indicated that it remains  essential  to  successfully  anchor  inflationary
expectations. According to BUSA, lower  inflation  presents  an  opportunity
for the use  of  monetary  policy  to  further  support  economic  activity.
According to BUSA, growth prospects are expected to be driven  by  household
consumption and gross  fixed  capital  formation  and  will  undoubtedly  be
assisted by lower inflation.

The 2010 MTBPS indicates that  sustained  exchange  rate  appreciation  will
lead  to  unbalanced  growth,  widening  the  current  account  deficit  and
increasing  the  economy’s  vulnerability  to  shocks.   Table   1   (below)
summarises the key macroeconomic projections  inclusive  of  2007  and  2013
calendar years.

Table 1: Macroeconomic Projections 2007 - 2013
|Calendar Year  |2007         2008  |2010   |2011         2012  |
|               |2009               |Estimat|2013               |
|               |Actual             |e      |Forecast           |
|Percentage change unless otherwise indicated                    |
|Final    |5.5                     |2.4      |-3.1                      |
|household|                        |         |                          |
|consumpti|                        |         |                          |
|on       |                        |         |                          |
|Revenue     |625.7               |684.8   |666.9                |
|Percentage  |30.1%               |29.5%   |27.2%                |
|of GDP      |                    |        |                     |
|Domestic Debt      |                      |                |
|Gross loan debt    |480.8                 |529.7           |
|Less: Cash balance |93.8                  |101.3           |
|Net loan debt      |387.0                 |428.4           |
|Mr. Pravin J.      |Minister of Finance   |National        |
|Gordhan            |                      |Treasury        |
|Mr. Nhlanhla Nene  |Deputy Minister of    |National        |
|                   |Finance               |Treasury        |
|Mr. Lesetja.       |Director-General      |National        |
|Kganyago           |                      |Treasury        |
|Mr Oupa Magashula  |Commissioner          |SARS            |
|Mr. Kenneth Brown  |Deputy                |National        |
|                   |Director-General:     |Treasury        |
|                   |Intergovernmental     |                |
|                   |relations             |                |
|Mr. Andrew         |Deputy                |National        |
|Donaldson          |Director-General:     |Treasury        |
|                   |Public Finances       |                |
|Mr Lumkile Mondi   |Chief Economist       |Industrial      |
|                   |                      |Development     |
|                   |                      |Corporation     |
|                   |                      |(IDC)           |
|Mr. Dawie Roodt    |Chief Economist       |Efficient       |
|                   |                      |Financial       |
|                   |                      |Holdings        |
|Prof. Raymond      |Deputy Chief Executive|BUSA            |
|Parsons            |                      |                |
|Ms. Simi Siwisa    |Director: Economic    |BUSA            |
|                   |Policy                |                |
|Mr.Coenraad        |Parliamentary Officer |Business        |
|Bezuidenhout       |                      |Parliamentary   |
|                   |                      |Office          |
|Ms.Prakashnee      |Parliamentary Officer |COSATU          |
|Govender           |                      |                |
|Mr. Sidney Kgara   |Parliamentary Officer |NEHAWU          |
|Mr. Woody Aroun    |Parliamentary Officer |NUMSA           |
|Mr. Dennis George  |General Secretary     |FEDUSA          |
|Mr. Len Verwey     |Budget Manager        |IDASA           |

The written submissions by the above-mentioned organisations  are  available
on request from the Committee Secretariat.

13. References

BUSA, (2010), Medium Term  Budget  Policy  Statement:  Presentation  to  the
portfolio Committee on Finance, Cape Town, 10 November 2010.

COSATU, (2010),  COSATU  Expectations  on  the  Medium  Term  Budget  policy
Statement, Cape Town, dated 10 November, 2010.

George, D. (2010),  Powerpoint  presentation  on  FEDUSA  2010  Medium  Term
Budget Policy Statement Comments. The Joint Portfolio Committee on  Finance,
dated 11 November 2010.

George, D. (2010), FEDUSA Submission on the 2010 Medium Term  Budget  Policy
Statement, Cape Town, 11 November 2010.

Gordhan, P. (2010), Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  2010’s  Speech,
Parliament of RSA, Cape Town, 27 October 2010.

IDASA, (2010), Perspectives on  the  2010  MTBPS.   A  Presentation  to  the
Finance Committees, Cape Town, 11 November 2010.
Mondi, L. (2010), Impact of  reforming  exchange  rate  system  on  economic
policy & broader policies: Some thoughts. A  presentation  to  the  Standing
Committee on Finance and Select Committee  on  Finance,  dated  10  November
2010.

National Treasury, (2010) Medium Term  Budget  Policy  Statement,  Pretoria:
Government Printers.

National  Treasury,   (2010),   Medium   Term   Budget   Policy   Statement:
Presentation to Parliament, Cape Town, 28 October 2010.

NUMSA, (2010), Submission to the Joint Meeting of the Standing Committee  on
Finance & Select Committee  on  Finance,  (National  Assembly  and  National
Council of Provinces): The Treasury and  SARB  are  failing  to  manage  our
economy to promote growth and  development-  we  need  much  lower  interest
rates and tighter exchange controls!

PBC, (2010), Submission of the Peoples  Budget  Coalition  to  the  Standing
Committee on Finance and Select Committee on  Finance  on  the  Medium  Term
Budget Policy Statement, dated 10 November 2010.

Roodt, D. (2010), The new Keynesian world and the MTBPS. A  Presentation  to
the Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance, dated  10
November 2010.

Verwey, L.; T. Dlamini, S. Durham, J Sylvester, and M. Zamisa,  (2010),  The
2010 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement:  Determining  the  limits  of  the
possible: A closer look at the 2010 MTBPS. PIMS Budget paper 8, Idasa.

Report to be considered.

2.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the provisional suspension from office  of  Magistrate  FR
   Rambau, dated 16 November 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the lifting of  the  provisional  suspension  of
   Magistrate FR Rambau, a regional magistrate  at  Polokwane,  pending  the
   outcome of an  investigation  into  his  fitness  to  hold  office  as  a
   magistrate, reports as follows:

   1) 0n 8 February 2010,  the  Regional  Court  President  of  the  Limpopo
      Province informed the Commission that Mr Rambau, a regional magistrate
      at Polokwane, had been arrested for corruption on 5 February 2010.  Mr
      Rambau was arrested together with the prosecutor and an  attorney.  It
      is alleged that Mr Rambau, the prosecutor and  the  attorney  arranged
      the outcome of a trial by pre-determining the sentence  for  financial
      reward.

   2) Mr Rambau and his co-accused appeared in the Musina District Court  on
      8 February 2010 on charges of corruption. The matter was set down  for
      11 to 13 October 2010.

   3) On 8 February 2010, the Ethics Division of the Magistrates  Commission
      informed Mr Rambau in writing that the  Commission  was  contemplating
      recommending that he be provisionally suspended from  office,  pending
      the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to  hold  office.  He
      was requested to show cause, in writing, why such  a  decision  should
      not be taken.

   4) At its  meeting  held  on  26  August  2010,  the  Commission,  having
      considered Mr Rambau’s response, resolved to  advise  the  Minster  to
      provisionally suspend Mr  Rambau  from  office  in  terms  of  section
      13(3)(a) of the Act. The Commission is  of  the  view  that  that  the
      charges against Mr Rambau are of such a serious nature as to  make  it
      inappropriate for him to  continue  to  perform  the  functions  of  a
      Magistrate  while  the  allegations  are   being   investigated.   The
      Commission is of the view that the alleged conduct by MR Rambau  s  of
      such a serious nature that it would justify his removal from office if
      he were found guilty of the misconduct charges preferred against him.

   5) In light of the above, the Minster decided to provisionally suspend Mr
      Rambau from office pending the outcome of an  investigation  into  his
      fitness to hold office of a Magistrate.

Recommendation

Having considered the report on the provisional suspension of Magistrate  FR
Rambau, the Committee recommends that the  National  Assembly  confirms  the
provisional suspension.

Report to be considered.

3.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the provisional suspension from  office  of  Magistrate  L
   Skrenya, dated 16 November 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on  the  provisional  suspension  of  Magistrate  L
   Skrenya, a Magistrate at Cala, pending the outcome  of  an  investigation
   into his fitness to hold office as a magistrate, reports as follows:
   1) Mr Skrenya is a Magistrate and Judicial Head at Cala. On 5 August 2009
      the Director of Public Prosecutions: Transkei directed that Mr Skrenya
      be prosecuted on a charge of fraud.

   2) On 18 September 2009, Mr Skrenya appeared in the Cala District  Court.
      The criminal case was postponed on various occasions and was  remanded
      to 21 and 22 September 2010 for trial. The criminal charge  flow  from
      misrepresentations that Mr Skrenya made to his  sub-cluster  head,  Mr
      Mthimkulu: On 24 April, Mr Skrenya claimed he used his private vehicle
      on an official trip from Cala to Dordrecht and submitted a claim for a
      transport allowance but, in fact, he used  a  government  vehicle.  He
      was, therefore, not  entitled  to  submit  any  claim  for  travelling
      allowance.

   3) A preliminary investigation  conducted  into  other  complaints  filed
      against Mr Skrenya found prima facie evidence that, on 12 May 2009, he
      irregularly refused to adhere  to  a  request  by  the  Prosecutor  to
      withdraw a criminal charge  against  an  accused  before  a  plea  was
      tendered, meru moto postponed the case to 30  June  2009  and  ordered
      that the accused be kept in custody. This decision was later set aside
      by the High Court on special  review.  His  conduct  resulted  in  the
      Minster of Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  being  sued  for
      damages. It is further alleged that Mr Skrenya held a  criminal  court
      which was not  properly  constituted  and  the  he  postponed  various
      criminal cases in chambers in the absence of the prosecutor.

   4) On 26 October 2009, the Commission informed Mr  Skrenya  that  it  was
      contemplating recommending that he  be  provisionally  suspended  from
      office pending the outcome of an investigation  into  his  fitness  to
      hold office. He was requested to show cause why  the  decision  should
      not be taken. In his response, he indicated that there was no need  to
      provisionally  suspend  him  as  there  was  no  possibility  of   him
      interfering  with  the  criminal  and  misconduct  investigations.  He
      further indicated that he never at any  stage  had  the  intention  to
      defraud the State of any money. He was of the view that the complaints
      were levelled against him because his sub-cluster  head  “is  pregnant
      with hatred towards him”.

   5) On 26 August 2010, the  Commission,  having  considered  Mr  Skrenya’s
      response, resolved to advise the Minister to provisionally suspend him
      from office in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Act.

   6) The Commission is of the view that the alleged misconduct  against  Mr
      Skrenya is of such a serious nature as to make  it  inappropriate  for
      him to perform the functions of a magistrate while the allegations are
      being investigated. It would be inappropriate for a judicial  officer,
      appearing as an accused before a court of law on a charge of fraud  to
      still sit on the Bench.

   7) The Committee expressed its dissatisfaction  at  the  amount  of  time
      taken by the Commission to finalise the matter.

Recommendation

Having considered the Report on the provisional suspension of  Magistrate  L
Skrenya, the Committee recommends that the  National  Assembly  confirm  the
provisional suspension.

Report to be considered.

1)  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate  IWOM
   Morake, dated 16 November 2010:
   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the lifting of  the  provisional  suspension  of
   Magistrate IWOM Morake, a Magistrate at Lichtenburg, pending the  outcome
   of an investigation into his fitness to  hold  office  as  a  magistrate,
   reports as follows:

   1) Mr Morake is a Magistrate and Judicial Head  at  Lichtenburg.  Several
      complaints were lodged with  the  Magistrates  Commission  against  Mr
      Morake. The allegations were as follows:
    • Attorneys Ranamane Phungo Inc alleged that Mr  Morake  had  personally
      called their client into his office and instructed her to  vacate  the
      property she was occupying. This instruction was given to her although
      there was no eviction application before the court; no eviction  order
      had been made by the court;  nor  had  she  consented  to  vacate  the
      property.
    • The Provincial Head of the South  African  Police  Detective  Service,
      North West, requested that the Commission investigate a complaint made
      by  one  of  its  members  against  Mr  Morake.  The  member  was  the
      Investigating Officer (IO) in a stock theft matter and had arrested  a
      suspect in the case in Lichtenburg. The suspect was charged,  appeared
      before the Lichtenburg Magistrate’s Court and the matter was remanded.
      The IO alleges that a week prior to the remand date he  was  contacted
      by Mr Morake and ordered to appear before him at his office. Mr Morake
      threatened to issue a warrant for his arrest if he failed  to  do  so.
      The IO complied with the instruction and  attended  the  meeting.  The
      accused was also present at the meeting. Mr Morake asked the IO if  he
      would assist the accused. The IO refused.  He  later  stated  that  he
      found the conduct of Mr Morake unusual and threatening.
    • A complaint was received from Legal and  Tax  Services  (Pty)  Ltd  (a
      legal expense insurance company) through the Chief Magistrate  of  the
      North West Administrative Region. It is alleged  that  Legal  and  Tax
      Services had paid Mr Morake R950 to assist their client  to  secure  a
      loan. Mr Morake failed to secure the loan.  They  requested  that  the
      payment be refunded.
    • In another incident,  it  was  alleged  that  Mr  Morake  contacted  a
      businessman, Mr Shohag and ordered him to see Mr Morake at his office.
      Mr Shohag was threatened with  arrest  if  he  failed  to  attend  the
      meeting. Mr Shohag initially ignored the  instruction  but  was  later
      visited by three police officers who informed him  that  his  employee
      had a problem with him and he had to go and see Mr Morake  about  this
      issue. Subsequently Mr Shohag and his two  partners  went  to  see  Mr
      Morake at his office as instructed.  Mr  Shohag’s  employee  was  also
      present. Mr Morake forced Mr Shohag to sign an agreement that  he  (Mr
      Shohag) would conduct business with his employee. Mr Morake threatened
      Mr Shohag with deportation back to Bangladesh if he failed  to  follow
      the instructions. Mr Shohag later obtained  an  interdict  against  Mr
      Morake and reported the incident to the SAPS Organised Crime Unit.

   2) On 13 July 2007, Mr Morake appeared in the Lichtenburg District  Court
      on three charges of theft. The matter was postponed to 18 October 2010
      for judgment.

   3) Mr Morake became involved  in  a  dispute  involving  the  payment  of
      arrears in respect of electricity in the amount of R 1 173. He order a
      woman involved in the matter to come to his office with  her  husband.
      The other party  was  also  present  during  the  meeting.  Mr  Morake
      insisted that the woman pay the outstanding amount to  him  personally
      rather than to the municipality. He threatened to lock her in jail  if
      she did not comply with his instructions. A few days  later  she  paid
      him the money on the understanding that he would pay the money to  the
      other party in the dispute. Weeks later she was summoned to the  Small
      Claims Court for payment of the amount of R1 173. The other party  had
      not received the money. When she followed up with Mr  Morake  he  made
      various excuses and finally stated that somebody had taken  the  money
      from his office.

   4) On 10 February 2010, the Magistrates Commission informed Mr Morake  in
      writing that the Commission was contemplating recommending that he  be
      provisionally  suspended  from  office  pending  the  outcome  of   an
      investigation into his fitness to hold office.  He  was  requested  to
      show why the decision should not be taken.

   5) On 26 August 2010,  the  Commission,  having  considered  Mr  Morake’s
      response received on 25 February 2010, resolved to advise the  Minster
      to again provisionally suspend Mr  Morake  from  office  in  terms  of
      section 13(3)(a) of the Act. The Commission is of the  view  that  the
      existing evidence against Mr Morake is of such a serious nature as  to
      make it inappropriate for him to perform the functions of a magistrate
      while  the  allegations  are   being   investigated.   It   would   be
      inappropriate for a judicial officer, appearing as an accused before a
      court of law in charges of theft, emanating from complaints within the
      district he is serving, to sit on the Bench.

   6) The Commission holds the view that the existing  evidence  against  Mr
      Morake is of such a serious nature that it would justify  his  removal
      from office should he  be  found  guilty  of  the  misconduct  charges
      preferred against him.

Recommendation

Having considered the Report on the  provisional  suspension  of  Magistrate
IWOM Morake, the Committee recommends that  the  National  Assembly  confirm
the provisional suspension.

Report to be considered.

5.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the lifting of the provisional suspension from  office  of
   Magistrate MK Chauke, dated 16 November 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the uplifting of the provisional  suspension  of
   Magistrate MK Chauke, a Magistrate at Pretoria, reports as follows:

1)    Mr Chauke appeared before the Specialised Commercial Crime Court on  a
      charge of theft of a number of containers from  Vitamine  Laboratories
      on 18 September 2004.

   2) On 8 November 2007, Mr Chauke, his wife  and  son  were  convicted  of
      contravening section 37 of the General Laws Amendment Act 62 of  1955.
      They were all sentenced to 12 months  imprisonment,  suspended  for  a
      period of 5 years on condition that they are not  again  convicted  of
      contravening section 37 of the Act during the period of suspension.

   3)  The  Minister,  on  the  advice  of   the   Magistrates   Commission,
      provisionally suspended Mr Chauke  from  office  with  effect  from  5
      February 2010. The suspension was recommended based on  three  charges
      of misconduct namely, the criminal conviction above; contravening  the
      Regulations for Judicial Officers  in  the  Lower  Courts,  1994;  and
      contravening the Code of Conduct for Magistrates. The  suspension  was
      confirmed by  both  Houses  of  Parliament  on  1  and  4  June  2010,
      respectively.

   4) On 20 November 2007, Mr Chauke’s attorneys advised the Commission that
      they were instructed to appeal against his  criminal  conviction.  The
      appeal was heard on 15 June 2010. Mr Chauke’s conviction and  sentence
      were set aside. The Commission, after studying the judgement,  decided
      not to proceed with  the  misconduct  charge  based  on  the  criminal
      charge.

   5) The Commission proceeded with a misconduct inquiry in respect  of  the
      remaining two charges of misconduct. It was alleged  that  during  the
      period October 2002 to July 2004, during  and  after  official  office
      hours, Mr Chauke retained  and  forwarded  e-mails  to  other  persons
      containing explicit pornographic  material  on  and  from  a  computer
      supplied to him  by  the  Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development for the exclusive use in the  execution  of  his  official
      duties as a magistrate. It was also alleged that he used the  computer
      to access internet sites containing explicit pornographic  or  obscene
      material.

   6) After considering the evidence placed before him at the  inquiry,  the
      Presiding Officer found Mr Chauke guilty in respect of failing to  act
      at all times in a manner which upholds and  promotes  the  good  name,
      dignity  and  esteem  of  the  office  of   a   magistrate   and   the
      administration of justice. He was acquitted on the other count in that
      it was duplication. The Presiding Officer postponed the imposition  of
      a sanction for a period of 12 months on certain conditions in terms of
      regulation 26(17)(a) of the Regulations for Judicial Officers  in  the
      Lower Courts, 1994.

   7) Since the criminal conviction of theft, which formed the basis  of  Mr
      Chauke’s provisional suspension, has been set aside by the High Court,
      Mr Chauke’s further  provisional  suspension  is  not  justified.  The
      nature and seriousness of the charge of misconduct  on  which  he  was
      found guilty does not warrant his provisional suspension  either,  and
      the sentence imposed does not impact on his fitness to hold office.

   8) As the basis for Mr Chauke’s provisional suspension fell  away,  there
      is no reason to uphold his provisional suspension.

Recommendation

Having considered the report on the lifting of  the  provisional  suspension
of  Magistrate  MK  Chauke,  the  Committee  recommends  that  the  National
Assembly confirms the lifting of the provisional suspension.

Report to be considered.

6.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the suspension from office of Magistrate MN Jassiem, dated
   16 November 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the suspension  of  Magistrate  MN  Jassiem,  an
   additional Magistrate at Mitchells Plain, reports as follows:

1)    On 9 October 2006, 28 August 2007  and  again  23  November  2009,  Mr
    Jassiem wrote to the Magistrates Commission  for  approval  to  run  his
    practice as an attorney while permanently appointed as a Magistrate.

 2) At its meetings held on 23 August 2007, the Commission resolved  not  to
    approve Mr Jassiem’s request to be allowed to practise as  an  attorney.
    The Judicial Head of the  Administrative  Region  was  informed  of  the
    Commission’s resolution on 12 September 2007 and was asked to inform  Mr
    Jassiem accordingly.

 3) It appears that  Mr  Jassiem  was  duly  notified  of  the  Commission’s
    resolution. The Commission has, however,  noted  with  concern  that  Mr
    Jassiem is apparently still practising as an attorney  and  that  he  is
    therefore deliberately in defiance of a decision by the Commission  that
    he not allowed to practise as an attorney while holding  the  office  of
    Magistrate.

 4) From the contents of an affidavit dated 17 September 2009, received from
    the Senior Legal Officer of the Cape Law Society, it appears that:

         o Mr Jassiem ceased practising as an attorney on  9  October  2000
           but recommenced to practise for own account as  MN  Jassiem  and
           Associates from 1 November 2006.
         o He is the sole partner in the firm.
         o There are no  other  practitioners  at  the  firm  and  that  he
           personally applied for a Fidelity  Fund  Certificate  for  2007,
           2008, 2009 and 2010.
         o He is in possession of a 2010 Fidelity Fund Certificate and that
           he submitted an unqualified trust account audit for  the  period
           ending 28 February 2009 for MN Jassiem and Associates.

   5)  After  considering  the  contents  of  the  affidavit   and   further
      correspondence received from the Cape Law Society, the Chairperson  of
      the Commission directed the Secretariat to request Mr Jassiem to  give
      reasons why he should not be charged with misconduct for  deliberately
      defying a decision taken by the Commission  on  23  August  2007.  The
      Commission wrote to Mr Jassiem on 12 November 2009.
   6) Mr Jassiem was charged  with  misconduct  on  11  December  2009.  The
      misconduct inquiry commenced on 26 April 2010. He elected  to  conduct
      his own defence.

   7) Although Mr Jassiem initially pleaded guilty to the main  charge,  his
      plea was altered to one of not guilty as he indicated  that  he  never
      ran any practice as an attorney but was doing conveyancing and  estate
      administration.

   8) In his judgment, the Presiding Officer found Mr Jassiem dishonest:  He
      had misled the Cape Law Society indicating in  writing  on  8  October
      2006 that he  had  the  Commission’s  permission  to  practise  as  an
      attorney. He had also misled his  Judicial  Head  of  Office  and  his
      conduct showed lack of integrity as an officer of the court.

   9) After considering all the evidence presented before him, the Presiding
      Officer found Mr Jassiem guilty of misconduct on the  main  count  and
      recommended that he be removed from office in terms of  regulation  of
      26(17)(b) of the  Regulations  for  Judicial  Officers  in  the  Lower
      Courts, 1994. The findings show Mr Jassiem’s  lack  of  integrity  and
      honesty and that he is, therefore, unsuited to hold the  office  of  a
      Magistrate. Mr  Jassiem  was  given  an  opportunity  to  furnish  the
      Commission with written representations in  respect  of  the  sanction
      recommended by the Presiding Officer.

  10) At its  meeting  held  on  26  August  2010,  the  Commission,  having
      considered relevant documents  as  required  in  terms  of  regulation
      26(22) read with regulation 26(19) of  the  Regulations  for  Judicial
      Officers in Lower Courts, 1994, the Commission resolved to accept  the
      findings of the Presiding Officer and to recommend to the Minister  of
      Justice and Constitutional  Development  to  remove  Mr  Jassiem  from
      office on the grounds of misconduct in terms of section 13(4)(a)(i) of
      the Magistrates Act, 1993.

Recommendation

Having considered the report on the suspension  of  Magistrate  MN  Jassiem,
the  Committee  recommends  that  the   National   Assembly   confirms   the
suspension.

Report to be considered.

7.  Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and   Constitutional
   Development on the lifting of the provisional suspension from  office  of
   Magistrate WJM Prinsloo, dated 16 November 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having
   considered the report on the lifting of  the  provisional  suspension  of
   Magistrate WJM Prinsloo, a magistrate at Ermelo, reports as follows:

   1)  The  Minister,  on  the  advice  of   the   Magistrates   Commission,
      provisionally suspended Mr Prinsloo from office  with  effect  from  3
      February 2010. The provisional suspension was confirmed by both Houses
      of Parliament on 1 and 4 June 2010, respectively.

   2) The Commission’s investigation confirmed that  Ms  S  C  van  Wyk,,  a
      female clerk employed at the Ermelo Magistrate’s Office, had filed ten
      complaints against Mr Prinsloo.  It  was  alleged  that  Mr  Prinsloo,
      during the period 18 April 2008 to 5 May 2008, had  on  ten  different
      occasions conducted himself in an unbecoming and  embarrassing  manner
      towards Ms van Wyk.

   3) The misconduct inquiry against Mr Prinsloo commenced on 29 April  2010
      and was finally concluded on 26 July 2010.  Mr  Prinsloo  admitted  to
      guilt on 10 charges of misconduct against him. The  Presiding  Officer
      found Mr Prinsloo guilty of misconduct as charged.

   4) Afte considering all the evidence placed before him in mitigation, the
      Presiding Officer found that Mr Prinsloo’s misconduct,  although  very
      serious, did not justify  a  sanction  of  removal  from  office.  The
      Presiding  Officer  ordered  that  Mr  Prinsloo   be   cautioned   and
      reprimanded by the Chairperson of the Magistrates Commission  and  the
      Cluster Head within a  month  from  the  imposition  of  sanction.  Mr
      Prinsloo was further ordered  to  tender  a  written  apology  to  the
      complainant within seven days of the reprimand.. On 12 August 2010, Mr
      Prinsloo appeared before the Chairperson and the Cluster Head and  was
      formally cautioned and reprimanded. Subsequently, he also  tendered  a
      written apology to the complainant.

   5) As the Presiding Officer did not recommend that Mr Prinsloo be removed
      from office, as contemplated in section 13 of the Magistrates Act, No.
      90 of 1993, his  provisional  suspension  from  office  is  no  longer
      justified and there is no basis to uphold his provisional suspension.

Recommendation

Having considered the report on the lifting of  the  provisional  suspension
of Magistrate Prinsloo, the Committee recommends that the National  Assembly
confirms the lifting of the provisional suspension.

Report to be considered.

CREDA INSERT - T101116e-insert8 – PAGE 3955

   9. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Births and
      Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B18B-2010] (National Assembly –
      sec 75), dated 16 November 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the subject
      of the Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18 B - 2010]
      (National Assembly – sec 75) and proposed amendments of the National
      Council of Provinces(Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 3
      November 2010, page 3662) referred to it, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B 18 C – 2010].

      Report to be considered.

Report of the Standing Committee on Appropriations on the  2010  Adjustments
Appropriation Bill [B 34 – 2010] (National Assembly – section 77), dated  16
November 2010

Having considered and heard evidence on the Adjustments  Appropriation  Bill
referred to it in terms of section  12(15)  of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
procedure and Related Matters Act 9  of  2009,  the  Standing  Committee  on
Appropriations reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Minister of Finance tabled  the  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement
(MTBPS) on 27 October 2010, outlining the budget  priorities  of  government
for the medium term estimates.  The  MTBPS  was  tabled  together  with  the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B34 - 2010]  and  the  Division  of  Revenue
Amendment Bill [B35 - 2010] in  Parliament.  The  Adjustments  Appropriation
Bill [B34 – 2010] was referred to the Standing Committee  on  Appropriations
and the Standing Committee on Finance to consider and report, in  accordance
with their respective mandates as outlined  in  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act 9 of 2009.

In preparing for the Adjustments Appropriation  Bill  report  the  Committee
invited identified Departments (see below) to  make  submission  before  the
Committee:
    • Department of Water Affairs,
    • Department of Arts and Culture,
    • Department of Health,
    • Department of Trade and Industry,
    • Statistics South Africa, and
    • Department of Communications.

2.    Overview of the Budget Adjustments

According to National Treasury the spending for the first  six  months  this
year has increased  by  R26.4  billion  when  compared  to  previous  year’s
expenditure in the same period. The adjusted amount of R6.2 billion was  for
salaries and housing allowances. An amount of  R2.33  billion  was  adjusted
for national government while R3.81  billion  was  adjusted  for  provincial
government. Even though the 2010/11 national expenditure  has  improved  for
the first six months when compared to the  2009/10  financial  year  in  the
same period, some departments have spent less than  50  per  cent  of  their
budgets for the first six months  and  have  submitted  requests  for  their
budgets to be adjusted due to  unforeseeable  and  unavoidable  expenditures
and roll-overs.  Although the Committee supports these  adjustments  it  has
noted that most of the unavoidable and unforeseeable expenditure was  mainly
due to the salary adjustments  and  housing  allowances  instead  of  policy
priorities both at the national and provincial government spheres.  Affected
departments in this regard include Health (48.9  per  cent),  Water  Affairs
(37.7 per  cent),  Statistics  South  Africa  (30.4  per  cent),  Trade  and
Industry (36.8 per cent), Rural Development (38.0 per  cent),  Home  Affairs
(35.4 per cent), Public Works  (37.7  per  cent),  Communication  (26.2  per
cent) and Art and culture (44.3 per cent). The Committee is concerned  about
this state of affairs which is an  indication  of  poor  planning.  Some  of
these  Departments  are  the  key  pillars  of  the  Medium  Term  Strategic
Framework of government Priorities.

3.    The adjustment on policy priorities for the next three years

The Medium Term Budget Policy Statement indicated that the revised  baseline
allocations have been prepared taking into account the carry  through  costs
of the 2010  salary  improvements,  higher  costs  of  municipal  rates  and
service charges, identified savings and reprioritisation proposals.  In  the
2010/11 financial year the overall increase amounts to R7.3 billion while  a
R67  billion  increase  can  be  seen  over  the  Medium  Term   Expenditure
Framework.  The table below shows that an amount of R22.1 billion  has  been
set aside for policy priorities over the MTEF period, proposed wage bill  of
R26.3 billion as well as  adjustment  to  baseline  of  R40.8  billion.  The
Committee supports the adjustment allocations, however  it  has  noted  that
the proposed wage bill  over  the  MTEF  is  much  higher  than  the  amount
allocated for policy reserves due to the inflationary wage settlement.  This
is  a  cause  for  concern.  The  Committee  has  noted  that  some  of  the
departments have not yet filled their vacant  positions,  but  have  instead
shifted the funds that were budgeted for vacant posts to  other  programmes.
The proposed  wage  bill  seems  to  be  escalating  when  compared  to  the
allocation for policy priorities. This means  that  fewer  funds  are  being
allocated for development and implementation of programmes,  and  will  thus
have a negative impact on the quality and completion of capital projects.

Table 1: Adjustment Allocation for MTEF
|Policy Reserves    |R22.1 billion    |
|Adjustment to      |R40.8 billion    |
|Baseline           |                 |
|Proposed Wage Bill |R26.3 billion    |


Source: National Treasury (2010)
Government prioritises its resources in the following areas:

    • job creation initiatives and realigning support to business to enhance
      employment opportunities;
    • enhancing the quality of education and skills development;
    • improving the provision of quality health care;
    • driving a more comprehensive rural development strategy; and
    • intensifying the fight against crime and corruption.

These priorities are supported by a government strategy which  includes  the
shifting  of  resources  to  labour  intensive  sectors  of   the   economy.
Furthermore, government  will  strive  to  improve  State  performance  with
specific regard to the delivery of services to the poor.  In  light  of  the
current budget  pressures,  the  Committee  is  of  the  view  that  limited
resources  should  be  utilised   to   produce   maximum   output,   without
compromising the quality of services.

The  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  for  2010  has  outlined   the
macroeconomic assumptions,  fiscal  and  public  expenditure  dimensions  of
proposed development  path.   It  emphasised  the  need  for  the  increased
infrastructure investment spending to faster growth  and  to  reduce  budget
deficit over the next period. The estimated reduction of  4.1  per  cent  of
the budget deficit for the 2010/11 which is projected to improve  to  3  per
cent of the GDP  by  2013/14  financial  year  is  noted.  The  government’s
outcome  approach  which  provides  framework  for  enhanced  monitoring  of
service delivery including guidelines for results  driven  performance  that
forms part of the basis of ministerial performance  agreements  as  well  as
related service delivery agreements is a step in the  right  direction.   It
was noted that the expenditure has increased  by  R67  billion  relative  to
baseline over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework  which  is  informed  by
the  12  outcome  policy  priorities  which   include   education,   health,
infrastructure, and job creation.

    • job creation initiatives and realigning support to business to enhance
      employment opportunities;

The Committee believes that  capital  projects  are  the  backbones  of  job
creation which is part of policy priorities. However, the Committee  remains
concerned that the  unspent  funds  amounted  to  R12.4  billion  which  was
budgeted for capital projects in 2009/10 financial year. The  Committee  has
noted, nonetheless, the new approach adopted by government  which  seeks  to
address  weaknesses  in  budgeting  and  planning  in  such  projects.   The
Committee identified a number of weaknesses and challenges in  the  area  of
procurement and supply chain management, and has since made  recommendations
in regards to this.  Therefore,  the  interdepartmental  team  and  proposed
scrutiny of non governmental agencies and other accounts which  is  informed
by these findings is one step in the right direction. In support of the  job
creation process, the Committee believes that such areas in government  need
to be monitored and evaluated  since  these  are  the  key  drivers  of  the
capital projects procurement. The delays and termination of tenders  due  to
irregularities is completely unacceptable as it hampers the  levels  of  job
creation and service delivery.
The Department of Water Affairs reported that to date it has  created  about
26 331 job opportunities through the Working for Water Programme. While  the
Departmental budget has been adjusted from R7.9 billion to R8.2 billion  the
Department has only spent 37. 7 per cent in the first six  months,  part  of
the adjustment was  R35.6  million  received  from  other  adjustments.  The
Committee was concerned about the level of virements and shiftings  of  36.7
per cent which exceeded the 8 per  cent  permitted  by  the  Public  Finance
Management Act. As provided  for  in  the  PFMA,  virements  exceeding  this
threshold   have  to  be  approved  by   Parliament.   Failure   to   attain
Parliamentary approval will lead to  the Auditor General reporting  this  as
an  unauthorised  expenditure.  The  Department  has   reported   an   under
expenditure in the first six months of 37.7  per  cent.  The  Department  of
Water Affairs indicated that the under  expenditure  was  due  to  the  late
submission of invoices by the Department  of  Public  Works  (DPW),  unspent
funds of Change  Journey  and  Master  Systems  Plan  (MSP),  unspent  funds
allocated  to  replace  Masibambane,  regional  bulk  infrastructure:  legal
issues around Nandoni  Dam  project,  delay  in  signing  of  Memorandum  of
Agreement by Municipalities, delay in  submission  of  invoices  by  service
providers.

The budget of the Department of Arts and Culture has been slightly  adjusted
from R2.40 billion to R2.44 billion. The Department has only spent 44.3  per
cent in the first six months of 2010/11. Part of the adjustment  was  a  R12
million roll over for 2010 FIFA World Cup and R18.6  million  for  Investing
in Culture projects. The Department  indicated  that  some  2010  World  Cup
projects were not finalised in March 2010 due to the  fact  that  the  event
was in June 2010. Therefore  the  Department  had  to  utilise  its  2010/11
budget to finance  these  projects.  The  R12  million  roll  over  will  be
utilised to  supplement  the  budget  for  operational  costs,  legal  fees,
machinery rental, audit fees and SITA account which  has  been  inadequately
funded.  An  amount  of  R3.9  million  was  added  for   higher   personnel
remuneration increase which includes housing allowances.

The Committee was concerned about the lack of spending in  the  Investor  to
Culture project hence it is the view of the  Committee  that  such  projects
are instrumental in the  creation  of  jobs  and  poverty  alleviation.  The
Department also indicated that an amount  of  R18.6  million  could  not  be
spent due to the  investigation  that  was  still  being  conducted  in  the
Investor to Culture project which was aimed at verifying the  legitimacy  of
various projects. The Committee needed more  clarity  on  the  R100  million
expenditure which was used to maintain playhouses. The  Department  reported
that it is responsible for all the playhouses which are located  in  various
provinces. The Committee acknowledged the progress made thus  far  and  also
indicated that programmes such as  EPWP,  Working  for  Water,  Working  for
Energy incentives need to be well supported and ensure  that  all  provinces
are spending their allocations according to  planned  targets  in  order  to
expand the levels of job creation.

The expenditure of the Department of Trade and  Industry  at  end  September
was 36.8 of the adjustment appropriation of R6.2 million for the year  as  a
whole.  In  comparison  to  the  mid-year  expenditure   in   2009/10,   the
expenditure in the first six months of 2010/11 decreased  by  25.2  percent.
The  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry  also  reported  on  a  number  of
enterprise investment project that were supposed to create jobs such as  the
East London industrial  development  zone  which  created  higher  than  the
estimate for the year. Due to the economic crisis some projects slowed  down
in  this  regard  than  estimated  such  as  the  Richards  Bay   industrial
development zone. Creation of decent employment through  inclusive  economic
growth was better than anticipated 230 projects where implemented,  compared
to the projected 275 for the year. The total value of investment and  export
credits programme has already reached its target to create 19 000  jobs  for
the year.

The Department of Communication was also invited to be  part  of  the  MTBPS
process due to its under expenditure of 26 per cent in the first six  months
of the 2010/11 financial year. The Committee was concerned at  the  lack  of
cooperation and  unprofessionalism  showed  by  the  Department  upon  being
invited to appear before it. This was seen as a clear  indication  that  the
Department undermines Parliament and its processes.  The  Committee  invited
the Department to a public hearing on  the  Adjustments  Appropriation  Bill
but the Department could not honour the invitation. When  the  Acting  Chief
Financial  Officer  (CFO)  appeared  before  the  Committee,  the  Committee
expressed it’s displeasure at the appearance  of  the  CFO  instead  of  the
Acting Directors General as the Accounting Officer of  the  Department.  The
Committee indicated that this would limit its engagement in seeking  clarity
on crucial issues which the Acting CFO might not be able to  account  on  as
he is not the Accounting Officer. No letter of  apology  was  received  from
the Acting DG for not being able to attend the hearing.

The expenditure of the Department as at end September was  at  a  concerning
figure of 26 per  cent  In  comparison  with  the  mid-year  expenditure  in
2009/10, the Department had spent 31  per  cent  which  was  also  an  under
expenditure. In the current financial year this became even worse  since  it
has decreased by 5 percent when compared to  the  previous  financial  year.
According to the department the reasons that  led  to  under  spending  were
mainly due to capacity constraints, delays in the implementation of  certain
projects,  reshuffling  and  backlogs  in  the  Department.   However,   the
Department is convinced that with the reconstitution of the  Department  and
the appointment of the Acting General-Director things are going to improve.

During its oversight the Committee discovered that more jobs can be  created
in the EPWP, through innovativeness and making sure  that  labour  intensive
programme is a condition of the contract between the Department in  question
and the contractor. The Committee also welcomes a new economic  growth  path
which is aimed to create job opportunities particularly  for  young  people.
The  Committee  welcomes  the  proposed  assessment  for  youth   employment
projects and incentive scheme which will be  operating  through  tax  system
which aims to encourage the employment of youth in businesses as well as  in
the non governmental sectors.  The  MTBPS  outlined  the  allocation  of  R1
billion for 2011/12 and R2 billion for 2012/13 and R3  billion  for  2013/14
which is aimed at supporting projects that demonstrate a potential  of  cost
effective job creation over the MTEF.

Despite the number of jobs that have been  created  in  various  areas,  the
Committee remains concern about the  level  of  virements  and  shifting  of
funds which could have contributed towards creating more job opportunities.

    • improving the provision of quality healthcare

The Health Sector Delivery Agreement aims  to  reduce  infant  and  maternal
mortality rate, reduce child mortality to 30-40 per  1000  births  over  the
medium term and also make further progress  in  preventing  and  controlling
HIV/AIDS.  However,  the  mid  term  report  of  the  Department  of  Health
indicated that severe staff shortages  in  forensic  chemistry  laboratories
have led to backlogs and targets not being met in this  regard.  Furthermore
the Department acknowledged that the delays in the filling of  vacant  posts
in  the  National  Department  of  Health  have  lowered  the  accreditation
process, though the audits tools have been completed  and  piloted.  However
the Department must have a programme in place to respond to  this  challenge
as well as to meet the targets and Millennium Development Goals by 2014.

While the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 5 reported that there  has  been
an  improvement  in  the  antenatal  care  coverage  and  usage  of   modern
contraceptive method maternal mortality is  still  amongst  the  challenges.
The MDG6 reported that HIV prevalence has been stable and there seems to  be
a decline between the ages of 15- 24 years old from 10 to 8.5  per  cent  in
2008. Millennium Development Goals 4 acknowledges the fact that  the  infant
and child mortality rate is unacceptably high in South  Africa  compared  to
international levels. The  committee  supports  the  interventions  such  as
immunisations, prevention from mother to child HIV infection which has  been
undertaken by the Department of Health. This will  assist  to  reduce  child
mortality,  enhance  nutrition  and  primary  health  care.  The   Committee
supports the proposed spending which will focus on improving the  monitoring
of women and infants after  child  birth,  upgrading  support  and  training
paediatric and maternal workers in district hospitals.

However, when the Committee  raised  concerns  about  the  increase  in  the
impact of HIV on infant and child mortality. The Department  indicated  that
there has been a high level of inaccurate reporting on such matters done  by
different organisations which brings a lot  of  confusion  in  the  society.
Furthermore, the Department indicated that the infant  and  child  mortality
cannot be treated in the isolation of morbidity.  While  the  Committee  was
concerned about this level of inconsistency and inaccurate  information,  it
advised the Department to bring all of these organisations  under  one  roof
to come up with the most relevant and  accurate  statistics.  The  Committee
supports the initiative taken by provincial  health  departments  to  remedy
and  improve  their  financial  management.  The  Committee   welcomes   the
agreement on the Occupation Specific Dispensation (OSD) reached between  the
Department and 40 health therapeutic groups  to  retain  most  critical  and
skilled health staff and the  prioritisation  of  filling  important  vacant
posts.

It is noted that though the department has  under-spent  in  the  first  six
months, the budget of the department has been adjusted  from  R21.4  billion
to R21.6 billion an amount of R146 million was adjusted to its budget  which
includes R49.6 million from roll-overs and R105 million  from  unforeseeable
and unavoidable expenditure. This also includes an amount  of  R9.7  million
which was adjusted for  increased  remuneration  on  personnel  and  housing
subsidies  for  certain  programmes.   The  Department  made  virements  and
shifting of R6.1 million or 1.4 per cent, this movement of funds was  mainly
done in order to strengthen service delivery on  programmes  1  and  3.  The
Department and treasury indicated that most of the  shifting  and  virements
were done from the savings made due to  the  reduction  on  consultants  and
special services  in  the  2010  FIFA  World  Cup  expenditure.   While  the
Committee has noted  the  movement  of  funds  and  under  spending  of  the
department in the first six  months,  during  its  oversight  the  Committee
identified a number of challenges  this  include  the  non  availability  of
mobile or immobile clinics  in  some  areas,  usage  of  mud  structures  as
clinics, prepaid electricity  and  solar  panels  of  which  some  of  these
require maintenance and repairs yet it was not  clear  whose  responsibility
it is to maintain this facility.

The  Committee  welcomes  the  additional  amount   of   R1.5   billion   to
Comprehensive HIV and Aids programme as  well  as  R7.3  billion  which  was
added to the provincial equitable share to address the  priority  issues  in
2010/11.  The  Committee  supports  the  introduction  of  Health   National
Insurance Scheme (NHI) which is going to be phased in by  2012/13  financial
year. This programmes aims to improve and bring about the  universal  access
to health facilities for all South Africa whether reach or poor.  While  the
Committee appreciates the progress that have been made with regards  to  the
Hospital Revitalisation programme but it was concern  about  the  slow  pace
and under performance of this programme in other provinces.

    • enhancing the quality of education and skills development

Most of the challenges  facing  the  education  system  include  substantial
backlogs in buildings  and  facilities,  insufficient  number  of  qualified
teachers, poor school management and high absenteeism  among  students.  The
funding of R40 billion to provinces in  the  baseline  to  eradicate  unsafe
school buildings is welcomed and the committee will monitor the  performance
of such allocations. During its oversight visit undertaken in  August  2010,
the Committee found that, some provinces  were  under  spending  on  certain
conditional  grants  particularly  those  that  are  earmarked  for   school
infrastructure. The under-spending  persisted  despite  the  high  level  of
inappropriate structures including mud schools.

The Committee’s concern is that this culture  compromises  the  dignity  and
safety of the learners and hampers the delivery of basic  services  such  as
water and electricity. The proposed  national  assessment  in  literacy  and
numeracy for all grade 3 and 6 learners which will be conducted as  part  of
the long term exercise to benchmark and raise educational level  is  a  step
in the right direction. While the learner  work  books  and  teacher  lesson
plans for literacy and numeracy for grade R to grade 6 will be  provided  in
the beginning of 2011, the Committee  is  still  concerned  whether  or  not
appropriate measures have been taken by the Department  of  Basic  Education
to avoid delays in the distribution  of  workbooks  which  occurred  in  the
current financial year resulting in the cancellation of the tender.

The proposed partnership between the Department of Basic Education  and  the
Development Bank of Southern Africa to  support  educational  infrastructure
is welcomed. The Committee has noted the proposal to increase the number  of
fully qualified teachers which will be supported through  the  Funza  Lusaka
Bursary Programme. The Committee supports the additional R5.4 billion  which
is aimed at the  implementation  of  the  Occupation  Specific  Dispensation
(OSD) for the  next  three  years.  Although  the  Committee  supports  this
allocation  for  the  baseline,  it  remains  concerned  about   the   under
expenditure by the Department  of  Basic  Education  during  the  first  six
months of the 2010/11 financial year.

The Committee noted that the Department has received a R1 million roll  over
and an adjustment amount of R4.7 million which was  divided  almost  to  all
programmes.  An  additional  R6.9  million  was  for  the  higher  personnel
remuneration and housing subsidy allowance and an  amount  of  R1.9  million
was transferred for  the  function  shifted  to  the  Department  of  Higher
Education and Training for an annual contribution to the  Common  Wealth  of
Learning. The Department has spent 45.9 per cent in the first six months  of
2010/11 financial year.

The mid-year  performance  report  of  the  Department  of  Basic  Education
indicated that the Department has exceeded its target of new  6000  learners
enrolled for Kha Ri Gude mass literacy campaign in  the  first  six  months.
The Kha Ri Gude campaign aims to improve the  basic  literacy  and  numeracy
levels of adults. The Department managed to achieve 2000 more new  learners;
this was due to savings made in  the  production  of  learner  and  educator
support materials and the costs of stationery which  allowed  more  learners
to be accommodated in the programme. The  report  also  indicated  that  the
number of learners had exceeded the yearly  estimate  which  ranged  between
480 000 and 486 000 as a results of more learners being enrolled.

The proposed improvement and expansion of University and  Further  Education
and Training enrolment is a step in the right direction.  This  will  assist
in addressing the misalignment between the needs of the  labour  market  and
the education provided by  institutions.  Even  though  the  Department  has
spent 72.3 per cent in the first six months, the Committee  noted  that  the
majority  of  this  expenditure  went  to  the  transfer  budget  which  was
earmarked for NSFAS, Further  Education  and  Training  (FET)  colleges  and
funds for the establishment of the new Department.  The Committee’s view  is
that there is need to ensure that the FET  colleges  are  properly  utilised
and enjoy the same kind of prominence as universities do.

    • driving a more comprehensive rural development strategy

Land Reform and Agricultural Development have a  considerable  potential  to
contribute to rural development, job  creation,  poverty  alleviation,  food
production and redressing  the  past  dispossession  of  land.   It  is  the
Committees view that the Department of Rural Development  is  not  the  only
department which can fast track rural development. The complexity  of  rural
development requires a number of  Departments  to  come  on  board  such  as
Agriculture,  Energy,  Public  works,  Water  Affairs,  Social  Development,
Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,  Trade   and   Industry,
Economic  Development,  Education,  Health  and  Transport.  The   role   of
Department of Rural Development is to coordinate such programmes.

The  Committee  has  noted  the  additional  funding  to  address  the  7000
outstanding land claims. It also noted the new model which is  going  to  be
piloted aimed at supporting emerging farmers in partnership  with  the  Land
Bank. The Committee supports the proposed additional funding  for  provinces
to improve the quality of extension  services  which  is  offered  to  newly
settled farmers. While the Committee supports all  these  interventions,  it
is its view that a lot still need to be done to drive a  more  comprehensive
rural development programme. While the 2010/11 MTBPS has made  a  number  of
interventions, it seemed not to be suggesting an  intervention  relating  to
challenges identified during the implementation of Land  Assistance  Act  in
the land reform programme.

The Land Assistance Act  No  126  of  1993,  makes  provision  for  emerging
farmers to be assisted in order to further  their  agricultural  aspirations
as well as change land ownership in the country through Land  Redistribution
Programme by Government. The Act is often misused for  corrupt  purposes  by
way  of  sub-divisions  and  the  resale  of  subdivided  land  and  illegal
evictions.

    • intensifying the fight against crime and corruption

The Annual Performance Plan (APP) indicates that  the  strategic  priorities
of the Department of Police are to combat crime to ensure  that  all  people
are safe. Whilst there has been a decrease in crime in general in the  first
quarter 2010/11 in some  areas  such  as  contact  related  crime,  property
related crime, and detection, the rate of crime has increased.  Irrespective
of the progress made to reduce the crime rate in certain  areas,  levels  of
crime are still unacceptably high in South Africa.  It  is  well  understood
that the Annual Performance Plan (APP) of the Police was revised  after  the
revision of the Estimate of National Expenditure 2010.  The  main  focus  of
the  Crime  Prevention  Programme  is  precisely  to  reduce  crime   levels
specifically of the trio crimes and crime  against  women  and  children  as
well as the implementation of  a  comprehensive  crime  prevention  strategy
which will be focusing on reducing illegal firearms.

It is the view of the Committee that the reduction of crime  mainly  depends
on  members  of  the  Police  response  and  visibility  together  with  the
involvement of society at large. In its annual  report,  the  Department  of
Police indicated that part  of  the  challenges  the  Department  is  facing
include the court case backlog, prisons  overcrowding,  high  proportion  of
violent crime, as well as high rate of recidivism.  The  Committee  supports
an additional  funding  over  the  MTEF  which  seeks  to  expand  detective
services, crime intelligence and  crime  prevention  particularly  in  local
stations and the proposed increase of Police members from  200  660  to  203
025 by 2014/15. Part of the capacity expansion over the  MTEF,  will  be  to
increase the Special Investigation Unit (SIU) to 650 members by  2013/14  to
fight corruption. The Committees welcomes this move since the fight  against
crime and corruption is one of the government priorities for five years.

The budget of the South African Police  Service  (SAPS)  has  been  adjusted
from R52.5  billion  to  R53.5  billion  for  the  2010/11  financial  year.
Therefore the total additional budget amounts to  R973  million  from  other
adjustments. This amount has been added precisely to address  the  issue  of
increase  in  remuneration  packages  and  housing   subsidy   for   various
programmes, visible policing being the highest. Even  though  the  Committee
supports the adjustment but it is still concerned that  the  department  had
only spent 46 per cent in the first six months of  2010/11.  This  level  of
under  expenditure  is  attributed  to  the  slow  spending  on  Information
Technology Service which is rendered by SITA.

Furthermore, the slow spending was also attributed to delays in  procurement
processes such as the awarding of six tenders by  the  SITA  for  Integrated
Justice Services Programme (IJSP) in  the  first  six  months.  The  2009/10
Annual Report of the Department  of  Police  has  highlighted  some  of  the
challenges that the Department is faced with.  These  include  the  lack  of
control systems within the area of supply chain management,  especially  the
management and controls of assets. The Committee  is  concerned  about  this
state of  affairs  since  the  larger  portion  of  the  budget  is  largely
dominated by current payments which accounts  for  R49.3  billion.  Part  of
this figure goes to goods and services and to capital assets.  To  this  end
the Committee is of the view that urgent action needs to  be  taken  by  the
Department to address these supply chain management issues.

Although the Committee did not engage with the  Department  of  Police,  the
Annual Report of the Department indicates a high level of expenditure  under
goods and services which is dominated by consultants, contractors,  agencies
or outsourced services. This is indicative of the  lack  of  capacity.  This
level of expenditure has increased from R1.22 billion in  2008/09  to  R1.44
billion in 2009/10. Of note is that the largest portion of this  amount  was
for contractors (R622 million in 2008/09 to R816 million  in  2009/10).  The
second largest expenditure was for agencies and  other  outsourced  services
which increased from R497 million in 2008/09 to  R516  million  in  2009/10.
Payments for infrastructure and planning  consultants  increased  from  R3.4
million in 2008/09 to R5.3 million in 2009/10. The  Committee  is  concerned
about the utilisation of financial resources on consultants instead  of  the
Department building its own internal  capacity  thereby  creating  more  job
opportunities. This  higher  level  of  expenditure  on  consultants  is  an
indication that consultants are used both  for  policy  work  and  even  for
functions which SAPS is supposed to have in its in-house capacity.

The Committee remained concerned about the capital work project  which  took
longer than expected particularly the  building  of  Inanda  and  Esikhawini
police stations. According to the Annual Report of the South African  Police
Service, the Department of Public Works was responsible for  these  projects
and the costs  of  these  projects  ended  up  escalating  higher  than  the
projected budgets. It is the view of the Committee that  in  order  for  the
priorities of government  to  be  achieved,  these  priorities  need  to  be
clarified and prioritised by  all  stakeholders  during  the  budgeting  and
planning stage. It is also the view of the Committee that planning  for  the
priority areas of government should be taken more seriously and can  not  be
treated  in  the  same  manner  as  none   prioritised   areas.   Reporting,
transparency and accountability in these areas should  be  enhanced  at  all
spheres of government so that problems and  challenges  are  identified  and
addressed accordingly.

5.    Findings:

    • The Committee found that there is  a  clear  persistence  of  the  non
      compliance with the provision of section  43  of  the  Public  Finance
      Management Act which allows  the  Departments  to  make  virements  or
      shiftings of not more than 8 per cent. In  the  first  six  months  of
      2010/11 financial year the  following  departments  have  shifted  and
      vired more than 8  per  cent  which  then  needs  to  be  approved  by
      Parliament: the departments of  Water  Affairs,  Trade  and  Industry,
      Rural Development, Statistics South Africa, Arts and  Culture,  Higher
      Education, Correctional Services, Defence, Human  Settlement,  Science
      and Technology, and Tourism.


    • Subsection (b) of Section 43 of the PFMA  does  not  allow  the  money
      which is earmarked for transfers  to  be  shifted  to  defray  current
      payments. The Committee found that the departments of Art and Culture,
      Defence and Water Affairs in shifting their funds  have  not  complied
      with this provision of the PFMA since some of their  transfer  budgets
      were shifted to defray current payments.

    • Subsection (c) of section 43 does not allow the utilisation of capital
      budget to defray current payments. The Committee found that,  contrary
      to this provision, the following  departments  have  defrayed  current
      payments  through  capital  budgets:   International   Relations   and
      Cooperation, Statistics South Africa, Higher  Education,  Correctional
      Services, Defence, Rural Development and Land Reform, Water Affairs.

    • The Committee established that the delays in  the  completion  of  two
      Police stations (Inanda and Esikhawini) by Department of Public  Works
      has led to escalated costs of building these stations when compared to
      the initially projected costs.

    • Most of the adjustments have been made to  accommodate  the  increased
      remuneration of  employees,  housing  subsidies  and  roll-overs.  The
      Committee also found that most of the  shiftings  and  virements  were
      done from budgeted vacant posts under the guise that  departments  are
      saving instead of under spending.

    • The under expenditure in the Department of Health was due to delays in
      finalising wage agreements, accruals amounts still to be paid, Capital
      expenditure funding being reviewed to address the turnaround  strategy
      and the lack of spending on the Hospital Revitalisation  programme  in
      some provinces such  as  Mpumalanga,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Free  State  and
      Eastern Cape.

6.    Committee Recommendations

The Standing Committee on Appropriations, having considered the  adjustments
Appropriations and heard comments from identified  stakeholders,  recommends
the  House  approves  the  adjustments  Appropriation  Bill  [B34  –   2010]
(National Assembly - section 77) without amendments. The  Committee  further
recommends the following:

    • That the National Treasury should monitor compliance with  section  43
      of the PFMA and  report  its  findings  to  Parliament.  The  National
      Treasury must regularly engage Parliament on the Money Bills Amendment
      Procedure and Related Matters Act and the  Public  Finance  Management
      Act in respect of virements amounting to more than 8 per cent to avoid
      irregularities;


    • That, in the event that funds are shifted,  the  relevant  departments
      should ensure that their  budgets  are  aligned  to  their  respective
      strategic plans and must be utilised for the intended purposes;

    • The Department of Basic Education and Public works should  draw  up  a
      costed plan for  the  building  of  schools  and  eradication  of  mud
      schools;


    • The Department of Education and the  Department  of  Transport  should
      draw up a costed plan to address the plight of learners in poor  rural
      areas who still travel long distances to get to school; and


    • The Department of Health should expedite  the  implementation  of  the
      Hospital Revitalisation programme  so  as  to  improve  the  level  of
      availability, affordability and accessibility of health facilities for
      TB, HIV and AIDS, and other diseases.

The  Standing  Committee  on  Appropriations  agrees  to   the   Adjustments
Appropriations Bill [B34 – 2010] (National Assembly -  section  77)  without
amendments.

Report to be considered.

Report of the Standing Committee on Appropriations on the 2010  Medium  Term
Budget Policy Statement, dated 16 November 2010

Having considered the 2010 Medium Term Budget  Policy  Statement  and  heard
comments  from  identified   stakeholders,   the   Standing   Committee   on
Appropriations (the Committee) reports as follows:

        1. Introduction


The Minister of Finance tabled  the  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement
(MTBPS) on 27 October 2010, outlining the budget  priorities  of  government
for the medium term estimates.  The  MTBPS  was  tabled  together  with  the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill and the Division of  Revenue  Amendment  Bill
in Parliament. The MTBPS was referred to the Standing and Select  Committees
on Appropriations (the Committees) to consider  and  report,  in  accordance
with their respective mandates as outlined  in  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedures  and  Related  Matters   Act   No.   9   of   2009.   Among   its
responsibilities, as  per  Section  6(8)  of  the  aforementioned  Act,  the
Committees are required to consider and report on the following issues:
    • the spending priorities of national  government  for  the  next  three
      years;
    • the proposed division of revenue between the spheres of government and
      between arms of government within a sphere for the next  three  years;
      and
    •  the  proposed  substantial  adjustments  to  conditional  grants   to
      provinces and local government, if any.

This is the second MTBPS introduced in the  Fourth  Parliament  particularly
after the introduction of the Money Bills Amendment Procedures  and  Related
Matters Act No. 9 of 2009. The MTBPS provides  the  framework  within  which
each sphere has to then prepare detailed budgets. The Money  Bill  Amendment
Procedures and Related Matters Act  affords  Parliament  an  opportunity  to
make recommendations and changes to the fiscal framework  and  the  Division
of Revenue. While Parliament is required  to  make  recommendations,  it  is
important  for  Parliament  to  take  into   account   inputs   from   other
stakeholders  such  as  civil  society,  labour,   businesses,   Chapter   9
institutions  and  others.  Through  the  2010  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy
Statement, it was indicated that South Africa needs to forge  a  new  growth
path to focus on its own specific transformation  challenges  which  include
the structural of wealth, ownership and control of  resources,  options  for
empowerment and broadening participation in  the  economy,  access  to  land
and, improving public education and health.

2.    Medium Term Spending Priorities

Government prioritises its resources in the following areas:
    • job creation initiatives and realigning support to business to enhance
      employment opportunities;
    • enhancing the quality of education and skills development;
    • improving the provision of quality health care;
    • driving a more comprehensive rural development strategy; and
    • intensifying the fight against crime and corruption.

3.    Budget Estimates for the 2010/11 Financial Year

Table 1 (below) summarises Budget Estimates for the spheres of government

Table 1: Budget Allocation for the 2010/11 Financial Year
|                   |Column A    |Column B        |Column C     |
|Sphere of          |            |                |             |
|Government         |            |                |             |
|                   |2010/11     |2010/11         |Amount       |
|                   |allocation  |adjustments     |adjusted     |
|                   |            |                |             |
|                   |R’000       |R’000           |R’000        |
|                   |            |                |             |
|National           |            |                |             |
|                   |            |                |             |
|                   |527 001 492 |519 980 624     |7 020 868    |
|Provincial         |260 973 745 |265 139 448     |-4 165 703   |
|Local              |30 167 706  |30 558 566      |-390 860     |
|Total              |818 142 943 |815 678 638     |2 464 305    |

The total allocations to national departments  decreased  by  R7.0  billion,
allocation to provinces increased by R4.1 billion and allocations  to  local
government increased by R0.3 billion.

4.    Hearings of the 2010 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement

The Standing and Select Committees on  Appropriations  jointly  invited  the
National Department of Cooperative Governance (DCoG),  South  African  Local
Government Associations (SALGA),  Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission  (FFC),
Human Science Research Council (HSRC) to comment on the MTBPS as  they  were
considered strategic in the implementation of policy priorities.  The  MTBPS
Hearings took place on the 2nd and 3rd November 2010.

4.1   Financial Fiscal Commission

The Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC) highlighted  the  potential  risks
to the moderate economic growth projections for the South  African  economy,
which  include:  interruptions  in  the  global  recovery,   exchange   rate
volatility,   human    resource    needs    and    the    proposed    fiscal
austerity/consolidation framework over the medium-term.

The FFC indicated that for the South African economy to grow faster; a  more
inclusive economic growth strategy that is multi-faceted is required in  its
approach. The strategy should  focus  on  poverty  alleviation,  the  labour
absorption capacity of the economy, the productivity of  public  expenditure
(i.e. quality  improvements  in  access  to  social  services),  accelerated
implementation of approved infrastructure projects  and  increased  spending
on maintenance and rehabilitation and the rooting out of corruption  in  all
sectors of economy. The FFC  requested  that  more  detail  be  provided  in
relation to the economic policy direction of  government  which  frames  the
fiscal environment in which the intergovernmental  fiscal  relations  system
must operate for effective Commission engagement.

The  FFC  raised  concerns  with  respect  to  the  downward  revisions   of
agriculture and health spending over the medium term, particularly in  light
of the fact that these sectors contribute positively to economic growth  and
form part of the identified 12 national priority outcomes.  The FFC  further
raised concerns about lack of consultation by  some  government  departments
when making financial decisions as per Section 1(3)  (1)  of  the  Financial
and Fiscal Commission Amendment Act No 25 of 2003.

The FFC noted that national government’s share of the  Division  of  Revenue
declines over the 2010/11 Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF),  whereas
the provincial and local government shares increases over the  same  period.
The FFC submitted  that  the  current  formula  for  determining  the  Local
Equitable Share (LES) may be unconstitutional in  respect  of  the  Revenue-
Raising Component (RRC). Furthermore, the FFC  cautioned  against  potential
negative  effects  on  middle  income  municipalities  resulting  from   the
government’s  approach   to   focus   on   targeted   funding   for   poorer
municipalities to the detriment of middle income municipalities.

The FFC also  indicated  that  the  biggest  expenditure  challenge  in  the
provincial government is the rising personnel  spending  compared  to  other
spending items that lead to growth and  development.  With  respect  to  the
local  government  sphere,  the  FFC  said  that  the  biggest   expenditure
challenges   are   the   poor   performance   against   conditional   grants
(particularly infrastructure) highlighted by  rollovers  amounting  to  R1.8
billion in the 2010 / 2011 financial year.

With respect to  proposed  substantial  adjustments  to  conditional  grants
allocations to provinces and local government the FFC noted the following:

 • Education Conditional Grants: Dinaledi schools – Mathematics and  Science
   proficiency are identified as key outcomes, but low  pass  rates  do  not
   augur well for the future;
 • Health Conditional Grants: Comprehensive HIV and Aids programme  –  There
   is a mismatch between the burden of disease and the population;
 • National Tertiary Services Grant: The health expenditure is dominated  by
   tertiary hospitals, therefore the next tier of hospitals  are  negatively
   affected and hence the same effort should  be  directed  towards  primary
   health care facilities;
 • Eradication of Backlogs in Education and Health Infrastructure  Grants  –
   The government should reconsider its decision to  discontinue  grants  in
   these areas;
 • Agricultural Grants: Namely, CASP, Ilima letsema and  Mafisa  –  The  FFC
   agrees that it makes economic sense to  merge  these  conditional  grants
   into one comprehensive agriculture  finance  programme  as  their  impact
   individually is limited; and
 • Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) Incentive Grant for Infrastructure
   – The FFC noted low level of spending from this grant. The FFC is of  the
   view  that  more  effective  reporting  of  EPWP  projects   will   allow
   municipalities to access this incentive grant.

The  Committee  asked  the  FFC  to  elaborate  what   it   meant   by   the
unconstitutionality of the revenue raising component of the local  equitable
share formula. The FFC explained that the  unconstitutionality  of  the  LES
formula refers to the current practice whereby deductions  or  additions  to
municipalities’ equitable share  are  based  on  actual  revenue  collection
figures, which disregards the municipality’s  capacity  to  collect  revenue
and the degree of effort made by the municipality to  collect  all  revenues
owed. The FFC advised that this is in  contravention  of  the  Constitution.
Hence, the FFC recommends that the LES formula  should  contain  a  revenue-
raising capacity variable.

4.2   Department of Cooperative Governance

The Department of Cooperative Governance (DCoG) provided the  Appropriations
Committees with an overview of key focus areas and  budget  priorities  over
the 2011 MTEF that will contribute to the national priority  outcome  9:  “A
responsible, accountable, effective and efficient local government  system”.
Key strategies and programmes proposed by the Department for the  2011  MTEF
include: a differentiated approach  to  supporting  local  government  (i.e.
covering aspects of finance, services and labour), propose a  single  window
of  coordination,  support   to   municipal   finance   and   administration
capability, propose a refined ward  committee  model  to  deepen  democracy,
improved support  to  human  settlements  outcomes,  implementation  of  the
community work programme and accelerated access to basic services.

The DCoG indicated that it  has  requested  additional  allocations  to  the
baseline allocations of municipal transfers,  which  include  the  Municipal
Infrastructure Grant (MIG), Bulk Infrastructure Fund  (BIF)  and  the  Local
Government Equitable Share (LGES): The Department of Cooperative  Governance
submitted that:

 • An additional allocation of R16.9 billion over the 2011 MTEF to  the  MIG
   baseline is requested on the basis of meeting sector target to  eradicate
   infrastructure backlogs;

 • An additional allocation of R26.3 billion over the 2011 MTEF to  the  BIF
   is requested on the basis  of  unlocking  the  delivery  of  reticulation
   services by funding bulk infrastructure and procuring well  located  land
   towards addressing backlogs in order to ensure universal access to  basic
   services. The DCoG explained that the BIF will be  specifically  used  to
   upgrade, refurbish and rehabilitate bulk infrastructure such as Water and
   Waste Water Treatment Works; and

 • An additional allocation of R4.2 billion over the 2011 MTEF to  the  LGES
   is requested on the basis of complementing the institutional component of
   the LGES by funding critical skills in municipalities, prioritising water
   and sanitation over the  MTEF  in  order  to  build  long-term  municipal
   institutional  capacity  through  the  proposed  reconfigured   Municipal
   Systems Improvement Grant (MSIG) into the Local Government  Institutional
   and Systems Support Grant (LGISSG).

The DCoG further submitted that additional funding has also  been  requested
for  the  following  departmental  programmes:  Special   Purpose   Vehicle,
Disaster Management, and the Implementation of the Masters Systems Plan  for
National Disaster Management Plan,  Municipal  Infrastructure  Audit,  Local
Government Turnaround Strategy and the Township Renewal Programme.

The DCoG has identified a lack of cooperation and coordination  between  the
three spheres of government as a risk and will attempt to mitigate the  risk
by proposing that the SPV be a single  window  for  coordination  among  the
three spheres of  government.  However,  the  proposed  model  still  awaits
cabinet’s approval.

4.3   South African Local Government Association

The South African Local Government Association (SALGA)  indicated  that  the
economic recovery was a welcome sign for local  government.  However,  SALGA
also cautioned that the economic  recovery  bears  pressure  on  demand  for
quality municipal services and hence the ability of  municipal  services  to
support the expansion  of  productivity  within  local  industries  and  the
sustainability  of  key  economic   sectors   operating   within   municipal
boundaries.

SALGA further recommended a comprehensive review  of  the  local  government
fiscal framework to address amongst  others,  the  limited  vertical  share.
There should be a systematic review of baselines to ensure:

 • Revenue allocations to local government as a whole are congruent with its
   full range of developmental and service delivery responsibilities; and
 • The vertical share of local government meets the  increasing  demand  for
   municipal services.
Furthermore, this should be coupled with efforts to build  the  capacity  of
weaker municipalities to spend efficiently and effectively.

A concern was raised as to whether the proposed  minor  adjustments  to  the
local government equitable share (LGES) formula  to  allocate  more  funding
towards  poorer   municipalities   are   substantive   enough   to   address
institutional challenges, such as: the need to appoint skilled personnel  to
manage finances,  human  resources,  service  delivery  functions  and  core
administration functions. In addition the availability of credible  data  on
key  variables  relating  to  the  socio-economic  demographic  and  spatial
profiles of municipalities need to be addressed not only to update the  data
underpinning the LGES formula, but also a more  fundamental  review  of  the
structure of the formula itself.

With regard to conditional grants, SALGA made the following submissions:
 • The management of grants should be reviewed;
 • The approach on conditional grants should not be a one size fits all,  it
   should be according to municipal needs and its capacity to deliver;
 • Analyse past performance to improve the operational effectiveness of  the
   grants;
 • A conditional  grant  for  rural  municipalities  for  job  creation  and
   economic development should be introduced;
 • Disaster management funding should reach municipalities faster;
 • Electricity Demand Side Management funding must be effectively  targeted;
   and
 • Increase funding for the water services operating subsidy grant to assist
   municipalities struggling with refurbishment and maintenance.

Since infrastructure funding remains a challenge; it was argued  that  there
should be an explicit link  between  municipal  infrastructure  grant  (MIG)
allocations  and  LES  allocations  especially  in  smaller  municipalities.
Funding should be set aside through  MIG  or  outside  for  the  funding  of
refurbishment and upgrade of existing infrastructure in smaller  and  poorer
municipalities. SALGA welcomed the envisaged devolvement of the housing  and
public transport functions to cities and the increase in the  Devolution  of
Property Rates Grant.

The Committees on Appropriations raised a concern as to the  perceived  lack
of support provided by SALGA with respect  to  capacitating  municipalities.
SALGA responded that in support of municipalities they are  partnering  with
universities who  are  service  providers  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of
financial management, for example University of Witwatersrand is offering  a
course in financial  management,  expenditure  and  oversight.  Furthermore,
SALGA reported that  they  are  reviewing  the  possibility  of  electing  a
permanent member to the National Council  of  Provinces  (NCOP)  to  provide
support to the Committees concerning local government matters.

Furthermore, the Committees on Appropriations sought clarity on  the  impact
of the new demarcations and SALGA reported that there are 382 new  wards  in
the country which will have  a  huge  financial  burden  to  the  government
particularly in Johannesburg where there are more than 60  new  wards.  This
also implies the increase in the number of councillors which  increases  the
amount allocated in respect of  the  institutional  component  of  equitable
share which funds the payments of councillors.
4.4   Human Science Research Council

The Human  Science  Research  Council  (HSRC)  applauds  the  Appropriations
Committees and the Ministry of Finance for enabling public  engagement  with
the  national  budget  priority  setting  and  decision  making   processes.
Further, it applauds efforts to chart  a  new  inclusive  growth  path  that
serves as an agenda for collective action.
The HSRC identified the following strengths in respect of the MTBPS:
 • Employment is clearly stated as the government’s  top  priority,  however
   the MTBPS need to be complemented by more detail as to how the government
   will implement a new development path that will  create  5  million  jobs
   within 10 years;
 • It takes into account the scale of challenges faced in areas of  poverty,
   education and health;
 • It recognises cities as engines of growth, thus requiring more investment
   in infrastructure to address bottlenecks and backlogs;
 • It recognises that expanding informal  settlements  need  investment;  It
   provides for faster growth in municipal spending compared  to  growth  in
   provincial and national expenditure;
 • It recognises that investment in transport can improve  living  standards
   for workers, cut transport costs and increase productivity; and
 • It gives due  attention  to  rural  development,  youth  employment,  the
   Industrial Policy Action Plan and the Community Works Programme.

The  HSRC  noted  the  insufficiency  of  progress  with  respect  to  broad
education,  health  and  economic  indicators.  The  HSRC   recommend   that
investment in these broad areas targeted for priority  need  to  be  further
specified. With respect to Education, the challenge  is  how  and  where  to
intervene, in order to break the cycle  of  the  education  and  development
trap. Substantial investments in early learning, through reception year  and
foundation phase of schools are critical to breaking the stagnation  of  low
performance scores.

The Aids epidemic  is  stabilising,  however  intensive  efforts  are  still
required. The 3rd  national  HIV  prevalence,  incidence  and  communication
survey (2008) revealed a number of positive trends. A  decline  in  the  HIV
prevalence in the teenage population (15-19 years)  has  been  observed,  as
well as a decline in  mother-to-child  infections.  However,  HIV  infection
risks remain high in the country, with women aged between 25  and  29  years
continuing to record very high levels of HIV infection.

In respect of economic growth, the HSRC noted the importance of a  knowledge
economy. A knowledge economy contributes to the growth of an economy.  South
Africa scores are low in respect of the  knowledge  economy  index  and  the
number of full time equivalent researchers per 1 000 people compared to  its
counterparts. Furthermore,  there has been slow uptake of the  Research  and
Development (R&D) tax incentive by the private sector  and  to  what  extent
has  the  requisite  institutional  reforms  and  actions  to  support   the
incentive regime been implemented by government. Hence, the HSRC  calls  for
the government to continue  to  prioritise  R&D  and  monitor  and  evaluate
programmes that has to deliver on R & D outcomes.

The HSRC, furthermore placed emphasis on the need for  research  information
to inform medium term expenditure decisions, with concern  being  raised  as
to whether national data  collection  needs  in  the  areas  of  health  and
education are receiving sufficient allocations from  national  funding.  The
HSRC proposes a new national health  survey  (i.e.  South  African  National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey [SANHANES]) that will provide  real-
time annual monitoring of the health status  of  the  nation  and  fill  the
current gap in national health surveys. Furthermore, proposes  accessibility
modelling (that  will  identify  access  norms  and  standards,  demand  for
services,  service  infrastructure  supply  etc.)  and  strategic   use   of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) capabilities for  spatial  optimisation
of services, resulting in improved service delivery.

The HSRC commends the  acknowledgement  in  the  MTBPS  of  procurement  and
tender fraud which is currently under investigation and the efforts  of  the
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Anti-Corruption in  its  efforts  to  address
inefficiencies in, and improving the  effectiveness  of  public  management.
The HSRC also proposes a closer examination  of  the  nature  and  scope  of
service delivery protests to avoid future  conflicts  with  communities  and
facilitate implementation, given the imminent increases in tariffs and  user
charges.

The Committees on Appropriations raised the following points of  clarity  in
respect of the HSRC submission:

    • The HSRC’s recommendations for improving educational outcomes in light
      of the poor outcomes observed thus far;
    • Whether the government HIV/Aids awareness programme has been effective
      in light of the prevalence of HIV infections continuing to remain high
      among women aged 25-29 years;
    • Concerns were raised that the current status of Tuberculosis  (TB)  in
      South Africa was not  mentioned  in  the  HSRC  presentation,  as  the
      prevalence of TB is quite high as well;
    • What conditionalities could be attached to social welfare grants?
    • What is the optimal percentage share of GDP that need to  be  invested
      in R&D activities?
    • What comparative studies has the HSRC undertaken in  relation  to  the
      economic growth potential of cities?

The HSRC responded that government has  been  proactive  by  intervening  in
critical areas such as curriculum and  teacher/educator  training  to  bring
about positive outcomes. The HSRC indicated that it would provide  empirical
evidence of factors affecting educational outcomes.

The HSRC explained that the prevalence indicator could be misleading  as  it
does not reflect the  positive  trends,  such  as  the  fact  that  HIV/Aids
patients are living longer as a  result  of  anti-retroviral  treatment  and
more people are becoming aware  of  their  HIV/Aids  status.  Prevalence  is
measured according to the number of  new  HIV  incidents  reported  and  the
mortality rate of HIV infected people or Aids patients. The  HSRC  indicated
that in the Western Cape, TB forms part the  Burden  of  Disease  Programme,
whereby HIV/Aids and  TB  are  diagnosed  and  treated  together.  This  has
resulted in cost savings and improved diagnosis and  treatment  of  HIV/Aids
and TB. The HSRC were of the opinion  that  the  Western  Cape  model  could
possibly be implemented across the country.

The HSRC proposed the following conditionalities related to  certain  social
welfare grants:
    • School enrolment could be a  conditionality  attached  to  the  child-
      support grant;
    • Teenage mothers should either continue with their schooling  or  enrol
      in an FET institution in order to gain  access  to  the  child-support
      grant; and
    • Conditionality in respect of the proposed youth employment grant could
      be that the individual should show proof of actively seeking for  work
      in order to qualify for the grant.

The HRSC reported that R&D as percentage share of GDP has declined,  despite
government committing to 1 per cent of GDP, Currently the R&D as  percentage
share of GDP is 0.93 per cent. The HRSC  recommends  an  optimal  percentage
share of 1.5 per cent of GDP.

The HRSC reported that it forms part of a research group that  is  reviewing
and assessing the socio-economic status of cities.  Findings  are  that  the
economic performance of cities have benefited the country  as  a  whole  and
have been the drivers of employment creation. On  the  other  hand,  it  has
placed  greater  demand  on  cities  infrastructure  and  service  delivery,
resulting in greater pressure  on  the  cities  finances.  Hence,  the  HRSC
cautions  the  government  and  recommends  a  more  balanced  approach   in
investment and the  distribution  of  investment  between  rural  and  urban
areas.

5.    Findings

    • The Committee  established  that  the  2010  MTBPS  made  more  budget
      provision for the wage bill. Concerns were raised about  the  increase
      in the wage bill due to the higher inflationary wage settlement.

    • Although Section 1(3) (1) of the Financial and Fiscal  Commission  Act
      (2003), as amended, provides for a Commission to act as a consultative
      body and make recommendations to organs of state  in  all  spheres  of
      government on financial and fiscal matters, the Financial  and  Fiscal
      Commission alluded, during the hearings on the 2010 MTBPS, to the fact
      that there has been a lack of consultation between the  Department  of
      Cooperative Governance and the Commission.

    • The Committee established that there was  a  lack  of  expenditure  on
      conditional grants which has led to a roll-over of R1.8 billion in the
      2010/11 financial year. It is the view of  the  Committee  that  these
      grants are very instrumental in the infrastructure development and job
      creation and should therefore be spent appropriately.

    • The Committee established  that  technical  and  vocational  education
      system  is  one  of  the  areas  which  contribute  towards   economic
      development and job creation.

    • The Committee established that there is  a  lack  of  consultation  by
      government  departments  with  regards  to  section  1(3)(1)  of   the
      Financial and Fiscal Commission Act.

5.    Committee Recommendations

The Standing Committee on Appropriations, having considered the 2010  Medium
Term  Budget  Policy  Statement   and   heard   comments   from   identified
stakeholders, recommends the following:
    • That the Department of Higher Education and Training  should  continue
      to improve  quality  levels  of  qualifications  obtained  at  Further
      Education Technical institutions; and
    • That the House adopts the 2010 Medium Tern Budget Policy Statement.

Report to be considered.

CREDA INSERT - T101116e-insert12 – PAGES 3978 - 3991


