---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-03-04
---

                           THURSDAY, 4 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr V B NDLOVU: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the IFP, I give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the coexistence of and respect for different
   cultures and understanding within the South African context.


Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I
intend moving, on behalf of the DA, the following motion:
   That the House debates, in light of the fact that today marks the 30th
   year of President Robert Mugabe’s rule in Zimbabwe, the adverse
   implications that having a ruler for life has had and will continue to
   have on the constitutional democracy, national stability and prosperity
   in Zimbabwe.

[Interjections.] Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
of the House I shall move:

   That the National Assembly debates the escalation of service delivery
   protests over the length and breadth of the country in recent days and
   weeks, and the detrimental effect thereof on the stability of the
   country.

Thank you.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the sector education and training authorities in
   relation to their mandate for developing the skills of the South African
   workforce, and come up with better solutions.

Thank you.
Ms C DUDLEY: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I shall
move:

   That the House –


      1) notes that on 11 February at the Legal Business Awards 2010 in
         London, England, one of the most prestigious accolades in the
         international legal world was awarded to the South African lawyer
         who has been defending the athlete Caster Semenya pro bono;


      2) recognises that the global award recognises a truly exceptional
         individual contribution to the legal profession during the course
         of 2009 and singled out the lawyer for his demonstrable commitment
         to pro bono and human rights, and


      3) congratulates Greg Nott of Dewey & Le Boeuf in Johannesburg for his
         work for this South African athlete, undertaken without payment,
         and for his recognition by the international legal profession as
         lawyer of the year.


Thank you.

Mr A LOUW: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving, on behalf
of the DA, the following motion:

   That the House debates the need for the creation of decent sustainable
   jobs other than the job opportunities created by the Expanded Public
   Works Programme.

Thank you.

Mr P D POHO: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the need to ensure that transport projects
   throughout the country are completed in time to ensure that all visitors
   to the Fifa World Cup will be able to travel in comfort and safety to the
   different stadia.

Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Mnr die Speaker, ek gee graag kennis van die volgende
voorstel, naamlik:

   Dat die Raad, in die lig van die President se besoek aan die buiteland om
   onder meer finansiering vir Eskom te bekom, die bronne van finansiering
   vir Eskom se kapitaalinvesteringsuitbreidingsprogram debatteer.

Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

   That the House, in light of the President’s foreign visit to obtain
   funding for Eskom, amongst other things, debates the sources of funding
   for Eskom’s capital investment expansion programme.

I thank you.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the National Assembly debates the statutory requirement for
   editorial independence of the SABC in the wake of serious concerns with
   regard to news bulletins, as well as recent allegations that a board
   member of the SABC instructed the news head to censor news that could
   have embarrassed the president of the ANC Youth League.

Thank you.

Mr D C ROSS: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on behalf of the DA, I
shall move:

   That the House debates the participation of the state-owned African
   Energy and Mineral Finance Company in prospecting and mining activities
   in competition with private entities in the mining sector.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move, on
behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the financial state of the Passenger Rail Agency
   of South Africa, PRASA, and the problems it is currently facing in light
   of media reports and information that has been made available to the DA,
   and come up with possible solutions.

                          FATAL MUDSLIDE IN UGANDA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)    notes that on 2 March 2010 a disastrous mudslide in Uganda claimed
       the lives of 86 Ugandans and displaced 200 people;


   (2)    further notes that authorities anticipate further landslides
       during the period known for its heavy rain which commences next
       month;


   (3)    extends its deepest sympathy to the Ugandan government and the
       Ugandan people who have lost their homes and whose lives have been
       affected by the mudslide and, in particular, to the friends and
       family members who lost loved ones in the mudslide; and


   (4)    urges all South Africans who are able to, to answer the Red
       Cross’s request for assistance to help search for victims of the
       mudslide and contribute to the medical treatment of survivors of the
       mudslide.

Agreed to.

                     CELEBRATION OF NATIONAL WATER WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      (1) notes that -


          (a) National Water Week is celebrated annually, often to coincide
               with World Water Day, and this year it is being celebrated
               from 2 to 8 March 2010;
          (b) during this week, the Department of Water and Environmental
               Affairs raises the importance, awareness and understanding of
               water issues and challenges;

          (c) the theme for this year is: “Water is Life – Securing the
               Nation’s Water Needs across Generations”; and

          (d) projections by experts point to the fact that demand on water
               resources will continue to increase at a fast pace in the
               coming decades with Africa, the Middle East, Central and
               Eastern Asia being the most affected;

      (2) recognises that South Africa is one of the driest countries in the
            world; and

      (3) supports the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs in its
           awareness campaign to ensure the long-term sustainability of our
           water resources.

Agreed to.

  KIDNAPPING OF SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNALIST AND NIGERIAN NATIONALS IN NIGERIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)    notes with serious concern the kidnapping of Nick Greyling, a
         journalist working for M-Net SuperSport and two Nigerian nationals
         in Nigeria on Monday, 1 March 2010;

   (2)    deplores the kidnapping of people and holding them hostage for
         ransom or any other reason;

   (3)    wishes that this matter is resolved quickly and that Nick and the
         two Nigerian nationals are released unharmed to their families;


   (4)    expresses support to the families during these difficult times;
         and

   (5)   congratulates the high commissioner in Nigeria for acting quickly
         and swiftly on this matter and trusts that they are monitoring
         developments and will continuously keep the family and the country
         informed of any developments.

Agreed to.

         CONDOLENCES TO FAMILIES OF THOSE KILLED IN UGANDAN MUDSLIDE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House –

   (1)    notes with deep sorrow that a massive landslide down the slope of
       Mt Elgon in the Bududa district of Uganda wiped out three villages
       and killed at least 90 people and probably as many as 450 people
       altogether;

   (2)    further notes that many of those killed were school children
       taking refuge in the local hospital;


   (3)    notes even further the point made by President Museveni that the
       cutting down of foliage and the clearing of trees had played a
       significant role in the tragedy; and


   (4)    expresses its condolences to all afflicted families and shares
       with all Ugandans a deep sense of sadness and loss.


Agreed to.

                          INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)    notes that 8 March is annually observed as International Women's
       Day, a day to celebrate women’s achievements throughout history and
       across nations and that this day is also known as the United
       Nations, UN, Day for Women’s Rights and International Peace;

   (2)    further notes that the United Nations organisation designated this
       day to give women the opportunity to review how far they have come
       in their struggle for equality, peace and development and it is also
       an opportunity for women to unite, network and mobilise for
       meaningful change;


   (3)    believes that to secure peace and social progress and enjoyment of
       human rights requires equal and full participation and development
       of women; and


   (4)    supports all endeavours geared at the realisation of women
       representation and participation in all decision-making structures.
Agreed to.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House suspends Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia  that  the
   debate on the Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before  at  least
   three working days have elapsed since the committee’s report was  tabled,
   for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading  debate  today  on  the
   Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec 76).

Agreed to.

                 TRAINING OF YOUNG WOMEN IN BUSINESS SKILLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V V MAGAGULA (ANC): Mr Speaker, the ANC government in Gauteng has
partnered with the Gauteng City Region Academy in the training of young
women as auxiliary social workers, shop fitters, air-conditioner
technicians and lift technicians. An additional 1 000 young women will also
receive training through various skills development programmes, giving them
the opportunity to earn a decent living instead of relying on government
grants.

Moreover, the government has plans to establish 15 co-operatives in
previously disadvantaged areas where the community will render cleaning,
gardening and laundry services to the government. This effort is part of
the ANC plan to address poverty by empowering people with skills while
creating adequate social means to protect the most vulnerable in our
society.

The ANC believes that these interventions should be encouraged and should
be implemented in other provinces, because they seek to develop exit
programmes that capacitate households and communities to empower
themselves. I thank you. [Applause.]

                DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND CRIME ON CAMPUSES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr W G JAMES (DA): Mr Speaker, it is in part the purpose of the DA’s
education campaign to prod unfocused decision-makers like Minister Nzimande
into action. In his address to the National Council of Provinces, Minister
Nzimande said that, and I quote, “We were happy to note that there were
fewer disruptions on campuses this year.” The facts are not altogether
clear, but I believe that the Minister understates the severity of the
problem.

At the start of 2010 there were major clashes between nursing students and
security at the Cape Peninsula University of Technology. Dozens of students
were injured in clashes with the police at the Mangosuthu University of
Technology in Umlazi.

During the course of 2009 and 2010 I visited the Tshwane University of
Technology, Soshanguve campus, and discovered that students had rented
their rooms to nonstudents who conducted themselves in a manner that is
reminiscent of criminal entrepreneurs. These individuals engaged in
activities such as stealing toilet seats to sell, growing marijuana in the
horticulture facility and rigging tenders by smashing kitchen equipment.

The DA is insistent that a decisive effort is needed to deal with crime on
campus and calls on government to proactively assist in this regard.
[Applause.]

                      PROTESTS BY STUDENTS ON CAMPUSES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N Y VUKUZA-LINDA (Cope): Mr Speaker, I rise to emphasise the same point.
While Cope is sympathetic to the plight of poor students who struggle
against great odds to put themselves through university, it asks government
not to condone disruptive acts by the SA Students Congress to bring
learning at several universities to a complete standstill. The rights of
educators at tertiary institutions to teach without intimidation and of
learners to attend lectures without hindrance should be sacrosanct and
fully protected.

Sasco is within its right to criticise President Jacob Zuma for paying too
little attention to education and to the plight of the poor during his
state of the nation address last month. It is also within its rights to
demonstrate peacefully or to stage an orderly march to Parliament to hand
over a memorandum.

Sasco, however, does not have the right to bring campuses to a standstill,
and Minister Nzimande and the government should make this abundantly clear.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                   HI-TECH CENTRE TO IMPROVE BLOOD SUPPLY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T E KENYE (ANC): Mr Speaker, on Monday, 22 February 2010, the Minister
of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, officially opened a new, state-of-the-art
medical training centre which will ensure the safe supply of blood and
blood products to patients.

The ANC views blood safety in this country as an important component of the
fight against HIV/Aids. Blood collection, banking and transfusion medicines
are an essential part of any modern care system that can help to save
millions of lives each year.

The ANC government therefore fully supports this initiative. Moreover, it
views education and training as fundamental to every aspect of blood safety
and the successful utilisation of blood and blood products to save lives.
This initiative demonstrates the ANC’s commitment to the improvement of
standards in both the public and private health sectors. I thank you.
[Applause.]

           GRANTS FOR RENOVATION OF HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Mr Speaker, the provision of adequate health services to
the people of our country should be a sine qua non. It is therefore quite
disturbing that, while the Department of Health transferred R14 billion in
conditional grants to provinces in the 2008-09 financial year especially
for the construction and renovation of hospitals, we have discovered that
much of this money was not spent and that there was inadequate control and
monitoring of the expenditure of the funds.

We would like to call upon the Minister of Health and the Cabinet to note
that health services should be a priority and that, while this country has
the money, we discover it was not adequately spent by those at the lower
levels of government. I thank you. [Applause.]

  INTENSIFICATION OF PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND TRADITIONAL LEADERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkosi Z M D MANDELA (ANC): Mr Speaker and the Deputy President, at the
opening of the National House of the Traditional Leaders on 23 February
2010, President Jacob Zuma called for a stronger partnership between the
ANC government and traditional leaders. He said the partnership would
contribute to sustainable development, especially in rural areas.

In his Budget Speech, the Minister of Finance, Pravin Gordhan, prioritised
R860 million to be used for the Comprehensive Rural Development Strategy.
Furthermore, the Minister announced a new grant to support on-site water
and sanitation infrastructure as part of the rural housing programme. An
initial R1,2 billion has, over three years, been made available for this
purpose.

Thus the ANC government is committed to strengthening the partnership
between government and the Institution of Traditional Leadership as part of
its Comprehensive Rural Development Programme. Ndiyabulela. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

              DEMONSTRATIONS BY STUDENTS ON UNIVERSITY CAMPUSES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N M KGANYAGO (UDM): Mr Speaker, the UDM notes that a student protest is
under way at various university campuses today, under the auspices of the
ANC-aligned SA Students Congress, Sasco.

Despite assurances of peaceful demonstration by Sasco, the day started with
violence, class disruptions and road blockages at the University of
Johannesburg. It provides a stark contrast to the recent peaceful mass
demonstration at the University of Cape Town, UCT, led by its vice
chancellor, who spoke with eloquence of the pain and suffering that we all
experience at the hands of criminals while the state fails to provide the
protection that is constitutionally applicable.

How ironic it is that the local ANC Youth League branches are complaining
about the vice chancellor’s dignified words in defence of our most basic
civil rights. There is a worrying trend among so-called “youth leaders”
aligned to the ruling party who seem to celebrate brashness and hooliganism
above everything else.

Sasco’s supposed concern about certain students who have not been able to
study is in complete contrast to their actions that prevent others from
studying while they protest. As for the ANC Youth League, the attack on the
UCT vice chancellor looks petty. It is disrespectful of university students
and staff who have been victims of a spate of unsolved murders. The youth
of this country is facing severe economic and social challenges. The last
thing they need right now is a group of charlatans who are claiming to
speak on their behalf when they really do not care... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                                STUDENT RIOTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs I C DITSHETELO (UCDP): Mr Speaker, yesterday the media covered the
riots by students at the University of Johannesburg. It makes a mother’s
heart bleed to read the placards they carried, in particular the one that
read, “Education remains an important pillar in community development”. It
seems we are back in the 1970s when young people, students in particular,
had to take upon themselves the responsibility of forcing a self-absorbed
government to halt and take notice of issues that our young people faced.

What was interesting to note was the heavy police presence. However, we
just cannot tell if the intention was to keep the peace or to intimidate.
Section 29 (1b) of the Constitution states:

   Everyone has the right ... to further education, which the state, through
   reasonable measures, must make progressively available and accessible.


The fact that we still see students rioting over the issue of education
means that the state has instead progressively failed to make available and
accessible the right to further education. The system of funding needy
students in tertiary institutions is flawed and it ties them to huge debts
when they finish studying. The majority of students that suffer in that
process are black and as such it delays their full participation in the
economic stream.

We need to change government’s culture of keeping on making promises and
having to be reminded by riots of the promises they made. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                   SKYROCKETING AIRFARES DURING WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Mr Speaker, the IFP is in possession of invoices that
are of great concern to us and it warrants an urgent response from all
stakeholders involved in the 2010 World Cup. Our research shows that while
a return ticket to America during June 2009 would have set you back
R15 000, it has now skyrocketed to R35 000 for a return ticket for June
this year. This amounts to a shocking 100% increase.

The IFP has said before that it believes the actions of airlines who were
hoping to capitalise on the flow of traffic to and from South Africa
before, during and after World Cup by doubling, tripling and quadrupling
ticket prices are highly distasteful. Something needs to be done to stop
that. We are again calling on government to inform the public what measures
are being put in place to prevent this price collusion and blatant
profiting by airlines. South Africans are being taken for a ride and it is
our belief that the prices of these tickets should be revisited and
adjusted accordingly. Government could be of great assistance in this
regard.

Seekers Travel deals with parliamentary travel. The invoices I have with me
are for a group of young people under the age of 18 who are going to an
interfaith conference in New York.

                        CEASEFIRE AGREEMENT IN DARFUR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs N B GXOWA (ANC): Mr Speaker, hon Deputy President, the ANC welcomes as
a big step forward the ceasefire agreement signed between the Sudanese
government and the Justice and Equality Movement, a rebel group in Darfur.
The agreement paves the way for the ending of a seven-year conflict. The
temporary ceasefire deal is considered a prelude to a permanent peace
framework agreement that includes a permanent ceasefire deal. It is
expected to be finalised by March, ahead of the country’s April
presidential and legislative elections.

The ANC, working with other formations, will spare no energy in the effort
to find urgent, democratic and lasting solutions to the situation in Sudan
and other countries in conflict. I thank you. [Applause.]

                              POLICE BRUTALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Mnr die Speaker, 10 dae gelede op ’n rustige
Sondagoggend in Krugersdorp was daar ’n ontstellende voorval op ’n
supermarkparkeerterrein. ’n Ou man in ’n bakkie veroorsaak per ongeluk ’n
klein skrapie aan ’n Mercedes Benz se buffer. Die bestuurder van die
Mercedes Benz is woedend, en sy maak dadelik ’n selfoonoproep na iemand.
Binne twee minute is daar twee polisievoertuie met ses polisiemanne op die
toneel.

Die ou man is bleek geskrik, en hy bewe van angs toe die een polisieman
aggressief teen hom staan en sy vinger in sy gesig druk. Omstanders wys die
polisieman dat daar slegs ’n klein skrapie is, maar die polisieman
beskuldig hulle hatig: “Nee, dis ’n crime [misdaad]”. Mense neem foto’s,
maar die polisie dreig hulle ook.

Een persoon wat die situasie probeer ontlont, word sommer hande agter die
rug gearresteer en in die polisievoertuig gestop. Die boeie is te styf, en
binne oomblikke is sy hande rooi en opgeswel. Hy skreeu van pyn en smeek om
hulp. Dis tevergeefs; hy is nou in die polisie se sorg.

Hierdie soort brutaliteit is die vierde in ’n maand in een kiesafdeling.
Mense behoort op die polisie te vertrou vir beskerming, maar hulle word
geviktimiseer, soos deur die President se eie bloulig-brigade.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Intimidasie deur enkele polisielede gee aan almal ’n swak
naam. Dit moet stop. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER (DA): Mr Speaker, 10 days ago on a peaceful Sunday morning
in Krugersdorp, an alarming incident took place in a supermarket parking
area. An elderly gentleman who was driving a bakkie accidently scraped the
buffer of a Mercedes Benz. The driver of the Mercedes Benz was furious and
immediately made a call on her cellphone. Within two minutes six police
officers in two police vehicles arrived on the scene.

The elderly gentleman was in a state of shock and started trembling with
fear when one of them stood aggressively in front of him and shoved a
finger in his face. Bystanders pointed out to the police officer that the
damage was only minimal, but the policeman responded accusingly: “No, this
is a crime.” Some people were taking pictures, but the police threatened
them as well.

An individual who attempted to defuse the situation was arrested with his
hands tied behind his back and thrown into a police vehicle. The handcuffs
were too tight and within seconds his hands were red and swollen. He was
shouting in pain and pleading for help, but to no avail. He is currently in
police custody.

This is the fourth incident in a month of this type of brutality that has
happened in our wards. People should be depending on the police for their
protection, but they are being victimised, even by the blue-light brigade
of the President. [Interjections.] Intimidation by a single police member
is tarnishing everybody’s name. It must come to an end. [Applause.]]

           COMMENTS BY PRESIDENT ZUMA ON BRITISH PRESS STATEMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A MDA (Cope): Mr Speaker, Cope believes that the President of the
Republic, President Zuma, has again turned what should have been a great
public-relations exercise on a global platform into a huge embarrassment
and a diplomatic furore for this country.

We say this as Cope, because we have consistently been critical of the
President of the Republic appointing friends and cronies to high,
influential and diplomatic positions of this country and abroad, not taking
into consideration the issues of capability, capacity and their suitability
to the office.

As a result of naive advice President Zuma unfortunately asserted that it
was the British people in general who held the view that Africans were
barbaric. This is not only unfounded, as is evident from an examination of
facts, but it is also deeply embarrassing to the people of South Africa in
their entirety.

The ANC spokesperson, Jackson Mthembu, has engaged in quick damage control
to restore the reputation that the President painted of our country. We
have missed another opportunity to fly the flag of South Africa high in an
overseas land and to make great impact. I thank you. [Applause.]

         CO-OPERATIVE AGREEMENT ON INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs G M BORMAN (ANC): Speaker, a co-operative agreement between the private
sector and government in KwaZulu-Natal to provide 3 500 families with
affordable housing is to be applauded. This is a new R1,5 billion
integrated residential, commercial and light-industrial development on the
Natal North Coast. It will target the lower- to medium-income market where
people are earning up to R15 000 a month or more, but do not qualify for
the government subsidy.

The project has been developed by Standard Bank’s integrated residential
development division. The MEC for Human Settlements and Public Works,
Maggie Govender, signed the memorandum of understanding with Standard Bank
at the launch of the project.

Kevin Duncan, the managing director of integrated residential developments,
said: “This type of project is a first for Standard Bank in KwaZulu-Natal,
and it is part of our mandate and the financial sector charter to increase
investment in the affordable residential market.” It will also provide work
opportunities, schooling and recreational and social facilities in a self-
contained community, which will include community halls, crèches, open
public spaces and public transport.

Work has already begun on bulk services and will take five years to
complete. This is in line with the ANC policy to develop integrated human
developments. Working together, we can do more. Thank you. [Applause.]

    DIRECTORATE OF RADIATION CONTROL IN DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ON VERGE OF
             COLLAPSE OWING TO MORATORIUM ON STAFF APPOINTMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Speaker, the Directorate of Radiation Control within the
Department of Health is on the verge of collapse due to the chronic lack of
staff and the moratorium on the appointment of new staff. This leaves
anyone needing x-ray examinations and a range of other uses of radioactive
nuclides vulnerable to machinery and sources that have not been tested and
will potentially be delivering too much or too little radiation, which can
result in serious health risks.

The directorate regulates the possession, use, transport, import, export
and disposal of radioactive materials and x-ray machines that are used for
a variety of medical, scientific, agricultural, industrial and commercial
purposes. However, the DA has been informed that the backlog in the
inspections of the x-ray machines is over 6 000 out of a total 15 000
machines, and the backlog for radioactive nuclides is over 1 400 out of a
total of 2 600.

The Durban office, for example, which is responsible for KwaZulu-Natal,
Free State and parts of the Eastern Cape, does not have one single
inspector, and certain areas of this office’s jurisdiction have not been
inspected for nearly nine years.

The Cape Town office, which is responsible for the Western Cape, Northern
Cape and the Eastern Cape, has only one inspector, with the other post
vacant for over a year. The DA is calling on the Minister of Health to
immediately lift the moratorium on the appointment of staff and to set up a
task team to investigate how the situation came about. [Time expired.] I
thank you. [Applause.]

                        KHA RI GUDE LITERACY CAMPAIGN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms F I CHOHAN (ANC): Mr Speaker, the Kha Ri Gude Literacy Campaign
concluded its second successful year of adult literacy classes in January,
which means that South Africa now has approximately one million newly
literate adults. This, Mr Speaker, is cause for enormous celebration.

A United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, Unesco,
report on adult learning and education refers to the failure of most
countries to report on the quality of programmes aimed at adult learners.
However, in South Africa the literacy campaign is able to effectively
report on the quality of the learning experience and also on completion
rates.

International and national statistics show that the current Kha Ri Gude
rate of 87,2% of learner attendance and participation is extremely high for
a campaign of this magnitude. The Eastern Cape has the highest completion
rate with 98% of the enrolled learners surviving the programme, followed by
the Limpopo province with a completion rate of 92%.

The ANC welcomes the results of this project and views it as a big step
forward in the process of ensuring that South Africa is completely
liberated from a century of illiteracy by the year 2014. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                   SKYROCKETING AIRFARES DURING WORLD CUP

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Mr Speaker, the IFP made a statement
about excessive pricing by airlines during the hosting of the 2010 World
Cup. It’s always a bit ironic when parties that stand for a free market,
which says that pricing must be driven by supply and demand, ask government
to step in and make sure there’s no overpricing.

Nonetheless, we do take this challenge seriously, and what we are told for
the moment by the airlines is that there will be seasonal adjustments. This
will obviously be a peak period for them and they do not envisage going
beyond seasonal adjustments. However, we are not simply reassured by that,
and the Competitions Commission is already looking into any possibilities
and signs of collusion.

We also need to take a wider stance on this – take a broader perspective.
What we’re saying not only to the transport sector, but to all other
sectors that will be actively involved during the 2010 World Cup, is that
this is not just about making a quick buck during this period. It is about
laying down a legacy, and it is about, among other things, presenting South
Africa as a wonderful place to come to – affordable, accessible, safe and
so forth. Therefore excessive pricing, whether it’s in the hospitality or
in the aviation sector, or in any other sector, would be extremely short-
sighted. But, of course, since we do have a mixed economy, we can’t step in
and simply regulate airline prices, but we will certainly watch very
carefully for any signs of collusion. [Applause.]

                   SKYROCKETING AIRFARES DURING WORLD CUP
                                STUDENT RIOTS
                              POLICE BRUTALITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias): Hon
Chairperson, Deputy Minister Cronin has responded to the question of
competition in South Africa. It’s a pity that in South Africa people always
speak from both sides of their mouth. People always question government
intervention in the market, because they say that they want an open-market
system, but if we enable the environment to make everybody a player, we’re
then expected to actually regulate prices. So, it’s contradictory. We need
to be very clear that South Africa is a developmental state. Therefore, it
will intervene to regulate the market to make sure that there’s fair play
in the market, and we’re doing that very well.

I also want to speak on issues of education. We need to be honest. The
Department of Education received a 20% budget increase – above that of all
other government departments. The National Student Financial Aid Scheme of
South Africa, NSFAS, fund has been increased since last year. Therefore
government is trying its level best to attend to the financial problems of
students, hence we should appreciate that we cannot only look at one
priority above others. Government’s key priorities are social
responsibility, education, social grants and skills development. Therefore,
there are interventions in that regard, and the UCDP should appreciate that
intervention.

Somebody spoke about the ANC Youth League as having nonchalants and
panderers in it. The ANC Youth League is an organisation of integrity.
[Interjections.] If you look at its ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Order, hon members!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias): Of course, it’s
only the ANC Youth League that could have produced Nelson Mandela. It’s
only the ANC Youth League that could have produced Oliver Tambo.
[Interjections.] It is the same youth league that has produced the current
leadership of the ANC. Are you suggesting today that Nelson Mandela is not
a leader of credibility? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, we can no longer hear
the speaker. [Interjections.] If there could be order, please, so that the
speaker can be heard.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias): Hon Chair, you
see the problem is that they don’t like the president of the ANC Youth
League, and they go above principle and equate him with an organisation.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Deputy Minister, could you
conclude? Your time has almost expired. You were interrupted. That’s why
I’m giving you a few seconds to wrap up.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias): May I speak on
just one more issue, hon Chairperson?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Speak quickly.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias): I want to give
the DA a task. [Interjections.] I want them to go and draw up statistics on
a weekly basis of how many policemen, on duty, trying to do their work, are
brutalised by criminals. When they have got that empirical evidence, we can
speak about police brutality. [Applause.]

                        KHA RI GUDE LITERACY CAMPAIGN
                                STUDENT RIOTS
                      PROTESTS BY STUDENTS ON CAMPUSES
              DEMONSTRATION BY STUDENTS ON UNIVERSITY CAMPUSES
                DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND CRIME ON CAMPUSES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, thank you very much.
There is a large number of matters that dealt with education and I will try
to be as quick as possible in dealing with them.

Firstly, to the hon member Fatima Chohan, I’d like to thank her and perhaps
emphasise the fact that Kha Ri Gude has not only contributed to the
eradication of illiteracy, but has won two prizes, one from the Pan South
African Language Services Board, PanSALB, and one from the Government
Communication Information System, GCIS, for its achievements.

Secondly, there are 40 000 practitioners, mainly between the ages of 25 and
35, that assist in this particular process, and they receive a stipend. So
this provides for economic empowerment, and many of these youth have
decided to pursue a teaching career as a result of this initiative.

Thirdly, the programme is available in all indigenous languages, as well as
sign language and Braille. So it is a remarkable achievement and it is
something that we have to celebrate as a country. Beyond that, 650 000
adult learners are enrolled for this year, and another 650 000 for next
year.

With regard to the issue of progressive realisation of the right to
education, I want to tell the hon member that it is not derived from the
Constitution but from the Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter speaks about
our commitment to provide opportunities for those who do not have means,
but have merit and ability. In fact this ruling party, as well as
government, is committed to this achievement.

What we should celebrate is that 10 years ago only R25 million was set
aside for tertiary education in the form of bursaries. Currently more than
R1,2 billion is set aside for higher education in universities and
universities of technology. [Applause.] Beyond that R800 million has been
set aside over a period of three years for further education and training,
FET, colleges. This increased access has contributed to the fact that more
than 520 000 students are enrolled in FET colleges, which was regarded as
the Cinderella of skills development.

With the regard to the member who spoke quite correctly about empowering
provisions of auxiliary services, the culmination or creation of a
Department of Higher Education and Training will look seriously – in fact,
is looking seriously – at out-of-school opportunities. This means that we
should not pretend that the only skills we require are professional skills
or high-level skills. There are artisanal skills and there are intermediate
skills, which are critical. The list that has been provided, in fact,
speaks to the response of the Department of Higher Education and Training.

Finally, with regard to the issue of misconduct and deviant behaviour on
campuses, the ANC, as well as government, is very clear that everybody has
a constitutional right to peaceful protest and that that constitutional
right does not involve vandalism, intimidation and destruction of property.

So government reaffirms its position in that regard, whether it is the SA
Students Congress, Sasco, or any other student organisation. That
commitment of government to the right to peaceful protest is something that
we will protect, but we certainly do not condone any deviation from that
right which results in violence or gross misconduct.

However, universities, given the fact that they are autonomous, have a
particular responsibility to ensure that their rules provide for measures
to deal with these transgressions. In fact, universities that have been
proactive have successfully dealt with issues where there have been
criminal tendencies. Thank you.

           COMMENTS BY PRESIDENT ZUMA ON BRITISH PRESS STATEMENTS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, I just thought it
important to advise the hon member Mda of Cope that it is not useful to
draw one’s information from a tabloid newspaper, the Daily Mail. It doesn’t
help one at all to get a factual account. She may wave her arms as much as
she wishes, but unfortunately that is not a respected journal from which to
gain one’s information. If one follows the response to the visit of the
President, the statements made at business dinners as well as other state
occasions, one will note that a very positive message about South Africa is
being conveyed and is being received positively by a range of
constituencies. [Applause.]

Finally, I would like to direct the hon member to perhaps visit a few
history books in order to get the sense that imperialism and colonialism
certainly emerged from across that part of the sea and not this one.
[Applause.]

Nkosi Z M D MANDELA: On a point of order, Chairperson ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Deputy Minister of Health ...
Where is the point of order?

Nkosi Z M D MANDELA: Over here, Chairperson. I would like to know if it is
parliamentary for a member, when a Minister is speaking, to point out her
hands like this to an adult. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Well it is quite difficult to say
now, because we didn’t see the action. Secondly, the one which was ruled
out was the one that was gesturing like this. This one is just – I’m not
sure what it means – so I will just look at the interpretation of that
gesture, because this one we all know means “death”. I don’t know what this
gesture means, whether it is a violent threat or whatever else, but we will
look at it. Can we just leave that matter until further notice?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, can we clarify it? No, we just want to clarify
what it means.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Do you know the gesture? What does
it mean?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Yes. When you gesture like this, it means, “go away” or
“stupid”. [Interjections.] This is what we are saying. That is exactly what
it means, and this hon member must stop it. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, order, please! Can you
stop that? What we want for the sake of decorum in this House, because we
don’t know the meaning ... that explanation is his interpretation of the
gesture... Whatever the meaning is, can we refrain, as hon members, from
making gesticulations that might be misinterpreted? Please stop it. Can we
proceed to the hon Deputy Minister of Health?

                   HI-TECH CENTRE TO IMPROVE BLOOD SUPPLY
    DIRECTORATE OF RADIATION CONTROL IN DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH ON VERGE OF
             COLLAPSE OWING TO MORATORIUM ON STAFF APPOINTMENTS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I appreciate the words of
support from the ANC on the Minister’s launching of the state-of-the-art
blood-testing facility. It is part of our effort to protect the health of
all recipients of blood in state facilities, but this was amidst concerns
that we did not have sufficient blood donors in this country. We have a
chronic shortage of blood supplies through the blood transfusion services
of our country. So we would like to continue to appeal to the hon members
and citizens of South Africa to enrol as blood donors.

Ho fana ka madi ke ho fana ka bophelo. Ha o fane ka madi o ka bina mmoho le
mminathoko ya reng: E sehlabelo sa ka ke nna ka sebele. [Mahofi.] [Donating
blood gives life. When you have donated blood, you may join in the chorus
that goes: Yes, I offer myself as a sacrifice. [Applause.]]

To the DA, there is a statement here that says: “... on the verge of
collapse due to chronic lack of staff and moratorium on the appointment of
new staff”. There is no moratorium on the appointment of new staff in the
Department of Health. There is a general measure of saying that we should
delay on those noncritical and nonfrontline personnel that we can do
without that do not directly affect patient care and so on, but all
critical personnel that are immediately necessary for patient care should
be appointed. That would include this category of inspectors for
radioactive nuclides and such technologies.

I just want to tell the hon member from the DA that the shortage of
inspectors is a result of history, where nuclear sciences and radiation
sciences were the preserve of the white minority of this country, because
they were classified as state secrets to protect the secret nuclear
programme of the apartheid regime. As a result of that we have not had
sufficient training of radio and nuclear scientists.

We are trying to catch up. The shortage is not only as a result of a
moratorium, it is also as a result of the fact that there is no formal
programme to train radio and nuclear scientist in this category of work. We
will attend to this, but do not distort our policy position, nor the
history and the cause of the situation.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

      (Consideration of Report of Standing Committee on Appropriations)

There was no debate.

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: House Chairperson, Mr Deputy President and
hon members, section 214 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa requires that government ensures a transparent and equitable system
to divide nationally raised revenue between the three spheres of
government. The Division of Revenue Bill and its underlying allocations are
the culmination of an extensive consultation process between all three
spheres of government.

By setting the three-year allocations for the equitable shares and
conditional grants for provinces and local government, the Division of
Revenue Bill entrenches transparency and accountability in our governmental
fiscal system. It allows all spheres of government to plan ahead and get
down to the business of delivering services to the people.

The Division of Revenue Bill tabled in this House by the Minister of
Finance on Budget day, 17 February this year, was, for the first time,
processed in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009, where a report was tabled with the 2010 Budget
which explained how the division of revenue and national Budget give effect
to, or the reasons for not taking into account the recommendations
contained in the committee reports on the 2009 Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement. I am pleased to announce that the recommendations by the
Standing Committee on Appropriations were taken into account when the 2010
Division of Revenue Bill was drafted.

This Division of Revenue Bill contains details on each grant, its purpose,
criteria for allocating the grant and an account of the performance of each
grant. Such information should contribute towards deepening parliamentary
oversight over the executive.

It gives effect to the priorities articulated by the President in his state
of the nation address on 11 February this year. These priorities are:
Improving the quality of education, as we all know; upgrading health care;
promoting public safety; supporting rural development; creating decent
jobs; building sustainable human settlements; encouraging efficient local
government; and combating corruption.

As government is shifting to target-based outcomes in order to increase
efficiency and improve performance to support inclusive development, these
priorities are unpacked in 12 measurable outcomes. Due to savings of
R25,6 billion identified through shifting towards priorities, the budget
framework allows us to provide an additional R112,2 billion in spending
over the next three years in comparison with our spending plans from a year
earlier. Of the additional resources, national departments will receive
R56,2 billion or 50,1% of the additional resources; provinces R46 billion
or 40,6%; and municipalities an additional R10,5 billion or 9,3% of this
allocation. The largest growth in allocations is to local government where
its share of the total available resource envelope increases from 7,3% in
2009-10 to 8,8% in the 2012-13 financial year.

Schedule 1 of the Bill – if I may just quickly go through the Bill itself –
provides a summary of the allocation of funds to the three spheres of
government. Of the R818,1 billion Budget for this year, national department
functions amount to R527 billion. This includes debt service costs
amounting to R71,4 billion and a contingency reserve of R6 billion.
Provinces receive R261 billion and R30,2 billion is allocated to local
government.

Schedule 2 presents provincial equitable shares and Schedule 3 allocates
equitable shares to municipalities. Schedules 4 to 6 allocate conditional
and other grants to provinces and local government. Schedule 7 allocates in-
kind transfers to municipalities. Schedule 8 allocates incentives for
provinces and municipalities to meet targets with regard to priority
government programmes.

The Division of Revenue Bill provides for a substantial share of nationally
collected revenue to go to provinces in order to strengthen social services
programmes that have a great impact on human development, quality of life
and social transformation. The increase over baseline for the next three
years amounts to R45,6 billion. This is to sustain the social progress made
in recent years, to meet government’s broader developmental objectives and
mitigate the effect of the current economic downturn. Including these
revisions, allocations to provinces will amount to R322,9 billion in the
2010-11 financial year.

Members of this House need to be alerted to the fact that wage agreements
of 2009 have placed pressure on provincial spending over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework. Of the R33,9 billion added to the provincial
equitable share, R30,9 billion is to cover the cost of general wage
agreements and occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, agreements in health
and education. While these additions should attract and retain experience
and skills in the public sector, it is a substantial sum of money that does
not necessarily translate into additional service-delivery outputs. We
therefore cannot afford to continue expanding personnel expenditure,
especially if we do not see a substantial improvement in the quality of
service delivery from the public sector.

The President stressed in his state of the nation address that government
will place education and skills development at the centre of its policies.
A general adjustment of R3 billion over the MTEF is made to the provincial
equitable share to cover health and education priorities. As in previous
years, further investments are made to education to ensure that access and
quality are improved.

Last year we announced that R500 million was added to the infrastructure
grant for provinces to ensure that classroom space is available for Grade R
learners entering the system. A further R1 billion was made available for
schools to upgrade infrastructure, improve security and install libraries
and laboratories. These improvements will become visible during this and
next year.

R9 billion was added to the provincial equitable share to cover the cost of
OSD agreements for educators and a further R1,2 billion was added to the
FET colleges grant for OSD for lecturers. The future of this country
depends on these additions being converted into improved teaching and
learning at our schools. Collectively we have a responsibility to ensure
that this happens.

In health, R3,9 billion is added to the provincial equitable share to cover
the OSD agreements for doctors and health therapists. The HIV and Aids
programme receives an additional R8,7 billion over the MTEF to ensure that
sufficient resources are available for government to deliver on the
commitments announced on World Aids Day.

The 2010 Budget introduces the Expanded Public Works Programmes for the
social sector. In 2010 this grant will perform as a basic wage subsidy for
nonprofit organisations working in home community-based care, allowing them
to pay salaries to volunteers. This year an incentive model will also be
developed for implementation in the 2011-12 financial year. This should
create incentives for provinces to create labour-intensive employment that
provides much-needed relief and support for the needy and vulnerable.

Over the next three years municipalities will receive R210,4 billion,
including in-kind allocations and the sharing of the general fuel levy with
metros, and an additional R12,2 billion. The local government equitable
share receives a further R6,7 billion to protect the poor from increased
electricity prices and secure the delivery of free basic services to all
poor households.

It is critical that intergovernmental grants are designed in such a manner
that they support optimal outcomes. It has become evident that there is a
need to reform the municipal infrastructure grant to appropriately respond
to the different demographic, economic, infrastructural and institutional
challenges faced by the 283 municipalities in the country.

In the 2009 Budget the municipal infrastructure grant for cities was
introduced to enable the cities to more effectively manage, support and
account for built environment outcomes.

The allocations for capacity-building totalling R1,8 billion over the 2010
MTEF continue to be complemented by the Siyenza Manje programme, via the
Development Bank of Southern Africa, to develop skills in engineering,
planning and financial management within municipalities. The Department of
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs announced the Local
Government Turnaround Strategy in 2009. Government works in a co-ordinated
manner to ensure that capacity-building initiatives are implemented
coherently and also create a supportive environment for municipalities.

Chairperson, I would like to thank the committee for the manner in which
they dealt with the Division of Revenue Bill and I look forward to further
engagements. We would want to say that the recommendations in the report
will be implemented working together with the committee. It is clear that
the allocations contained in this year’s Division of Revenue Bill should
put government in a better position to accelerate service delivery and
improve the efficacy of public services. Thank you.

Mr E M SOGONI: House Chairperson, hon Deputy President, colleagues, the ANC
government’s steely resolution to create a better life for all and roll
back the frontiers of poverty through focusing on its five manifesto
priorities is demonstrated in the division of revenue across all three
spheres. It follows, therefore, that the certainty of meeting these
priorities is strengthened or weakened by the quantity and quality of
resource allocation towards this realisation.

The centralisation of revenue raised nationally is intended to foster the
centripetally and spherically autonomous implementation of the ANC
government’s priorities to create hope and restore dignity to ordinary
people. The idea of South Africa as a unitary state characterised by high
inequalities should inform the division of revenue.

A division of revenue which is shorn of a historical basis is prone to
inadvertently catalysing the equal treatment of unequals. Therefore, as a
developmental tool, the division of revenue should be acutely aware of
righting the wrongs of the past and redressing those imbalances.

South Africa is a country in transition from a past marked by the exclusion
of the majority from decent services and amenities. This was engineered to
perpetuate the system of coexistence between the opulent elite and toiling
majority. The creation of Bantu native reserves had no developmental
genesis and implementation, but ensured comfort and plenty to the ruling
oligarchy. This malicious intent is what bequeathed to our young democracy
the so-called rural and poor provinces and municipalities.

Section 214 (1) of the Constitution of South Africa requires that -

   An Act of Parliament must provide for –


      an equitable division of revenue raised nationally among national,
      provincial and local spheres of government.

This is the report of the Bill the Minister tabled in this House. The
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relation Act, Act 97 of 1997 also prescribes the
process for determining the equitable sharing and allocation of revenue
raised nationally.

The Minister of Finance has, as required by the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009, responded to the
recommendations of Parliament at the adoption of the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement, MTBPS. The response is contained in the Budget Review in
Annexure A.

There is an urgent need for Parliament to train Members of Parliament on
this Act and to accelerate the process of implementation because the Act
guides us on the procedures of amending or not amending the money Bills,
especially the Budget. Contained in the Division of Revenue Bill, as
required by section 214 of the Constitution, is the share of national
government and the equitable shares of provinces and municipalities,
including conditional grants to provinces and municipalities.

The Bill seeks to regulate the procedures to be followed on how and when
these resources should be transferred to provinces and municipalities. It
spells out the roles of national departments as transferring offices and
the requirements of the receiving offices.

During the hearings we observed that the National Treasury and the
departments administering certain grants needed to pay closer attention to
the procedures provided for in the Intergovernmental Fiscal Reviews, IGFR.
A dispute arises when conditions of reporting appear to exclude the
departments that are responsible for implementation. The reports from all
the implementation agencies, municipalities or provinces must be
communicated to the relevant departments without creating an unnecessarily
complicated reporting regime for the implementing agency or municipality.
These reports should be and can be co-ordinated at both provincial and
national level. We expect the 2011 division of revenue to include a clause
addressing this matter.

The Committee on Appropriations recommends that the National Treasury and
the Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Cogta, continue to
engage on the matter of unspent conditional grants that municipalities fail
to return to the national fiscus as required by the Public Finance
Management Act and the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act.
It should further investigate whether National Treasury can deduct a
balance from the funds that have not been returned from the equitable
share.

The Public Finance Management Act and the Local Government: Municipal
Finance Management Act provide clear guidelines on procedures to be
followed regarding unspent conditional grants. Therefore, we would
encourage Cogta and National Treasury to hold workshops for their municipal
treasuries and to report to Parliament by the end of May.

Treasury regulations require that agents apply for a rollover of unspent
but committed funds. Parliament would like to engage National Treasury to
withhold the funds of municipalities that do not have capacity to spend. As
a committee we insist that any transferring national officer must produce
proof of the steps taken to build capacity in that municipality, as
required by the Constitution and the Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act.

The withholding of funds is tantamount to penalising the communities that
reside in those municipalities. Though withholding of funds is legal,
punishment should be directed to the officials, not to the communities. In
fact the next division of revenue must include a clause that allows for a
fraction of the grant, for example, 4% or 5%, to provide for capacity-
building.

Currently there are demonstrations demanding service delivery in different
municipalities. Many of these demonstrations are directed at the wrong
people. Demands for services such as housing, crime prevention and jobs
don’t necessarily belong to the municipalities but to other spheres.

The committee supports the Expanded Public Works Programme, the EPWP, which
intends to create longer working time. However, the national Department of
Public Works must insist on portable skills that can be certificated, as
was originally planned in this programme. We suggest that the Portfolio
Committee on Public Works follows up on this matter.

The other challenge is that municipalities that can’t spend cannot report
on what they have done. As a result they are unable to be allocated further
funds. Again, poor communities get penalised if these municipalities have
not provided a report. This department will review the system.

I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the members of the
committee who worked long hours to produce the report; committee secretary,
Mrs Thoko Xaso; the researchers in the committee; my secretary; and the
other support staff who really supported us. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Chair, Deputy President, on Tuesday Parliament approved the
report tabled by the Standing Committee on Finance in respect of the fiscal
framework. We now need to discuss the expenditure in relation to the fiscal
framework and revenue proposals. In his Budget Speech the hon Minister of
Finance highlighted the key spending priorities of government to create a
better life for all.

One of the main focus areas raised by the Minister is job creation. The
Minister quite correctly said that one in four adults seeking work is
unemployed and that almost half our young people have not found work. We
agree with the Minister that job creation is of the utmost importance. Not
only will people with jobs be able to look after themselves and their
families financially, but they will also be contributing to the tax
revenue, growth in the economy, better schooling and opportunities for
their children, as well as building a sense of self-esteem.

The Minister announced various measures by which government proposes to
create jobs. These included, amongst others, a shift in emphasis towards
labour-intensive jobs, increased public sector infrastructure investment of
R845 billion over the next three years, increased expenditure on the
Expanded Public Works Programme, increased investment in skills
development, encouragement of small business development, and a focus on
promoting youth employment.

These proposals are generally welcomed, particularly the one of a cash
reimbursement to people who employ young people without experience, and
whereby an expected 800 000 jobs will be created in the short term, with a
further 500 000 jobs of this nature by 2013 – a DA policy, of course.

The proposed allocation of R52 billion over the next three years for the
Expanded Public Works Programme, however, is disconcerting. Although it
aims to create 4,5 million job opportunities, the jobs are, unfortunately,
of a short-term nature, and no, or very little, skills transfer takes
place.

The Department of Public Works, in a presentation to the Appropriations
committee, admitted that it was impossible to train all people employed on
the EPW programmes in order to improve their skills levels. The
appropriateness of this programme is therefore questionable, as it does not
create sustainable, permanent jobs nor does it equip recipients to find
jobs more easily afterwards as a result of skills gain. In our opinion, the
funds provided for the EPW programmes should rather be used to extend the
Youth Employment Programme and grant more assistance to small and medium
enterprises.

The proposal that a significant portion of the public sector infrastructure
investment to create jobs be undertaken by state-owned enterprises is also
disconcerting. These parastatals have received some R260 million in
financial bail-outs over the past four years due to bad management. Eskom
in particular, where the major portion of these infrastructural investment
job opportunities is to be created, is a prime example of how business
should not be managed. Instead of job creation, Eskom is likely to
contribute to job losses in the economy with their huge proposed,
inflationary tariff increases.

Soos daar in Afrikaans gesê word, dis soos om wolf skaapwagter te maak. [As
the Afrikaans saying goes, that would be like setting the fox to keep the
geese.]

In his speech on the fiscal framework in Parliament on Tuesday, the hon
Mufamadi mentioned the example of a graduate known to him who finds it
impossible to find a job. Yet we have government departments with vacancy
rates of 25% and more, with funding available to fill these vacancies.
Government should indeed be ashamed that, on the one hand, we have
thousands of people out there looking for jobs, and on the other, thousands
of job opportunities in government itself, which they fail to fill.

One of the greatest impediments to creating jobs in South Africa, of
course, is the current labour legislation. In his Budget Speech, the
Minister said, and I quote, “Organised labour must embrace and act on
behalf of all our country’s workers, both those employed and those
desperate for employment.”

The Minister is quite correct. Conversely, Cosatu, in a presentation to the
Finance committee, attacked the fiscal policy framework and contributed
nothing in terms of recommendations with regard to the relaxation of our
stringent labour laws in order to create more employment. They also failed
to offer improved productivity in the workplace, as opposed to only
demanding higher wages. Had they done this, our businesses would become
more competitive in both the local and overseas markets, and more rather
than fewer jobs would have been created. They are adamant that labour
brokers be abolished, thereby shedding even more jobs in the economy.

Cosatu seems to be less interested in job creation and more in increasing
membership to ensure a good life for leadership. They propose, instead, a
wealth tax to balance the budget. They seem to forget that it is normally
the wealthy investors who start businesses and thus create employment. If
they do not believe me, I suggest they contact that wealthy businessman
Julius Malema to establish how, through his endeavours and directorships of
companies, he created a stream of jobs in Limpopo. Another alternative, of
course, is Chancellor House.

Cosatu should rather follow and support the DA’s model of creating an open-
opportunity society. It will lead to the attraction of more investments,
which in turn will lead to economic growth and, hence, more jobs.
Unfortunately continued talks about the nationalisation of mines, the
takeover of the Reserve Bank, the scrapping of inflation targeting and the
tendency of increased centralisation of power will negate any possibility
of attracting more investment and, therefore, more jobs. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: House Chairperson, Deputy President, we are dealing here
with the basis for distributing revenue to the three spheres of government
for the financial year 2010-11. The debate on the Division of Revenue Bill
takes place against growing uneasiness and impatience across our country.

Service delivery rumblings, witnessed almost daily, are becoming ominous.
The poor voters are at the receiving end. The passing of the Bill today
must be meaningful to our people. As Parliament we must hold government
accountable to its promises. No more hollow promises at all levels of
government should be entertained. Government must address the plight of the
people.

Cope welcomes the Budget reform which empowers Parliament to amend
government’s budget so that the most urgent needs of South Africans are
indeed addressed. The million dollar question is, however, whether this
House is equal to the challenge of urgently appointing highly skilled
people with real capacity and the ability to deal with budgets or will it
just resort to cadre deployment rather than the skills that are appropriate
for Parliament’s budget office.

Of course, because of the ruling party’s “sweethearts” we are about to
encounter the issue of accountability. Regrettably, the developmental state
is moving very slowly in respect of the development of our people, hence
Balfour is on fire today.

Cope advocates an activist state wherein citizens will keep government
accountable. We must understand that people are not taking kindly to this
new segment of the ruling party called “tender-preneurs”, as confirmed by
the SACP pronouncement on it. People are sick and tired of being used to
keep the ruling few in their positions, from where they pick the public
pocket for their own enrichment.

Cope confirms that the Minister of Finance performed a good balancing act
with the Budget. Now government must walk the talk, so that the people who
are protesting can see an honouring of promises that were made, leading to
change in the places where they live.

We are concerned that the state-owned enterprises are treating the public
purse as their own cash cow to be used for regular milking. In passing this
Bill, we need assurances that they will be watched strictly by Parliament.
We must stop making the people’s assets into plundering fields for those
who are well aligned and connected. This cancer must be rooted out. I
wonder, however, if the Minister of Public Enterprises has the power and
the support of Cabinet to make sure that those who are “connected” are
dealt with when they are discovered with their hands deep in the cashbox.

Government’s promise to focus more on job creation and rural development
has our support. However, the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and
seeing is believing. This focus should not be undermined because some well-
connected people are aiming for self-enrichment. The people’s patience is
running thin. We are worried that we are seeing a repeat scenario of George
Orwell’s Animal Farm.

We agree that crime, health, education, jobs and poverty reduction are
critical service-delivery barometers. In this debate today we are
appropriating R902 billion of the Budget to the three spheres of government
– a lot can be done for the poor with that.

Let me turn to the conditional grants and their potential for job creation.
With the receiving entities unable to manage debt and lacking proper
financial management, these grants are open to mismanagement. You don’t
have to be a rocket scientist to know that much of these grants will be
used to cover debts in local authorities. We note that the Financial and
Fiscal Commission will be reviewing the grants. Cope believes the review
can be done quicker.
We believe further education and training colleges should be capacitated to
address the shortage and mismatch of skills, and to prioritise the creation
of those skills whose absence have been identified as limiting the growth
of the economy.

As Cope we are delighted that the committee has agreed that the money
allocated and appropriated will be accounted for by the Ministers, the
departments and the local government.

We support the intention to recapitalise about 200 technical schools. We
support the Dinaledi schools, but we want to emphasise that given the
measures that have been put in place to deal with their failures, all
schools must put programmes in place to enable them to perform
appropriately and to implement what has been agreed upon.

We want to make this point very simply: Money that is intended for projects
must be put to optimum use. The enormous leakages everywhere have to be
stopped. This government was born out of the struggle of the people and
that struggle must be rewarded. To abandon the people in whose name the
struggle was waged to benefit a few is to betray the people. We support the
Bill but we wish to warn that it could very well become the rope with which
the ruling party hangs itself. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, colleagues, the hon
Ramatlakane has indicated that many members have their hands in the
cashbox, but I can assure you that in many municipalities, and sometimes in
the provinces, even the cashbox has disappeared. [Laughter.]

However, he also spoke about the question of municipalities using their
conditional grants and the interest derived from them to pay operational
expenditure within those municipalities. That is true; it happens. It is
largely because National Treasury has not as yet devised a way of allowing
municipalities to have separate banking accounts.

For example, if money is allocated for a water project in a particular
municipality, there should be a trading account for that particular
project. Municipalities now put these funds into a global account, hence
there is no accountability. And if they have the opportunity to use some of
those funds to pay staff and other expenses, they do so. Treasury should
address this kind of situation as quickly as possible.

However, when one looks at the Division of Revenue Act, it’s about sharing
amongst the three spheres of government. If you share funds between the
three spheres of government, you’ve got to rely on credible statistics. It
is, therefore, a matter of concern that the Financial and Fiscal Commission
indicated to our committee that the data they are using at the moment for
an equitable share was last updated in 2001. So, we cannot rely on data
from 2001 to ensure that there is an equitable share. I hope Statistics SA
takes note of this so that we can have an equitable share distribution.

We as the IFP associate ourselves with all the findings contained in the
committee report, but it is quite ironic that the first finding of the
committee is as follows:

  The committee noted with concern the persistent delays in implementing
  the pronouncement by the President of the Republic of South Africa with
  respect to the reopening of nursing and teaching colleges.

This is déjà vu. As far back as 1994 the IFP said teaching and nursing
colleges should not be closed because it would cause mayhem for our young
people who would not be given the opportunity to be trained in those
disciplines. What has happened today? We are returning to open teaching and
nursing colleges. A number of those teaching colleges are in a dilapidated
state and now we’ll have to spend a lot of money repairing them. I think it
was political expediency to close those colleges at that time.

However, what we would like to see is the Department of Health doing an
audit on all the institutions that offer training to the so-called nursing
colleges, because many of them are fly-by-night institutions. Young people
and their parents spend a lot of money sending the youth to these
institutions only to find that the qualification they receive cannot be
utilised to get a job in a hospital or clinic.

Our biggest concern with the Division of Revenue Bill and how things
operate is the underspending of funds. It is criminal when municipalities
and provincial governments underspend. To give you an example: In terms of
the municipal infrastructure grant 2008-09, Umdoni Municipality, my
neighbouring municipality, received R195 million but spent R6 million. They
spent only 3,3% of their allocation. Umhlabuyalingana spent 19,5%,
Mtubatuba 9,7% and Eden 9,4%.

This is something we as government should not tolerate. As I said earlier
on, the money is there. The money is not being utilised properly because
people are still putting their hands in the cashboxes and people are not
skilled enough to ensure that they spend the money for its intended
purpose. Who gets short-changed, as a result, are the millions of people
out there who expect this government to deliver on its mandate and
promises.

Lastly, I would like to speak about the water and sanitation grants. The
intention exists to do away with some of these grants and to consolidate
others, whilst money is allocated for new water projects. We have to think
seriously about ageing infrastructure. In a number of municipalities
throughout the country, there is water. We have been receiving water for
about 20 to 30 years, but the infrastructure is ageing so much so that
there are leaks all over and people don’t get water. We should therefore
concentrate on providing funding for ageing infrastructure. Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Chairperson, hon members and Ministers present, Deputy
President, the division of revenue is a vital instrument that provides the
first step in the process of service delivery. It is necessary and logical
that a large proportion of the revenue should be channelled towards the
provinces and municipalities.

These two tiers of government have a constitutional service delivery
mandate. What is more, they are, by virtue of proximity, supposedly better
placed to deliver. Unfortunately this is where the entire process falters.
We have, since the inception of democracy, witnessed a distinct inability
amongst provincial and municipal administrations to manage these revenues
and deliver the intended services.

Conditional grants do not solve this problem. At the heart of the matter is
a severe lack of skills coupled with an institutional culture that
celebrates ineptitude and turns a blind eye to crony-ism and tender fraud.
National government will simply have to improve its ability to monitor the
spending of provincial and local governments. We welcome the recent
announcement of a dedicated unit to investigate tender fraud.

One of the leading causes of service delivery failures and key reasons that
the division of revenue does not produce the intended results is the
countless vacancies at provincial and municipal level in critical areas
such as financial management and engineering.

As the UDM has indicated before, government is missing an opportunity. It
could improve service delivery by providing jobs to qualified and skilled
professionals whilst at the same time reducing reliance on expensive
consultants. These vacancies present a major stumbling block. However, it
will require political will to ensure that these positions are filled. By
their nature, such positions will put the brakes on the gravy train.

It is time for those who ride on this gravy train to realise that they may
be able to ignore our appeals to their consciences and moralities, but they
cannot indefinitely ignore the increasingly frustrated communities marching
in the streets. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T SNELL: House Chair, hon Deputy President, hon members, in 1987, in
his January 8 Statement, the late ANC president Oliver Tambo said:

   We must proceed from the position that our task is to win a revolution.
   Political revolutions are about the capture of state power and its use to
   advance the objectives of fundamental social transformation. This task
   must be carried out consciously and intentionally by the revolutionary
   forces to bring about profound change in favour of the social classes and
   strata that have gained power. Without the victory of the revolution,
   revolutionary changes are not possible. The state is a vital feature in
   an effort to bring about those revolutionary changes, because a new
   society cannot be built within the existing framework. Hence we’ll see
   the opposition’s attack on our progress as we incrementally achieve the
   revolutionary state that was envisaged.

It is critical that we bear this in mind at all times when addressing
budgets as tools of transformation.

The Budget and Division of Revenue Bill allocate resources to give effect
to the ANC’s objectives and policies, ensuring that the state’s resources
are allocated in a manner that systematically and incrementally transform
the state and concretise the people’s contract for a better life for all.
The Bill, in our opinion, achieves these objectives in the 2010-11
financial year and beyond.

As an activist Parliament, it’s our responsibility to transform the budget
process into one that will culminate in an activist budget, using organs of
people’s power to achieve this. The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
Related Matters Act is a mechanism through which this can be achieved. It
is our responsibility to begin engaging our people around the provisions in
the Act and how these will be phased in over time.

Furthermore, the Act is an instrument that sets out a legal framework that
gives a voice to the voiceless in determining how resources should be
allocated amongst the various spheres of government. As public
representatives, it’s our collective responsibility to ensure that all
sectors of society are mobilised into organised constituencies.

In forming partnerships with the people and to give meaningful expression
to the notion of partnership, we as Parliament must ensure that we
strengthen our interaction with the organs of the people’s power that this
very House, through legislation, gave effect to, namely school governing
bodies, SGBs; community policing forums, CPFs; ward committees; hospital
boards; clinic committees etc. These organs of the people’s power can play
a significant role in assisting in the budgeting, monitoring and evaluation
process, in turn accelerating the implementation of the five key areas of
government. Our people must be involved in the planning, execution,
monitoring and evaluation of services delivered to them as they are direct
beneficiaries of these services. As such their participation is critical in
advancing the national democratic revolution.

In ensuring that the strategic objectives are met through the Division of
Revenue Bill, let me emphasise the following from the Bill: The ANC
government’s commitment to the implementation of the five priorities
demonstrates itself in the revenue allocation to provinces, as the
Constitution confers concurrent powers to provinces with respect to, among
other areas, education and the Expanded Public Works Programme, the EPWP,
through the Department of Public Works. In that regard, equitable
allocations should be made to provinces to capacitate them to contribute to
their realisation of sustainable, quality public education and the creation
of decent work.

Over the three-year period, provincial transfers will grow at an average
annual rate of 7,7% to R369,3 billion in the 2012-13 financial year. The
total transfers to provinces for the 2010-11 financial year amount to
R322,9 billion, with R261 billion allocated to the provincial equitable
share and R61,9 billion to conditional grants.

Part of this adjustment is meant to assist provinces in accommodating the
higher-than-anticipated wage settlements and the occupation-specific
dispensation, OSD, payments for Health and Education. Despite the general
challenges of scarcity of skills, there tends to be a higher turnover of
skills in areas such as education and health. The highest skills turnover
is often attended by skills concentration in urban areas and scarcity in
rural areas. The OSD implementation should therefore be expedited to
enhance retention and equitable skills distribution.

The ANC has always viewed education as an instrument of both liberation
from poverty and underdevelopment and an empowerment tool to ensure that
skills and training required to build a prosperous and equitable national
democratic society are developed and retained. Education is one of the
areas that still reproduce the imbalances of the past. Interventions made
in education should be to ensure quality and equity in the education system
through allocations that seek to empower and support learners.

To give further effect to these objectives, the Department of Basic
Education administers the National Schools Nutrition Programme grant, the
Dinaledi Schools grant, the Technical Secondary Schools Recapitalisation
grant and the HIV/Aids Skills Education grant. As a result of the split in
the education Ministry and the formation of the new Department of Higher
Education and Training, the further education and training, FET, colleges
grant is introduced to protect current spending on these colleges by
provinces while the legislative processes required to shift this function
to national government are completed.

Total expenditure on further education and training colleges was taken out
of the equitable share and shifted into this conditional grant. The grant
amounts to R11,9 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period.
It should be noted that the Department is to encourage FET colleges to
develop courses that will be utilised by the various sector education and
training authorities, Setas, for training purposes, thus creating revenue
flows for the FETs and improving sustainable job opportunities for the
participants.

Unlike the opposition parties, the ANC is planning ahead; it’s putting
processes in place that will concretise our ability to deliver on our
election manifesto.

Phase two of the Expanded Public Works Programme aims to create 4,5 million
short-term jobs nationally that will last for 100 days. The effect of job
opportunities which are created through the public works programme is not
only poverty alleviation and skills transfer but the possibility of
subsequent permanency in some of the jobs offered. The EPWP incentive grant
to provinces for the infrastructure sector provides incentives to provinces
and municipalities to increase spending on labour-intensive programmes.

The 2010 Budget introduces a new grant on the Public Works Vote, namely the
Expanded Public Works Programme grant for the social sector. This grant
receives R57 million in 2010-11 to subsidise nonprofit organisations that
have been using the services of unpaid volunteers so that these volunteers
can receive some form of remuneration.
During 2010 a comprehensive funding model for a programme that will
incentivise labour-intensive employment in the sector and inform grant
allocations for 2011-12 and 2013 will be developed.

Municipalities play a critical role in furthering the ANC’s policy
objectives of providing services to all while facilitating local economic
development. Over the next three years, national transfers to local
government will grow to accelerate the delivery of basic services to
households that cannot afford them. In line with the ANC policies,
government is accelerating efforts to assist municipalities in improving
service delivery capacity.

The 2010 MTEF will see an additional R10,3 billion allocated to the local
government sphere, of which R6,7 billion is in respect of the local
government equitable share to ensure conditional expansion of access to
basic services, and to assist municipalities in dealing with increases in
the cost of purchasing bulk electricity. The remainder of the R10,3 billion
will be allocated to the infrastructure grants. [Interjections.] After 30
years, hon Mike, I thought you would’ve had enough.

It is recognised that economic disparities do exist between and within
provinces and municipalities, and that provinces and municipalities have
different demographic and economic profiles, and markedly different levels
of economic development. The equitable share formulae are therefore
redistributive, and in particular, allocations have been increased to
invest in economic infrastructure like roads, social infrastructure and
schools in order to accelerate economic growth and job creation.

The extent of interventions needs to differ among provinces and among
municipalities, mainly due to the disproportionate development strategies
of the apartheid era. The priorities of successive ANC-led governments over
the years have sought to ensure that social and economic deficits inherited
from the apartheid era are addressed.

It is in light of the above that we, as the ANC, are confident that the
Division of Revenue Bill will give effect to the strategic objectives of
government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I forgot to listen to what the hon member was
saying. I wonder if he could repeat his speech. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Ellis, this is not on.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, I’m just asking that the hon Ellis listen very
closely so that I won’t have to repeat my three minutes of speech.

We had a lengthy debate earlier this week about the fiscal framework where
it concerns - and the ACDP expressed concerns about this – the budget
deficits and ballooning government debt levels.
Now as we deal with this Bill today, it is interesting that the Financial
and Fiscal Commission warned that the fiscal situation in South Africa is
very weak, especially regarding provincial and local governments. It added
that, given the slow rate of economic recovery and the inherent lag in
provincial and local government tax revenue growth, many provinces and
local governments will eventually be forced to enact large cuts in public
spending.

This is obviously a matter of great concern. In particular, the Financial
and Fiscal Commission adds that public education and health are likely to
be hit very hard. This is highly regrettable, but to a large extent
unavoidable due to the fiscal framework and the situation with which we are
faced. However, we agree with the commission that cuts should be limited to
noncore areas to ensure that basic service delivery in the crucial areas of
education and health is not compromised.

It is then very concerning to us as the ACDP that some conditional grants
are being utilised to service overdraft debts at provincial and local
government level. This is according to the report. This defeats the whole
purpose of conditional grants, which are conditional on certain services
being delivered and on compliance with specific requirements. We agree with
the recommendations that have been made to address the issues of
conditional grants.

We agree that “a more coherent and co-ordinated approach” is required in
the management of conditional grants to ensure prudent spending and to
achieve the intended objectives. Clearly as parliamentarians in our
committees we will have to exercise better oversight, particularly in view
of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act. The
Parliamentary Budget Office, once it is up and running, will hopefully
provide support to us in that regard.

Now as far as the report on this Bill is concerned, we clearly support the
recommendation of the reopening of nursing and teacher-training colleges.
The obvious question – as was raised before – is why were such institutions
closed in the first place? Their closure resulted in a shortage of
teachers, doctors and nurses.

We are also concerned that certain grants, relating to addressing backlogs
in water, electricity and sanitation at clinics and schools, have been
cancelled. Clearly there are still huge challenges in these areas and we
wonder why that decision was taken.

Lastly, the Deputy Minister of Health stated this afternoon – if I heard
him correctly – that there was no moratorium on the filling of vacancies in
his department. I was then expecting him to object to the report on this
Bill, which clearly states and recommends that, “the Department of Health
should reconsider its moratorium on the vacancies”, yet he did not express
any view on this statement and recommendation in the report. But the ACDP
will support the Division of the Revenue Bill.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it
correct for the hon member to misrepresent me and attempt to mislead
Parliament in the manner that he is doing now?

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, I indicated “if I understood or heard him
correctly”.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Stay away from ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, don’t answer yet; let’s
hear what the point is.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I said, “There is no moratorium
on critical posts”. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, do you then want to
correct this aspect, because he did not say generally, he said “on critical
posts”.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order: I think the difference of
opinion across the House of Parliament is quite in order and I don’t think
that that constitutes a point of order ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Can we allow the hon member to ...

Mr M J ELLIS: ... but, Chairperson, I’m trying to protect him because I
don’t think he has to reply to it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Ellis. Hon Sefularo,
can we see whether the hon member still insists on the issue?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Okay.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the recommendation in the report that was
accepted by this House speaks about vacancies; it does not speak about
specific vacancies. I would have thought that the Deputy Minister would
have raised that matter. Obviously he might not have read the report, but
if it is specific vacancies to which the report refers, then the report
should have said “specific vacancies”. At the moment the report says
“vacancies in general”.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): So what the Deputy Minister is
saying is that he only spoke about critical vacancies, not vacancies in
general.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, I accept his explanation.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Okay, thank you very much.

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Thank you, Chair.

Ke a dumedisa bagaetsho. [Good day, ladies and gentlemen.]

The purpose of the Bill is noble. For a long time now we have seen an
inequitable sharing of resources in terms of the provinces. The Bill needs
to be properly consulted upon, and an issue that needs to be taken into
account is how the national government can play an oversight role over how
and what gets allocated to the local spheres of government. As it stands,
whatever mechanism exists is not in the best interest of the people, who
should be receiving such services at local level.

An oversight role should not only come into play when there is an
unqualified report from the Auditor-General, but also when there is a need
to develop mechanisms in which the national government plays such a role
continuously. Thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Chairperson, the MF congratulates the Minister of
Finance on the award he received in India recently. We are proud of that.

We are very positive about the allocation of funds for youth employment
skills development and the policy shift in respect of the provision of
housing for those who belong to the middle-income group. The mistake South
Africa must not make is digging deeper into becoming a state giving
handouts rather than being a developmental state.

A lot of money should have been given to education for the expansion of the
technical aspect and to where there is skills development. In a country
where you have to import skilled workers and essential workers in the
government service – about 800 000 – and you pay them 30% more than the
normal wage, there is definitely something wrong with the direction of our
education.

If you look at Gujarat in India, for example, every year they build more
technical institutions and medical schools. The MF strongly believes that
as far as education and training is concerned in our country, the public
sector is playing its role, but the private sector is not.

We have made the mistake of spending billions on capital-intensive projects
instead of on labour-intensive projects, and we are going to pay a heavy
price.

No country has economic spin-offs after a World Cup. German economists have
confirmed that. Korea, Japan and the United States all suffered. Our job
must be to make sure that everyone in South Africa has a house and everyone
is skilled. Where are the agrarian, economic and industrial revolutions?
Black Economic Empowerment, BEE, does not mean that somebody who has a firm
gets a contract and farms it out to other people. The construction and the
manufacturing industries are important.

However, notwithstanding all of these concerns, the first Budget of the
Minister of Finance is welcomed by the MF. Remember, in the MF’s election
manifesto, we demanded the following: Lifestyle and unaccounted-for
enrichment checks, inspectors in education, and a planning commission. Sars
is undertaking the lifestyle check, but add unaccounted-for enrichment
checks and what we have developed is called “tenderpreneurship”.

There is another industry that has become very important, and that is the
knowledge industry. It is high time that our country moves away from race.
Forty-two per cent of scientists in the USA are Indians, and they do not
take a ruler and measure an affirmative action policy.

The majority of the players in the New Zealand team are black, but the New
Zealand whites do not have a quota for blacks. South Africa is going race
crazy. The world is grabbing qualified people and South Africa is chasing
qualified people out of the country. Study the wise words and the advice of
world-renowned Professor Ramphele.

From today onwards the knowledge industry must grow, and we must count the
number of graduates and middle-class people we are producing. India’s
growth rate is what it is because of the knowledge industry. Qualified
South Africans are getting e-mails from the US offering them jobs and
asking when they can start, and in South Africa we parade matriculants. The
MF will support the Bill. [Time expired.]

Dr P J RABIE: Hon Deputy President, hon Deputy Minister, hon members, the
purpose of the Division of Revenue Bill is to provide for the revenue
raised nationally among the national, provincial and local spheres of
government for the 2010-11 financial year, and to see that the money raised
is spent by these spheres of government. What is significant is that this
Bill provides for the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Act, Act
9 of 2009, which empowers Parliament to amend the government Budget and to
oversee government actions and monitor spending.

What is also noteworthy is that this piece of legislation will be phased in
over a period of three years. The Standing Committee on Appropriations and
the Finance committee met on a number of occasions to finalise the
establishment of the Parliamentary Budget Directorate, and that will
provide support to assist the Finance and Appropriations Committees to
strengthen their legislative oversight. The DA supports the establishment
of the Parliamentary Budget Office.
The 2010 Budget and the Division of Revenue Bill must be seen in the light
that 900 000 South Africans lost their jobs due to the economic recession,
that only 12 million South Africans are permanently employed, and that
14 million South Africans depend on some kind of government grant.

The recent escalation of 24,8% in the price of electricity and other
inflationary factors may mean that within two years the number of South
Africans that depend upon social grants may even increase to 16 million.

The plight of the poor and the needy cannot be left unattended to, but it
is also acknowledged that the very limited resources of government must be
spent properly so that the benefits of the taxes flow through the system,
such as health care, education, municipal infrastructure grants, etc.

In a submission to the Appropriations committee, the Financial and Fiscal
Commission said that an in-depth review of the management of conditional
grants was needed. It is an open question whether prudent spending and the
intended objectives regarding the creation of jobs are attained by
government agencies and parastatals. The DA will welcome a review. We urge
the Minister to intervene and create the capacity so that proper
performance audits can be conducted in dysfunctional entities.

Globally national, provincial and social governments do not grow economies
or create jobs. Businesses do that. But governments, through their
departments, provide an enabling environment - or a disabling environment,
if the department is dysfunctional - which either encourages or discourages
economic growth. The task ahead is to alleviate unemployment, which at the
present rate is 26,5%. This, Mr Chairman, is clearly unacceptable.

The DA calls upon respective government departments to review our present
rigid regulatory environment. The cost of doing business in this country is
exorbitant. We need investment. It is said that it is possible to set up a
company in less than three weeks in some parts of the world. If we want to
alleviate poverty and unemployment, we must be able to compete with these
economies if we want to attract sustained investment.

Poor delivery of services is endemic to South Africa’s largest parastatals.
Telkom’s service is expensive, with a high fault vote; Eskom’s supply
problems have cost the manufacturing and mining sectors millions, while
Transnet’s rail division inhibits growth in the mining and agricultural
industries. The Chamber of Mines has noted that the lack of rail
infrastructure is a huge bottleneck in terms of the development of our
mineral resources.

The present system of management within these parastatals is clearly not
acceptable. Eskom and Transnet are, at the present moment, without a
permanent chief executive officer. What is of further concern is that Eskom
has stated publicly that South Africa’s electricity supply-and-demand
situation will be tight by the end of this year. To bridge this difference,
it is important to involve all role-players to take proactive steps to
provide adequate services. I thank you, Mr Chairman. [Applause.]

Adv A D ALBERTS: Agb Mevrou die Huisvoorsitter, die VF Plus neem kennis van
die konsepwetgewing ten einde uitvoering te gee aan die allokasie van
staatsinkomste na al drie vlakke van regering. Minister Gordhan het ’n
ewewigtige begroting aangekondig en daar is groot planne in die pyplyn om
werkskepping te bewerkstellig.

Die bekommernis wat die VF Plus egter ten aansien van hierdie
regeringsfunksie het, lê weer eens by die implementering van al die planne
en die korrekte aanwending van die begrotings. Endemiese korrupsie,
baantjies vir boeties, kaderontplooiing, regstellende aksie en swart
bemagtiging is kritiese elemente wat die hele Suid-Afrikaanse projek tans
van progressie beroof.

Trouens, dit vind reeds op ongekende vlakke plaas. Daar is ook ’n sterk
persepsie onder burgery dat politici in die ANC net daar is om hulle eie
sakke te vul, om die staat te plunder en om bloot lippediens te dien oor
dienslewering. Hierdie sake sal met ’n ongekende aggressie aangespreek moet
word. Die ANC-regering sal ook vir Malema moet aanspreek oor sy tenders en
swak dienslewering, onder meer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Adv A D ALBERTS: Hon Madam Speaker, the FF Plus notes of the draft
legislation with the view to give effect to the allocation of state revenue
to all three spheres of government. Minister Gordhan announced a balanced
budget and there are major plans in the pipeline to bring effect the
creation of jobs.

The concern that the FF Plus has with regard to this function of government
lies once again in the implementation of all these plans and the proper
employment of these budgets. Endemic corruption, cronyism, cadre
deployment, affirmative action and black empowerment are critical elements
that are at this time holding up the progression of the entire South
African project.

As a matter of fact, this is already happening at unprecedented levels.
There is also a strong perception among the citizenry that politicians in
the ANC are there just to fill their own pockets, to pillage the state and
to simply give lip-service with regard to service delivery. This matter
will have to be tackled with unprecedented aggression. The ANC government
should also speak to Malema regarding, inter alia, his tenders and poor
service delivery.]

The unprecedented flare-up of service delivery protests is evidence of the
uselessness of a Bill if it is not respected. The government and all its
office bearers must be seen to respect the rule of law. If they do not,
then the people who are paying the salaries of the government will not
respect the government and its laws either.

It is a simple process of cause and effect. Therefore, when the Minister of
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs says that it is the fault
of white ratepayers’ associations that certain local governments are not
financially viable, he is missing the point completely. If government did
its job properly in the first place, citizens would not have to organise
into ratepayers’ associations and make use of self-help to survive.  It is
truly that simple.

One of the ways we can create sustainable service delivery is to bring back
the lost expertise forced out of the Public Service and the free market by
interventions like affirmative action and black economic empowerment.
Otherwise we will have to contend with the situation aptly described by
Abbey Makoe in today’s The Star newspaper, and I quote him:

   Never, it seems, can the ruling party rely on its rich history in order
   to curry favour with short-changed communities.

And then he asks: What is to be done? The FF Plus answers: Stop corruption
and bring back the lost expertise from the minority communities to act as
mentors for future generations. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

Ms R J MASHIGO: Hon Chairperson, Deputy President and Members of
Parliament, before I get to my speech I just want to say that it is very
interesting that FF MP Mr Spies requested that retired white technicians be
employed and that the ANC government employ those people. So if they don’t
make any difference, the hon member from the FF must go and talk to them
and let them bring about the difference he said in this Parliament they
would bring about. [Applause.]

In this debate I’ll focus on the division of revenue in order to determine
the extent of the allocations for quality health care and sustainable rural
development. Section 214 of the Constitution, as already mentioned, demands
that in terms of the division of revenue, resources are allocated in line
with provincial needs, fiscal policy and efficiency at all levels of
government in order to provide a better life for all. The provinces and
local government are best placed to meet the needs and demands of the
people, as well as to monitor the expenses in terms of what is happening
locally.

The ANC government is guided by the Freedom Charter in that there shall be
access to health care for all. No doubt, the Freedom Charter committed
government to promoting a preventive health-care scheme, free medical care
and hospitalisation, especially for the needy, old, women and the young. As
a consequence we all know that since 1994 there have been many achievements
in health care.

I can make mention of just a few of these. Greater access and availability
of health services has benefited the targeted people. There is free primary
health care for all, and right now we are discussing the implementation of
national health insurance. There is accelerated implementation of the HIV
and Aids plan; and there is improved access and addressing of the needs of
those affected by HIV and Aids, including ARV treatment both nationally and
provincially.

Nevertheless, we know that we still need to do more - making services
available to all South Africans and ensuring better health outcomes. The
resources of the public health system need strengthening in the areas of
personnel and diseases related to HIV and Aids, and with regard to
tuberculosis, the infant mortality rate and the life expectancy rate.

Conditional grants in health care play a large part. I will just mention a
few of them, owing to time constraints. We have a comprehensive HIV and
Aids grant. We have the hospital revitalisation grant. We have the health
professions training and development grant, which will address all the
recruitment needs and developmental needs of people, and especially focus,
again, on specialists in medicine.

We all know that in the Northern Cape hospitals have been revitalised. The
Robert Ferreira Hospital, the Themba Hospital and the Ermelo Hospital are
also nearing completion as a result of the hospital revitalisation
programme. Similarly, we all know that in the Free State there’s a very
intensive programme to address the HIV and Aids-related stigma,
conscientising communities and making them aware of such health-related
issues.

With regard to rural development, the ANC considers rural development a key
pillar in addressing poverty, inequality and unemployment. Historically we
know that people in rural areas were neglected owing to policies based on
cheap labour and discrimination. We know that right now this is still
continuing. We have the eviction of people on the farms. Rural people don’t
get any basic services, and it is our duty as the ANC to remember what the
Freedom Charter said to us – “The land shall be shared by all those who
work it.” These people working the land will be helped with implements,
seeds, tractors, infrastructure for irrigation and other forms of material
support.

The hon Deputy Minister of Finance has already acknowledged that they have
considered what the Appropriations committee has recommended to them, and
that is highly appreciated, because it means they remember the mandate that
was given to them by the people during the elections in 2009.

We can’t run away from our five basic priorities which were in the
manifesto of the ANC and are now the ANC-led government’s policy. We can’t
run away from them and try to address other issues in order to satisfy
people who are not interested in the development and upliftment of our
people. [Applause.]

We are happy that the hon Nkosi Mandela referred to the grant to support
water and sanitation infrastructure as part of the rural housing programme.
Some people should also appreciate it. The reason why some people don’t
appreciate it is that they have never ever experienced what the people who
voted for the ANC have experienced. [Applause.]

They never experienced the need for the Expanded Public Works Programme,
which addresses the needs of all those people who don’t have anything to
eat, people who go to bed hungry. So the only way to address the hunger and
poverty of the people is to come up with programmes like the Expanded
Public Works Programme.

We discussed that issue in our meetings. We all understand what the EPWP
means, we all understand what the second phase of it means and we all know
that these people are going to bed hungry. Most of us here have people who
work for us and go to sleep hungry, who tell us that they have relatives
who lie hungry and they say, “Thanks to the ANC for the Expanded Public
Works Programme”. The fact is that the social factor of the Expanded Public
Works Programme has been taken a step further and is going to employ these
people on a permanent basis, and they are going to earn money like any
other person. That will address the really basic needs of the people. They
must not come here and grandstand and say that people have everything.

The people out there are listening to you. You go to people to vote for you
but you say they must go to sleep hungry. I don’t know how they will go to
the polls and vote for you when you still disregard the little that the ANC
has done for them to be able to eat. Let’s do some introspection and ask
ourselves: Are we being fair? Is the division of revenue unfair? It is
quite fair, because it’s addressing the needs of the people.

Whilst on this issue, the purpose of the Budget is to promote rural
economic infrastructure which involves the building of roads and railways;
the revitalisation of irrigation schemes, dipping tanks, fencing, community
gardens and infrastructure; and the erection of bridges. It also goes
further to address ICT infrastructure, because people in the rural areas
need to be connected like all other people. What labour do we need? We
don’t need capital labour to do this. We need all these people to do that
job, get paid the incentive - because we all know there’s an incentive -
and eat and sleep happily, like any of us present here.

The rural local government has to lead the process of development, land
reform and agrarian reform. We all know that we are held fast by the
willing-buyer, willing-seller system. No one addresses us and tries to help
the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform on how better to approach
it, how not to sell the land to foreigners, but rather to sell it to the
government with the price of the land not being market-related, and not
ignore the needs of local people.

There is a lot of development in the agricultural sector. In KwaZulu-Natal
there is the Agribusiness Development Agency, which rescued emerging
farmers from collapse through its support. Consequently 13 farms, which
fell mainly under the sugar production sector, were included in the sugar
mills agreement with the Department of Agriculture.

Even in the Eastern Cape we saw on TV last week that people were happy,
stating how the government has helped them. Let’s all see that. Let’s all
think of the people. Let’s all think of those people who, in 1994,
addressed the Freedom Charter of the ANC, who took part in the Congress of
the People representing the ANC, speaking about the Freedom Charter,
feeling very well how people felt. They went there to address what we are
addressing here.

The hon Nel said, “Don’t retard our progress. Think of revolution and what
our achievements are supposed to do.” [Interjections.] Everybody needs to
have a better life. Fortunately our committee knows everything. We are
liberated on everything. Whatever statements they change in here we are
going to address in our meetings. We are going to address the monitoring
and evaluation issues in our meetings. We are going to sit down together
and address the issues and see to it that the departments are performing
well. We are going to sit on them, and we are going to roll up our sleeves
and say, “Let there be delivery; let there be monitoring; let the
committees account to us; and let even the portfolio committees address all
the issues that affect us”. The ANC supports the Bill. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: House Chair, let me take this opportunity
to thank all the members who contributed to the debate and supported this
Division of Revenue Bill before this House. A number of issues were raised,
but I am going to stick to those that relate to this Bill because some
members happened to have brought the wrong speeches.

The issue of the conditional grants was raised by a number of members of
this House and the committee. The performance of the grants has generally
improved over the years. More children are being fed at schools compared to
five years ago. Statistics also show improvement in terms of access to
basic services such as water, sanitation, electricity and houses. HIV and
Aids programmes are improving and a number of these grants are actually
doing what they are supposed to do.
However, we agree that more needs to be done. Processes are currently
underway to review these grants. We trust that working together with the
committee and this House, we will be able to improve on performance and
oversight. At the same time we will ensure that government’s programme of
action is given effect.

Also, as Mr Singh indicated, we agree that provincial and equitable share
formulas are based on outdated data. This is the reason that the matter is
also being looked at and we trust that the 2011 Division of Revenue Bill
will take this into account. One would recall that the last time we had a
census was in 2001, hence the statistics we used are the only official
stats available. However, we take the point, Mr Singh.

We also want to re-emphasise the fact that in order for us to ensure that
these grants are not abused to pay debt or other unrelated matters which
they were not meant for, as has been raised by some members, oversight in
Parliament will assist us to identify those areas. The point you raised, Mr
Singh, regarding the introduction of trading accounts, is a bit of a
challenge because it would be difficult to monitor. We trust that you are
going to work with us in finding a solution to this.

Regarding the issue of the Expanded Public Works Programme, phase two of
the programme has a focus on increasing spending on labour-intensive
programmes. I agree that these jobs are not sustainable, but research has
also proved that once people have actually been in employ - no matter how
short the period is - it provides them the opportunity to be able to move
into other areas of employment.

The water services operating grant does make provision for the maintenance
of existing water and infrastructure. We do, however, take the point and we
should monitor whether municipalities utilise it according to the Act.
Also, when it comes to the issue of capacity within municipalities,
government is looking at the turnaround strategy. One would recall that the
Minister of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs tabled the
turnaround strategy of the department. Part of that turnaround strategy
looks at building capacity in a number of areas, amongst them financial
management, infrastructure delivery and improving governance. So those are
the areas that we would be looking at to ensure that that happens.

With regard to the issue of the recommendations by the Financial and Fiscal
Commission, the FFC, as members would know, there is a response to those
recommendations. We take the recommendations seriously. We are working
together with the committee to ensure that those are taken into account.

Ms Ditshetelo raised the issue that the Bill must be consulted upon. The
consultation process is the one that took place in the committee where -
I’m told - the member missed a number of meetings. It would help when
members take those consultative processes seriously because that is an
opportunity to do just that. [Interjections.] However, we shall continue
working with them even if it means visiting some of the members at home so
that the consultation can take its real course!

Hon Ramatlakane raised the issue of whether Parliament would be equal to
the task of oversight. I would want to believe that because this Parliament
includes the hon member, it is equal to the task. All other members will
work together to ensure that that happens.

Chairperson, without taking much of your time, once again let me take this
opportunity to thank members for their support for the Division of Revenue
Bill. I trust that we are now going to go out there and ensure that its
implementation delivers what it is supposed to. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
 AFFAIRS – 2008-09 ANNUAL REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND
                                   TOURISM

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
  AFFAIRS – FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND ANNUAL REPORT OF TRANS CALEDON TUNNEL
      AUTHORITY (TCTA) AND WATER RESEARCH COMMISSION (WRC) FOR 2008-09

      CONSIDERATION OF JOINT REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND
 ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND
 FORESTRY – DEPARTMENT OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY’S FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                        AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2008-09

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Honourable House Chairperson, hon
Deputy President, I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on 2008-09 Annual Report of Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism accordingly adopted.

Report on Financial Statements and Annual Report of Trans Caledon Tunnel
Authority (TCTA) and Water Research Commission (WRC) for 2008-09
accordingly adopted.

Joint Report on Department of Water Affairs and Forestry’s Financial
Statements and Annual Report for 2008-09 accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINING - OVERSIGHT VISIT
         TO FOUR PROVINCES TO INVESTIGATE ILLEGAL MINING ACTIVITIES

Mr M F GONA: Honourable Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon members, the
Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources received reports in June 2009 that
more than 86 suspected illegal miners died at Harmony Gold Mines in the
Free State. True to being an activist Parliament, we immediately conducted
public hearings followed by oversight visits that targeted other affected
mines in the Free State, the North West, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal. A
detailed and unanimously adopted report on those oversight visits was
submitted to Parliament on 27 November 2009. Our findings are that the
phenomenon of illegal mining, which poses a serious challenge to the mining
industry, is planned, funded and operated by highly sophisticated, well-
armed and syndicated groups of criminals that are located within the
country and beyond our borders. Their foot soldiers, who are at the
coalface of these activities, are largely unemployed ex-mineworkers and
general jobseekers, including ex-mineworkers from our neighbouring states.
Apart from the ordinary people who engage in illegal mining activities such
as for coal for subsistence purposes at Coronation Mines in KwaZulu-Natal,
high-calibre weapons are used in forced mining in some of the mines such as
Barberton Mines in Mpumalanga. Places such as G-Hostels in Welkom are used
as treatment plants where the community gets exposed to high levels of
toxic gases emitted during these primitive processes of smelting gold-
bearing ore. Learners from the adjacent school are lured out of classrooms
to participate in these hazardous production processes.

We appreciate and fully support the well-planned intervention strategy
being executed by the security cluster in combating this scourge. The
initial positive results have been registered in raids recently mounted by
our security forces in Welkom and Barberton mines. This includes the offer
of amnesty against prosecution to those illegal miners who surrendered to
the police.

Multipronged strategies are required to rid the country of this phenomenon
of illegal mining that has already killed more than 200 people and has cost
us more than R5,6 billion in revenue losses per annum. We must remove these
apparent and lucrative market conditions and strive for the eradication of
conditions that are conducive to illegal mining. These strategies,
therefore, must include the arrest and incarceration of identified kingpins
and the withdrawal of licences for the gold dealers who are guilty of
laundering illicit gold. Mining companies, however, must also be held
directly accountable for access control in their mines. The Department of
Mineral Resources and mining companies must be encouraged to assist small-
scale miners to operate the mothballed and unused mine shafts that still
contain gold-bearing ore deposits.

In conclusion, the portfolio commmittee is committed to processing all the
necessary amendments to the legislation aimed at strengthening our
legislative framework in dealing decisively with this scourge. I thank you.

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AUDITOR-GENERAL ON
                STRATEGIC PLAN AND BUDGET OF AUDITOR-GENERAL

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AUDITOR-GENERAL ON ANNUAL
                      REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL 2008-09

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

 That the Reports be adopted.
Motion agreed to.

Report on Strategic Plan and Budget of Auditor-General accordingly adopted.

Report on Annual Report of Auditor-General 2008-09 accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND
  LAND REFORM ON 2008-09 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON RESTITUTION OF
                                 LAND RIGHTS

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND
     LAND REFORM ON 2008-09 ANNUAL REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF LAND AFFAIRS

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND
      LAND REFORM ON 2008-09 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE INGONYAMA TRUST BOARD

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

 That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on 2008-09 Annual Report of the Commission on Restitution of Land
Rights accordingly adopted.

Report on 2008-09 Annual Report of Department of Land Affairs accordingly
adopted.

Report on 2008-09 Annual Report of the Ingonyama Trust Board accordingly
adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:29.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.   The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)  Strategic Plan of the Office of the  Public  Protector  for  April
        2010 – March 2013 and Annual Performance  Plan  for  April  2010  –
        March 2011.

    (b)  Letter from the Minister of Trade and Industry dated  27  February
        2010 (received 4 March  2010),  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National
        Assembly explaining the delay in the submission of the  tabling  of
        Strategic Plans in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
        Related Matters Act, 2009.

       TABLING OF STRATEGIC PLANS IN TERMS OF  THE  MONEY  BILLS  AMENDMENT
       PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS ACT, 2009.


       The Office of the Leader of Government Business requested two  weeks
       ago that, in terms  of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
       Related Matters Act, 2009 (hereafter  referred  to  as  “the  Act”),
       strategic plans must be tabled after the fiscal framework is  passed
       on 2 March 2010. The Department of Trade and Industry  has  reviewed
       the Act and noted that entities are also required to table. However,
       the Act does  not  define  “entities”.  According  to  legal  advice
       provided to the  dti,  “entities”  are  defined  in  the  PFMA,  and
       therefore  departments  are  required  to  table  strategic  of  all
       entities listed in Schedule 2 and 3 of the PFMA by 03 March 2010.


       Previously, in terms of the PFMA and Treasury Regulations  only  the
       dti, CIPRO and SAMAF were required to table. As you would note,  the
       implementation of the new Act poses a significant  challenge  as  15
       dti entities who were previously  not  required  to  table  are  now
       compelled to do so without sufficient notice.  The  dti  is  in  the
       process of informing all 15 entities of this legal  requirement  and
       will ensure that all strategic plans are tabled by the end  of  June
       2010. However, to facilitate the process, the department will ensure
       that, entities that are required to brief  the  Trade  and  Industry
       Parliamentary Committees, will provide sufficient information to the
       relevant Committees in preparation for discussion.


       Should you wish to discuss the matter further, please contact me.
        Kind regards



         (Signed)
        Dr Rob Davies, MP
        Minister of Trade and Industry
        Date: 27/02/2010


        cc:   Ms J Fubbs, Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee  on  Trade
             and   Industry
             Mr D Gamede, Chairperson of the Select Committee on  Trade  and
             International Relations


    (c)  Letter from the Minister of Science and Technology dated  4  March
        2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the  delay
        in the submission of the tabling of Strategic Plans in terms of the
        Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009.

         TABLING OF THE STRATEGIC PLAN FOR THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCE  OF  SOUTH
         AFRICA


         The Department of Science and Technology (DST)  received  a  letter
        from the office of  the  Deputy-President,  Mr  Kgalema  Motlanthe,
        regarding the tabling of strategic plans by  departments,  entities
        or institutions on or before 3 March 2010. The request is  in  line
        with the requirements of section  10(1)(b&c)  of  the  Money  Bills
        Amendment Procedure and Related Matters  Act  of  2009,  which  was
        assented by the President on the 16 April 2009.
         The letter from the Deputy-President was received by the DST on the
        9 February 2010 and all the DST based entities were informed  about
        this request. All DST based entities have managed to  submit  their
        strategic plans for tabling, except for the Academy of  Science  of
        South Africa (ASSAF).

         ASSAF was established by an Act  of  Parliament.  ASSAF  has  since
         updated their strategic  plan  in  May  2006.  Although  the  ASSAF
         strategic plan is still in action, the  ASSAF  Council  is  in  the
         process of reviewing and updating this current strategic plan  with
         the aim of presenting it later to Parliament. The Academy has  also
         prepared copies on  the  current  strategic  plan  and  if  granted
         permission could table to Parliament.

         The problem  is  that  previously  entities  used  to  present,  on
         request, their  strategic  plans  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
         Science  and  Technology.  In  future,  the  DST  will   take   the
         responsibility that all DST based entities submit  their  strategic
         plans as required  by  section  10(1)  (b&c)  of  the  Money  Bills
         Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act. The ASSAF Council will
         also  be  required  to  finalise  the  process  of  updating  their
         strategic plan and submit to Parliament.


         Should the Speaker require additional information on  this  matter,
        please feel free to contact my office or  the  Director-General  of
        the DST, Dr Phil Mjwara.


        Warm regards






         (Signed)
         G N M PANDOR, MP
        MINISTER
         Date: 4-03-2010


    (d)  Letter from the Minister  in  the  Presidency:  National  Planning
        Commission dated 4 March 2010,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National
        Assembly and the Chairperson of the National Council  of  Provinces
        explaining the delay in the submission of the tabling of  Strategic
        Plans in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure  and  Related
        Matters Act, 2009.


        Late Tabling of Statistics South Africa Strategic  Plan


        I have been informed by the Leader of Government Business  that  in
        terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure  and  Related  Matters
        Act, Parliament required all strategic plans  to  be  tabled  by  3
        March 2010.  This  is  obviously  a  departure  from  the  previous
        guidelines in the form of Chapter 5  of  the  Treasury  regulations
        that prescribed that strategic plans be tabled at  least  ten  days
        before the discussion of the Budget vote in the relevant committee.





        The Leader of Government Business’ correspondence (dated 8 February
        2010) brought this change to my attention at a somewhat late  stage
        as departments were still working on the basis  of  the  timeframes
        set out in the Treasury regulations. As the correspondence received
        referred to a letter received from  the  Speaker  to  the  National
        Assembly, we therefore wish to indicate that the strategic plan  of
        Statistics South Africa will unfortunately not be  able  meet  this
        deadline.



        While I am aware that  the  Money  Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
        Related Matters Act does not require a  written  apology  for  late
        tabling of strategic plans, I take our responsibility to account to
        Parliament very seriously and therefore feel compelled  to  explain
        our late tabling. I have made the requisite arrangements  with  the
        parliamentary committee to ensure that  the  documents  are  tabled
        with sufficient time for them to interrogate the information.



        I  trust  that  this  explanation  will  be   given   the   desired
        consideration.



        Yours sincerely



         (Signed)

        Trevor A Manuel, MP

        Minister in the Presidency: National Planning Commission

        Date: 4 March 2010


2.   The Minister of Communications

    (a)  Strategic Plan of the South African Broadcasting Corporation for
        2010 – 2013.
        Correction: The above entry replaces item 14(e) published under the
                  name  of  the   Minister   of   Communications   in   the
                  Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 3  March
                  2010, page 317.


3.   The Minister of Economic Development


    (a)  Medium Term Strategic Plan for the Department of Economic
        Development for 2010/11 - 2012/13.


4.   The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation


    (a)  Strategic Plan of the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA) for
        2010 – 2011.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT T100304e-insert1 Pages 350-375

CREDA INSERT T100304e-insert2 Pages 375-388

CREDA INSERT T100304e-insert3 Pages 389-395

CREDA INSERT T100304e-insert4 Pages 395-417


