---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 18 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-18
---

TUESDAY, 18 MAY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 09:59.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mnr W F FABER: Mev die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag van die Raad sal voorstel:

   Dat die Raad —

      1) kennis neem dat die Minister van Verdediging en Militêre Veterane,
         Lindiwe Sisulu, ’n groot oordeelsfout begaan het om mnr Julius
         Malema, as jeugleier van die ANC, asook ander senior lede van die
         ANC-jeugliga toe te laat om twee weke militêre dienspligopleiding
         te ondergaan;


       2) verder kennis neem dat dit belangrik is dat die weermag nie by
          partypolitiek ingesleep moet word nie;

       3) verder kennis neem dat die DA vra dat dié tipe onaanvaarbare
          praktyk stopgesit moet word; en

        4) laastens ook vra dat die besluit, dat mnr Malema met
           staatsfondse deur die SA Weermag opgelei word, herroep moet
           word.

Ek stel so voor. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr W F FABER: Madam Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council –

   1) notes that the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, Dr Lindiwe
      Sisulu, has made a big error of judgement by allowing Julius Malema as
      youth leader of the ANC, as well as other senior members of the ANC
      Youth League, to undergo two weeks’ military service training;

   2) further notes that it is important for the Defence Force not to be
      dragged into party politics and requests that this kind of
      unacceptable practice be stopped; and

      3) therefore requests that the decision to have Mr Malema trained with
         state funding by the SA Defence Force be reversed.]

Ms B P MABE: Deputy Chair, I object. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I’m correcting myself.
Hon Mabe, can you sit down. It is motions right now.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, I wish to give notice that, on the next sitting
day of the Council I shall move:

  That the Council —


      1) offers its condolences on the death of Dr Frederik Van Zyl
         Slabbert, aged 70, to his wife and family after a long illness;


      2) notes that the late Dr Van Zyl Slabbert was elected to Parliament
         in 1974 and was Leader of the Progressive Federal Party (PFP) from
         1979 to 1986;
      3) also notes that Dr Van Zyl Slabbert then played an influential role
         as analyst, and in the setting up of the Institute for a Democratic
         South African (IDASA) and in 2008 was appointed Chancellor of
         Stellenbosch University; and


      4) further notes that the late Dr Van Zyl Slabbert made a huge
         contribution to the transition of South Africa on the road to
         democracy and has left deep and lasting footsteps on the political
         landscape.


I so move.

Mnr H B GROENEWALD: Mev die Voorsitter, namens die DA gee ek hiermee kennis
dat ek sal voorstel:

  Dat die Raad —


     1) sy diepe bekommernis uitspreek oor die treinstaking in Suid-Afrika
        en erken dat dit die land se ekonomie tot R15 miljard uit die sak
        sal jaag;


     2) kennis neem dat Suid-Afrika dit nie kan bekostig nie; en aanvaar
        dat hoe langer die staking voort duur, hoe ernstiger die gevolge
        wat dit vir al die burgers in die land sal inhou.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr H B GROENEWALD: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of the DA I hereby give
notice that I shall move:

  That the Council –


    1) expresses its concern at the railway strike in South Africa and
       concedes that it could cost the country’s economy up to R15 billion;
       and


    2) notes that South Africa cannot afford this and accepts that the
       longer the strike continues, the more serious the consequences will
       be for all of the country’s citizens.]

Ms B P MABE: Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the Council, I shall move:

  That the Council —

      1) notes the public admission by Cope general secretary, Charlotte
         Lobe, that the people of South Africa have lost interest in the
         flagging party as it battles leadership crises, internal spats,
         factionalism and anarchy;


      2) further notes that the party’s current audited membership is a far
         cry form the nearly 500 000 which Ms Lobe claimed last year; and
      3) acknowledges that the inflated membership figures were nothing but
         a ploy to exaggerate the support of the flagging party prior to the
         2009 national and provincial elections.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chair, I think the motion earlier on by hon Groenewald
is a motion without notice, and I think it is premature as we are still
dealing with notices of motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, please.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, let me correct you. It is Mr Tau who is
going on with me and I’m just responding. It is Mr Tau; he must be called
to order. Please.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can both of you please
obey the Rules. Mr Tau, that goes for you as well.

                    CONDOLENCES ON DEATH OF WEYNI DEYSEL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the tragic death of The Citizen newspaper’s cartoonist Weyni
         Deysel who committed suicide on Saturday evening, 15 May 2010;


      2) further notes that Deysel was an accomplished journalist who used
         his gift as an artist and won several awards as well as Vodacom’s
         Gauteng Journalist of the Year in 2009; and

      3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to his
         family, friends and relatives and calls on all South Africans to
         seek help in resolving challenges that they face and urges relevant
         government departments to enhance awareness of programmes that are
         available for our people.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                  Murder and kidnapping on free state farm

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council -

      1) notes that two Free State farmers appeared in the Bloemfontein
         Magistrate’s Court on Monday, 10 May 2010 after a man hunting with
         dogs on their farm was killed with one of his dogs and three of his
         friends kidnapped and badly assaulted at Dikatso near Sannaspos in
         the Free State province;


      2) further notes that the two men face a charge of murder, three of
         attempted murder, malicious damage to property, assault with intent
         to cause grievous bodily harm, kidnapping and the illegal pointing
         of a firearm;


      3) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
         the continued disregard of the lives of black farmworkers and
         dwellers by farmers in the Free State; and

      4) calls on the police and the Department of Justice and
         Constitutional Development to ensure that the perpetrators of these
         colossal crimes receive the full might of the law.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


             SPEEDING CAR KILLS TRAFFIC OFFICER IN ODENDAALSRUS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that a Free State traffic officer was tragically killed near
         Odendaalsrus when she tried to stop a speeding vehicle near
         Monyakeng on Tuesday, 11 May 2010;


      2) also notes that the traffic officer was monitoring motorists for
         speeding at Allanridge Road next to Monyakeng when she was knocked
         over by a reckless driver who was travelling at 146 km per hour in
         an 80 km per hour zone;


      3) further notes that the 34-year-old driver was arrested for culpable
         homicide and speeding; and

      4) takes this opportunity to convey its condolences to the family of
         the deceased traffic official and calls on all motorists to respect
         traffic rules.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

            DRUG SHORTAGES IN EASTERN CAPE HOSPITALS AND CLINICS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:


   That the Council –


     1) notes the drug shortages in the Eastern Cape hospitals and clinics
        and calls on the Minister of Health to investigate the situation;


     2) acknowledges that primary health care at our clinics is absolutely
        essential, especially for TB and HIV/Aids patients;

     3) recognises that there is a lack of TB drugs, especially the 60/30
        drugs for children and without these drugs MDR and XDR TB strains
        are breeding;

     4) notes that children cannot be treated effectively with the initial
        phase drugs, which can cause permanent liver damage;

     5) notes further with concern that there is very little Pentax
        available for basic immunisation for babies and small children,
        which will adversely affect our status with the World Health
        Organisation;

     6) realises that there is no medication for diabetic treatment in some
        clinics and although the staff is being educated on the treatment
        and isolation of Rift Valley fever patients, no equipment or
        clothing is made available to primary health care staff; and

     7) recognises that local clinics do not have the facilities to
        stabilise and isolate patients and no emergency measures are taken
        to protect staff clinics.


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I object to the motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In light of the
objection the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion and will be printed in the next Order
Paper.

         CONDOLENCES ON PASSING AWAY OF DR FREDERIK VAN ZYL SLABBERT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D Z RANTHO: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) notes with the utmost sense of loss the death of former politician
        and businessman Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert on Friday, 13 May 2010
        at the age of 70 years;

     2) further notes that Dr Slabbert was the living embodiment of active
        citizenship and an outstanding South African with a pioneering and
        indomitable spirit whose incisive intellect helped shape our young
        democracy, particularly in driving our country’s electoral laws and
        processes; and

     3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to the
        Slabbert family, particularly his wife Jane and his children Tania
        and Riko.

May his soul rest in peace.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I just say that the
same motion has been already passed.

                CRASH OF LIBYAN AIR CARRIER AFRIQIYAH AIRWAYS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I want to move without
notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the tragic death of 93 passengers and 11 crew on board a
         Libyan carrier Afriqiyah Airways from South Africa to Libya on
         Wednesday, 12 May 2010;


      2) further notes that a 9-year-old Dutch boy, who was on a dream
         safari vacation to celebrate his parents’ anniversary in South
         Africa, lost both his parents and his 11-year-old brother,
         miraculously survived the plane crash and has since arrived in his
         home country in the Netherlands; and

      3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to the
         families of the deceased and wishes the 9-year-old Dutch boy a
         speedy recovery.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                        RAIL TRANSPORT WORKERS STRIKE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the current strike by rail transport workers, which has
         affected thousands of our people, as they battle to reach their
         places of employment and costs South Africa millions of rand; and


      2) calls on all the affected parties and the Minister of Transport to
         ensure a speedy resolution of the stalemate.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    FIRE AT JIKA JOE INFORMAL SETTLEMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M P JACOBS: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that a raging fire broke out at the Jika Joe informal
         settlement in Pietermaritzburg yesterday morning, leaving 10 shacks
         gutted and more than 40 people homeless;


      2) further notes that one shack dweller sustained burns to his arms
         while trying to extinguish the fire and many residents lost their
         properties;


      3) calls on the relevant departments and the people of KwaZulu-Natal,
         particularly the business community, to open their hearts and
         assist the people of Jika Joe informal settlement; and

      4) urges our people to be more vigilant as we enter a period where
         many of them rely more on open fires, coal and paraffin stoves.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 STAFF SHORTAGE IN CAPE FLATS’ SASSA OFFICES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with utmost discomfort reports of senior citizens and people
         with disabilities who sleep on the pavement outside the SA Social
         Security Agency, SASSA, offices in the Cape Flats townships from as
         early as 6am in order to be able to stand a chance of being
         assisted with their applications for social grants, due to staff
         shortages;


      2) takes this opportunity to call on the Minister of Social
         Development to intervene immediately; and
      3) further calls on the Minister to ensure that the offices stop the
         discriminatory practice of using designated days for certain
         applications and that a special help desk be set up immediately to
         assist senior citizens and people with disabilities.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                     EIGHT-MONTH-OLD BABY BURNT TO DEATH

                             (Draft Resolution)

The HOUSE CHAIRPESON (Mr R J Tau): Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes a tragic incident where an eight-month-old baby burnt to
         death while a Cape Town community stood by helplessly and listened
         to his screams;


      2) further notes that little Rudy Ontong was left alone in the shack
         while his mother, Patricia, 35, went to buy bread and eggs for her
         older children on Saturday afternoon and when she returned, the
         room where her baby was sleeping was engulfed in flames;
      3) takes this opportunity to pass its condolences to the mother and
         expresses its profound appreciation to the neighbour who displayed
         absolute bravery and selflessness when he rescued the other two
         children who were also trapped in the shack; and

      4) calls on communities, as we enter the winter period, to remain
         vigilant and never to leave children alone near stoves.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): The hon Groenewald. I
hope you are not repeating what you said before.


                DELETERIOUS IMPACT OF RAIL STRIKE ON ECONOMY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Thank you, Deputy Chair. I’ve just changed my motion, my
previous one, to a motion without notice.

Ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad —
       1) Sy diepe bekommernis uitspreek oor die treinstaking in Suid-
          Afrika en kennis neem dat dit die land se ekonomie tot
          R15 miljard kan kos;


       2) kennis neem dat Suid-Afrika dit nie kan bekostig nie; en

       3) aanvaar dat hoe langer die staking voort duur, hoe ernstiger die
          gevolge wat dit vir al die burgers in die land sal inhou.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[I move without notice:

   That the Council –

   1) expresses its concern at the railway strike in South Africa and notes
      that it could cost the country’s economy up to R15 billion; and

  (2) notes that South Africa cannot afford this and accepts that the
         longer the strike continues, the more serious the consequences will
         be for all of the country’s citizens.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, that motion has been moved already.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): And that’s exactly what
I asked, hon Groenewald, before you stood up.

                          VICTORY FOR BAFANA BAFANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M G BOROTO: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the victorious win by Bafana Bafana in thrashing a toothless
         Thailand team by a whopping 4 goals to nil in an international
         friendly that was regarded as the opening ceremony for Mbombela
         Stadium in Nelspruit; and


      2) takes this opportunity to congratulate Bafana Bafana who turned the
         zebra interior décor of Mbombela stadium into a euphoric yellow
         symphonic orchestra singing the same song with the same key tuned
         from the national instrument, the vuvuzela, in their victory, and
         thanks the people of Mpumalanga.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


            MAINTENANCE BUDGET FOR SCHOOL HOSTELS IN EASTERN CAPE
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that there is no budget for the maintenance of school
         hostels in the Eastern Cape and requests that an emergency fund be
         established to address this problem;


      2) acknowledges that children cannot be accommodated in hostels that
         are not maintained and habitable, namely the hostel of the
         Daleview Primary School in Steytlerville; and

      3) calls for an urgent investigation to determine why the provincial
         Department of Education does not make provision for the
         maintenance of school hostels.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I object to the motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In the light of the
objection the motion cannot be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion and will be printed in the next Order
Paper.

Hon Tau, the time is over for motions without notice, unfortunately. I hope
you understand that we have to proceed. Thank you.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 7 — Women, Children and People with Disabilities:

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I’ll now call upon hon
Mayende-Sibiya. Hon members, may I ask that we give her a chance to speak
from where she is seated?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Can I amend your proposal, Chairperson?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Yes.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: I want to amend what you’ve proposed; I’m
not disagreeing with you. I propose that we further allow the Minister to
deliver her speech seated because we got her apology last time.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you. Is it
accepted?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Deputy
Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP, it is a great honour for me to
present to you the first Budget Vote of the Ministry of Women, Children and
People with Disabilities. In doing so, I would like to address a few key
issues.

Firstly, I would like to outline the mandate of the Ministry to ensure that
our debate this morning is informed by what we are committing to deliver
against this mandate.

Secondly, I would like to talk about key focus areas that have been
allocated to the Ministry from the 12 outcome or performance areas of
government. I believe that Parliament has a crucial role to play in
monitoring our performance against the task assigned to us as Ministers.
There is also extensive work relating to our regional and international
obligations as a country that I believe the NCOP should be aware of.

I will end with the acknowledgement of the various role-players and
entities that have supported and worked with us in the first year of this
Ministry, of which the NCOP is one such institution.

When announcing his Cabinet in May last year, President Jacob Zuma said
this Ministry was being created to protect the rights of and enhance
development opportunities for women, children and people with disabilities.

The President further magnified our role at the celebration of National
Women’s Day last year when he said this Ministry –

   ... will monitor other government departments to ensure the
   mainstreaming of gender, children's rights, and disability
   considerations into all programmes of government and other sectors. This
   will help government to respond to issues of these targeted groups in an
   integrated and coherent manner.

Again, in outlining the programme of action of government during the state
of the nation address this year, the President emphasised the need -

   ... to integrate gender equity measures into the government’s programme
   of action. This action will ensure that women, children and persons with
   disabilities can access developmental opportunities.

It is important to outline this mandate in order to appropriately locate
and respond to the varying expectations with regard to the work of the
Ministry which arose in our consultation with Parliament and stakeholders
in the three sectors, namely women, children and persons with disabilities.
Women expect us to facilitate their socioeconomic development, be it
through poverty alleviation programmes or fighting for gender equality at
all levels of the workplace. People with disabilities want equal access to
development opportunities and the realisation of their social rights.
Children want protection against the violation of many of their rights, and
an opportunity to grow to their full potential.

These are some of the expectations that have influenced and will continue
to influence our strategic direction and areas of focus as the Ministry and
Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities. We have to
carry out our mandate of oversight and mainstreaming, while at the same
time responding to the challenges facing our three constituencies. I must
emphasise that these challenges require immediate action on our part as the
Ministry.

To actualise our mandate, which originates from the resolution of the
Polokwane conference of the ANC, we have, over the past year, focused on
building systems and processes which will enable this entity to effectively
carry out its mandate. The former Offices on the Status of Women, Rights of
the Child and Rights of Persons with Disabilities have been incorporated
into the new department.

The Commission for Gender Equality, CGE, is another entity that now falls
under our scope of work as the Ministry. Members are aware of the serious
challenges facing the CGE. We are engaging with the CGE to provide the
necessary leadership and support to address the various challenges facing
the organisation. We have to ensure that the CGE carries out its mandate as
an important Chapter 9 institution focused on issues of gender in our
country.

We have made much progress in building the internal systems and capacity of
this Ministry and the department over the past year. Part of this
groundwork has been the mobilisation of human and other resources needed
for the implementation of our programme.

Our organogram, with the staff complement of 195, has been approved by the
Department of Public Service and Administration. We have since advertised
some of the posts that are scheduled to be filled in the 2010-11 financial
year. These include, among other things, the posts of a director-general
and three deputy directors-general responsible for each sector-specific
branch. Those sectors are, of course, women, children, and people with
disabilities.

All three branches of the department will put in place monitoring and
evaluation systems with measurable indicators that are responsive to
gender, the rights of children and persons with disabilities. This will
ensure that our oversight function leads to the integration of sector-
specific equity measures in government programmes. These branches will also
seek to mainstream norms and standards relating to their sector throughout
all spheres of government.
We will be revising policy frameworks relevant to each sector, including
the National Policy Framework for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality;
the Draft National Policy for the Advancement of Children's Rights; the
National Plan of Action for Children;
and the National Policy on Disability.

This revision is necessary to align policy framework with the changes in
institutional arrangements and co-ordination mechanisms. We are planning to
strengthen our capacity to co-ordinate activities of the special programmes
units located in the premier’s offices in various provinces and focal
points in various departments to ensure that our programmes have an impact
across the country and in all sectors.

The Special Programmes Unit in the Department of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs, Cogta, which is responsible for this work at a
municipal level, is being transferred to our department to provide that
critical link with local government.

The budget allocated to the department is limited compared to the magnitude
of the task of transforming our society for the benefit of women, children
and persons with disabilities. It is, however, the policy of our government
to mainstream the programmes throughout the government system.

We ask the NCOP to approve the budget, cognisant of the intention to
discuss how priority programmes can be relocated to the Ministry of Women,
Children and People with Disabilities. That is the discussion which should
occur at a policy level. This discussion should inform the adjustments
budget process later this year, which should result in an enhanced resource
allocation.

Partnerships are being strengthened with various players to make sure that
these budget limitations do not hamper our ability to improve the lives of
women, children and persons with disabilities. We are establishing
relationships with both the business sector, which has some resources, and
civil society organisations that are dedicating a lot of energy to
improving the plight of the vulnerable groups in our society.

As you know, government has 12 outcome areas that are used to monitor and
evaluate our work as Ministries. I have been allocated three of those 12
outcome areas: a long and healthy life for all South Africans; support for
an inclusive growth path; and an empowered, fair and inclusive citizenship.

Poverty continues to bear a disproportionately female face. Maternal and
child mortality are still at a high level, and women are more likely to be
infected with HIV and affected by Aids than men. We are working with the
Department of Health to ensure that government delivers on this key outcome
area of a long and healthy life for all South Africans.

We will be utilising the opportunity of the review of the Millennium
Development Goals, MDGs, in July this year to ensure that there is a
stronger focus on reducing poverty and improving the health status of
women, children and persons with disabilities.

The Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities, therefore,
fully supports the HIV testing initiative, as well as the immunisation
campaign currently under way. We want to ensure that women, children and
persons with disabilities participate in their numbers to protect their
health.

We are also working with the Department of Health and other role-players
towards universal access to assistive devices that are essential for
independent living and participation in social and economic activities. The
success of our economy depends on our ability to build a healthy nation
today and for generations to come.

On the second outcome, which is inclusive economic growth, we will be
focusing on ensuring that there is economic empowerment for women and
people with disabilities. For this financial year, we are focusing on the
development of the Gender Equality Bill, including 50-50 parity.

It is critical that we address this matter. We have made progress in
women’s representation in national and provincial legislatures, and
endeavours are being made within the Public Service to increase the number
of women at various levels.

The reports we are receiving indicate that in the private sector and in
some civil society structures women are not making the necessary headway.
The recent census conducted by the Businesswomen’s Association of South
Africa, Bwasa, indicates that by September 2009 there were still 73
companies listed on the JSE that did not have even a single woman on their
boards of directors. At least 26 of these companies did not have a single
woman at executive management level.

Predictions from the census are that if we continue at the current rate, we
will achieve 50-50 gender parity at board level only in 20 years; and at
executive management level, it will take us another 40 years. This worrying
situation with regard to the process of transformation is confirmed by
separate findings of Business Unity South Africa, Busa, and the Commission
for Employment Equity.

That is why we need a legislative framework with enforcement mechanisms to
make sure that women’s participation is enhanced at all levels. Amongst
persons with disabilities, these efforts will focus on ensuring that the 2%
employment equity target is met.

We will also be working within the existing frameworks such as the Broad-
Based Black Economic Empowerment Act and the Employment Equity Act, to
ensure that current equity targets for women and persons with disabilities
are met.

We will have consultations with organised labour, private sector
organisations and other stakeholders as part of our campaign to advocate
for the 50-50 gender parity principle and 2% employment equity target for
persons with disabilities.

We are aware that our economy is not absorbing the unemployed at the pace
at which we would like it to. We are, therefore, working towards the
establishment of an empowerment fund that should facilitate the economic
empowerment and development of women and persons with disabilities.

A study released by the University of Johannesburg last week once again
highlights the challenges of poverty affecting persons with disabilities.
It states that persons with disabilities remain excluded from the labour
market and are having difficulty accessing government social services. We
have been assigned to develop a concept paper on the empowerment of persons
with disabilities. We expect this paper to address issues of economic
participation and strengthen the social security net for persons with
disabilities.

We are working together with the Department of Labour on a project to
create sheltered employment for persons with disabilities. This project has
the capacity to create up to 2 000 permanent jobs and increase skills
development for persons with disabilities.

You should expect a lot of activity by our department in the area of
poverty alleviation and economic empowerment of women and persons with
disabilities, because that is what we have committed ourselves to through
the monitoring and evaluation process.

The third outcome area is the development of an empowered, fair and
inclusive citizenship. This is an area where we need massive mobilisation
of all sectors of our society and an outreach to all the nine provinces of
our country. In this area, we will be focusing on the implementation of the
review findings and recommendations on the Domestic Violence Act and the
sexual offences Act.

Violence against women and girls remains a challenge both globally and in
South Africa. In line with the UN Secretary-General’s UNiTE to End Violence
against Women campaign, we are intensifying our initiative of a dedicated,
comprehensive and integrated programme on the 365 Day National Action Plan
to End Gender Violence. This would include the 16 Days of Activism for No
Violence against Women and Children campaign.

We are focusing on challenges such as rape, murder, human trafficking and
forced prostitution affecting women and children. It is under this outcome
area that we are crisscrossing the country and addressing various issues
affecting women, children and persons with disabilities.

We are very concerned about the abuses that are being reported in schools
for children with special needs. We will be conducting an audit of the
situation in these schools and will initiate the appropriate action to stop
these cases of abuse.

In view of the 2010 Fifa World Cup, we need to raise awareness on the
possible risk of violation of children’s rights. We are launching the
Children’s Rights and Responsibilities Development Programme for the 2010
Fifa World Cup and beyond. The launch will be held here in Parliament on 1
June 2010. We will use this launch also to commemorate International
Children’s Day and the Day of the African Child.

The main objective of the launch will be to empower children and
communities on children’s rights and responsibilities.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Minister, please
conclude.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: The main
objective of the launch will be to empower our children. Citizens, families
and communities should speak out on these issues.

We will also be joining all stakeholders to ensure that hotspot areas for
violation of the rights of children and women are cleared. As a result, we
will be launching the Masego Kgomo Park in Soshanguve, Tshwane, in memory
of the little girl who was brutally murdered during the festive season last
year.

As I conclude, I thank the NCOP for this opportunity to present this budget
and everybody, all structures, Cabinet, and the Presidency. I thank the
NCOP again for the support given to us during the previous year. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Ms B P MABE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, distinguished guests,
women in their various capacities are found across all class and national
permutations.

As workers they bear the greatest burden of super-exploitation and poverty.
As survivalist micro entrepreneurs, they are called upon to provide these
values to working-class communities under unbearable conditions. As middle
strata and businesspersons, they are compelled to hew their way through the
jungle of male-dominated professions and environments.

In the home, they carry the burden of nurturing families and are forced to
reproduce relations of patriarchy. In these challenging anomalies, along
with progressive men, women form, in gender terms, the bedrock of the
construction of a caring nation.

Women, children and persons with disabilities have for far too along
suffered undue hardship, due to the lasting legacy of apartheid, entrenched
patriarchy and perpetual discrimination. It is therefore critical that
official programmes should directly address the needs of these socially
vulnerable groups, in line with the need for social spending, eradication
of poverty and job creation.

The main objective of this programme should be to strengthen women’s
empowerment, gender equality, and children’s rights and responsibilities,
as well as the rights and equality of persons with disabilities. The ANC’s
52nd national conference in Polokwane specifically resolved to give serious
consideration to the establishment of a women’s Ministry. It also
recommended the equalisation of opportunities, lifelong learning and
economic opportunities for persons with disabilities, and that the best
interests of children should be paramount and prioritised.

The intention to establish the Ministry of Women, Children and People with
Disabilities was in recognition of the realisation that the operating
authority and budget of the former Offices on the Status of Women, the
Rights of the Child and the Status of People with Disabilities in the
Presidency had not been adequate for providing the necessary strategic
leadership and management of the issues affecting these groups.

The new department amalgamates the functions of the three offices mentioned
and is more streamlined in its approach to the needs of the socially
vulnerable groups under its mandate. This will be achieved through the
housing of all three socially vulnerable groups, and the dovetailing of
policies and programmes, as opposed to the offices that previously operated
independently of each other.

The intention is also to ensure that each of the three areas has the
necessary authority to interact effectively with government and civil
society, secure critical competencies and technical skills and advance
equality, empowerment and the development of women, children and people
with disabilities. The aim is to drive, accelerate and oversee government’s
equity, equality and empowerment agenda for the three designated groups.

The priorities outlined by the new department speak to some of those
outlined in President Jacob Zuma’s 2010 state of the nation address,
particularly as they relate to improved performance monitoring and
evaluation and improved access to rights and developmental opportunities
for women, children and persons with disabilities.

Furthermore, the focus on the protection of the rights of persons infected
with and affected by HIV and Aids, as a priority area, synergises the
increased focus, as outlined by the President in his state of the nation
address.

While increased spending on health and social services, education and
infrastructural development will also impact positively on women, children
and persons with disabilities in general, no explicit mention is made of
resource measures to specifically improve the lives of these socially
vulnerable groups.

The President also highlighted the integration of gender equity measures
into the government’s programme of action and key allocations in relation
to women, children and persons with disabilities. This relates to increased
resources for HIV and Aids programmes and increases in the child support
and disability grants, as well as increased resources allocated to
education.

I am therefore particularly pleased with the intention to place special
emphasis on facilitating access to the rights and development opportunities
for women, children and people with disabilities, especially in poor and
rural communities, in relation to the protection of the rights of HIV and
Aids infected and affected people in the three groups. There will also be a
focus on ensuring that issues affecting women, children and people with
disabilities become part of the broader African agenda.
Expenditure of the previous Offices on the Status of Women, the Rights of
the Child and the Status of People with Disabilities, situated in the
Presidency, grew at an average annual rate of 11,2% between 2006-07 and
2009-10. It grew from R49,6 million to R68,2 million. We do note the vast
difference between the department’s estimates and the actual appropriation
by Treasury.

Apart from the increase in the women’s empowerment and gender equality
programme as a result of the transfer of the Commission for Gender Equality
to the department under discussion from Justice and Constitutional
Development, the reasons for these increases and decreases in programme
allocations are unclear.

One would have hoped that more resources would have been allocated to
mainstreaming and integrating the rights of women, children and persons
with disabilities, thereby fast-tracking the interests of these
traditionally marginalised and vulnerable groups.

Allocations have trebled from what was previously allocated, but in terms
of improving the functioning and outputs from what had been achieved under
the previous offices, logic dictates that far more resources need to be
made available. If the previous offices were impeded from delivering on
their mandates by inadequate human and financial resources, it is
questionable whether the situation has improved in real terms, taking into
account the limited financial resources and human resource capacity of the
new department.
The ongoing transformation of the state is meant to ensure that the process
of identifying weaknesses and correcting them will be intensified. This
includes engendering new cultures and practices and ensuring that state
institutions reflect the demographics of the country including appropriate
representation of women, children and persons with disabilities.

However, we realise that, given that the department has been established
only recently, it is not possible to directly compare budgetary increases
or decreases with the previous years’ allocations. We also realise that the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for the next three years seeks to steer
the culture in the Public Service towards greater prudence and efficiency.
We realise that, given the shortfall in government revenue collection and
the pressure on the available resources of the fiscus, this year’s budget
preparation has focused on redirecting expenditure towards key priorities,
of which women and children form part.

The President stressed in the 2010 state of the nation address that the
need to integrate gender equity measures into the government’s programme of
action will ensure that women, children and persons with disabilities can
access development opportunities.

With this reassurance, we are confident that the main objective of the
Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities will be to take
the lead in formulating and driving the ANC-led government’s strategic
agenda in relation to women’s empowerment and gender equality, children’s
rights and responsibilities and the rights and equality of persons with
disabilities.

This Ministry is set to become the driver of the government’s strategic
agenda in regard to women’s empowerment and gender equality, children’s
rights and responsibilities and the rights and equality of persons with
disabilities. The ANC supports Budget Vote No 7 of Women, Children and
People with Disabilities. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, MECs present and hon
members, firstly, I would like to thank the department for their budget
presentation and the parliamentary research unit for their input.

As has already been stated, this is a brand-new department and replaces the
previous, somewhat dysfunctional Office on the Status of Women, Office on
the Rights of the Child and Office on the Status of Disabled Persons.

These departments were all previously situated in the Presidency, in the
hope of giving strategic direction and leadership to the various programmes
focusing on women, children and persons with disabilities.

The new department, considering its scope, objectives and targeted groups,
has received the smallest allocation of all the Ministries. The department
has a total budget allocation for 2010 and 2011 of only R97,8 million, with
Programme 2 – Women’s Empowerment, Programme 3 – Children’s Rights and
Responsibilities, and Programme 4 – Rights of People with Disabilities,
receiving only some R7,1 million each.

Deputy Chairperson, who can forget the disabled children that we visited at
the Le Rena Re A Gona project on our visit to Limpopo province? Who can
forget the children, lying on a blanket on a concrete floor, who are
visited perhaps only once a month by an occupational therapist?

Children with disabilities who live in abject poverty are particularly
vulnerable to hunger and environmental barriers, such as housing, and the
budget must speak to the needs of children with mobility impairments and
those who make use of wheelchairs.

One of the largest portions of the budget, however, is in respect of gender
equality, and is taken up by the transfer payments from the Commission for
Gender Equality – a Chapter 9 institution – of some R49,1 million. Whilst I
believe an attempt is being made to clean up the mess at the gender
commission, a report on the gender body in a newspaper stated –

  ... there is no culture of gender work in [this] organisation. In fact
  there is no organisation at all.

The report further states that the perception of the commission was poor.
It had mismatched human resource capacity, poor programme design,
fragmented leadership at the commissioner level and poor, noncompliant
financial systems, resulting in a disclaimer in the audit report.

Some of the reports of the programmes previously located in the Presidency
and the audited financial statements have, as yet, not been provided to the
committee. As such, it is difficult to ascertain whether any debts have
been inherited by the new department from the former offices.

Programme 1 – Administration constitutes 25% of the total budget
appropriation. Considering that this is a new department - and initial
costs such as operations and support systems, recruitment of staff, capital
expenditure, and the setting up of IT infrastructure are included - this
expenditure may be justifiable in this financial year. But the department
cannot appropriate anywhere near this amount for 2011-12 or 2012-13, as the
administrative costs would then continue to consume the most significant
portion of the department’s resources.

It is of concern that so few resources have been allocated to mainstreaming
and integrating the rights of women, children and persons with
disabilities, thus marginalising these already vulnerable groups. Thus,
despite the needs and rights of these groups having been elevated to
ministerial level, the financial human resource allocations indicate that
they are still relegated to the bottom of the barrel.

The department will not be able to effectively implement this mandate due
to its financial constraints, but has chosen rather to fund catalyst
projects which are already being implemented by other departments. The
department intends working across all departments as well as all spheres of
government. The bulk of the resources, therefore, continues to be within
the other departments, NGOs and the private sector.

The aim of the newly established Department of Women, Children and People
with Disabilities is to drive, accelerate and oversee government’s equity,
equality and empowerment agendas.

In my home province, the Free State, the situation is so bad that the
provincial government and in particular the department of social
development, has been taken to court twice in one year because the
department has not paid sufficient subsidies to institutions that are
responsible for the poorest of the poor in the child and youth centres, let
alone to children with disabilities.
It is imperative that the funds that are transferred to the National Youth
Development Agency be monitored on an ongoing basis. The agency – which
takes up a large portion of the programme budget – must be held to account
on the use of funds transferred to it and the lessons learnt by its
predecessors, namely the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth
Fund, which were previously located in the Department of Labour.

The mainstreaming of youth development cannot be undertaken without the
appropriate ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Excuse me, hon member.
Just hold on.

Mr D A WORTH: Let me just conclude. The Department of Women, Children and
People ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Before you conclude,
hon member, can you just ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I want you to point out to the
member that he is out of order because this debate is on women, children
and persons with disabilities and it has nothing to do with what he is
saying now. That is, the issue of Umsobomvu, or the youth agency is not
part of this debate.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Harris?

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, Rule 33 states that a member may not interrupt
another member who is addressing the Chair. Now, I am not sure what the
Chief Whip was intending there, but that was not a point of order. She was
simply interrupting the member, and was therefore in breach of Rule 33. Can
you please rule on whether the Chief Whip is in breach of Rule 33?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I then ask that we
proceed?

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, I must ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): We take note of what
has now been put forward ...

Mr T D HARRIS: ... and you will rule later?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I will rule later.
Continue, hon Worth.

Mr D A WORTH: Thank you, Deputy Chair. Parliament should consistently
evaluate these new Ministries against their stipulated aims, allocated
budgets and outcomes.

The new Ministry has tremendous challenges in terms of improving service
and co-ordination through better planning. Women empowerment and gender
equality is central for poverty eradication and the development of human
potential. The Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities
and relevant stakeholders owe it to the nation to make a difference to the
daily lives of our people, especially in the poor and rural communities of
South Africa. I thank you.

Ms M P THEMBA: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, one takes
pride in the fact that for the first time in the history of South Africa
our council is convening to consider a budget allocated to the most
vulnerable of our society. As the ANC, we are proud because this budget is
clearly expressing our nation’s commitment to advancing the needs of women,
children and people with disabilities.

It is a statement indicating that we have broken with the past and are on
the path to prosperity. It is decisive and a reassurance to our people that
we should remain committed to our nation with regard to great prospects of
social, economic and political equity of all its citizens.

Without a shred of doubt, we would like to indicate that we are welcoming
this gender-sensitive budget and its strategic focus in leaving no stone
unturned in seeking more ways of ensuring that the lives of the most
vulnerable sectors of our population are changed for the better.

As has already been indicated, you will remember that the department was
established after the inauguration of President Jacob Zuma. This was after
a comprehensive political review by the ANC and Parliament that showed the
previous structures that were put in place in order to protect women were
severely constricted by complex institutional arrangements and a lack of
adequate resources. The ANC envisages that the new department will drive
government’s strategic agenda for meeting the needs and challenges facing
women, children and people with disabilities.

Women, children and people with disabilities in South Africa were very
vulnerable and rendered helpless by a racially orchestrated system that was
designed to keep them in the homelands and townships. They were faced with
discriminatory legislation, practices and policies, which restricted their
participation and empowerment in most spheres of life.

The demise of the apartheid state in 1994 echoed deliberate efforts by the
ANC to systematically dismantle apartheid and create a democratic society
based on the principles of equity, nonracialism and nonsexism. The ANC
committed itself to addressing the needs of the most vulnerable sectors of
our society, and ensuring the advancement of the lives of women,
particularly those in rural areas.

Without a doubt, we would like to indicate that we remain committed and are
on course in ensuring that women are also beneficiaries of all programmes
and initiatives that are geared toward redressing the legacy of apartheid
in our society. We are saying this because, as the ANC, we saw the
advancement and empowerment of women and changing the lives of people with
disabilities as the cornerstone of the struggle for equality in our
society.

The Ministry is one of the many visible symbols that have made a
declaration to our people that our nation is no longer regarding gender
issues and gender equality as peripheral. Hence, we are welcoming the
development of the Gender Equality Bill which the Minister mentioned in her
speech. It is a visible symbol of progress that clearly indicates that the
conditions of women, children and people with disabilities have radically
changed for the better.

It is a political declaration showing the people of South Africa that the
ANC remains even more committed to placing the issues and conditions of
vulnerable groups at the very centre of our transformative agenda for an
equal, nonsexist and nondiscriminatory South Africa. Despite many
interventions by the government, women, children and people with
disabilities are still facing the harshest conditions in the workplace, on
the streets of their communities, and behind the closed doors of their
homes.

The position of women in the economy remains weak, as the majority of them
battle with job insecurity and low employment levels. Women are continuing
to enter the labour force at the lowest level of organisational
establishments. Statistics from Census 2001 and labour force surveys
conducted in 2000, 2001 and 2002 highlight women’s overrepresentation in
casual, part-time, seasonal and temporary work.

As the ANC, we are concerned that despite those changes the Department of
Women, Children and People with Disabilities has been allocated a mere
R97,8 million. This allocation constituted 0,02% of the total appropriation
of all departmental Votes and is the smallest allocation of them all. In
total, 22% of the department’s budget has been allocated to the programme
for women, children and persons with disabilities, with the remainder being
spent on administration and the transferring of payments to the Commission
for Gender Equality.

As far as the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Cedaw, the 365 days national plan,
the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children, and so
forth, is concerned, the budget will not be able to cater for all of them.
Although the allocations have increased substantially from what was
previously allocated to the Offices on the Status of Women, the Rights of
Children and on the Status of Disabled People, this is still inadequate in
terms of improving the functioning and output of what had been achieved
under these previous offices. Much more would need to be made available in
the way of resources.

The effects of the insufficient resources allocated to this Ministry are
clearly visible in the provinces, where structures that previously drove
its mandate are left with grossly underresourced offices. We are also
concerned that the department’s allocations did not show any allocation for
intersectoral liaison and interaction. The ANC believes that together we
can do more. Therefore nothing must be done without the voices of those
affected.

We would like to request the Minister to consider requesting the National
Treasury to allocate some resources towards engaging the relevant sectors,
particularly NGOs. We are saying this because we know that NGOs are playing
a crucial role in articulating government’s policies and educating our
people about their rights and obligations as democratic citizens.
Nongovernmental organisations are playing an important role in assisting
government to identify the challenges facing our people and seeking better
ways to resolve them.

We welcome this budget, but also reassure this House that the ANC will
always remain committed to the advancement of the lives of the marginalised
sector of our society. We will continue engaging with the government to
ensure that the vulnerable sectors of our society are prioritised in the
allocation of government resources. I thank you.

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Phini likaSihlalo wale Ndlu, mam’ uMemela mhonishwa
Ngqongqoshe, malunga ahloniphekile ale Ndlu, ngithi kuleli lizwekazi, lapha
eNingizimu Afrika sijatshuliswa ukuthi kuyaye kuxoxwe obala ngazo zonke
izabiwomali zeMinyango, ukuze bonke abantu bazi ukuthi kwenzekani.

Nakuba sikwesekela ukuba khona kwalo Mnyango kodwa kukhona izinto ezithile
ezingenza ngibe nokungabaza – kufana nalesi sabiwomali esinikezwe uMnyango
wakho. Ngalokho ngifisa ukwazi ukuthi uyokwazi yini ukufeza lezi zidingo
zabo bonke laba bantu bakithi abahluphekile baseNingizimu Afrika na?

Okunye futhi ukuthi lezo zinqubo noma izinhlelo zoMnyango ozibekele ukuthi
zisize laba bantu bakithi abampofu kanye nalabo ababedla izambane likapondo
emiphakathini yethu, ngifisa ukwazi ukuthi ingabe lesi sabiwomali
osinikeziwe esingu-R156 wezigidi kuleminyaka emithathu ezayo, sanele yini?

Angiboni ukuthi uzokwazi ukufeza izidingo zabantu ngaphandle kwalezi ziNdlu
Ezimbili ngoba zona kufanele zikwazi ukukwelekelela ukuthi usize abantu
bakithi abampofu. Ngoba ngiyazi ukuthi uma kwenziwa inqubongomo njengoba
kunguMnyango omusha nje, yonke leyonto kuba yingxenye yomsebenzi okhona
kanti futhi ngiyazi ukuthi kunomthelela omkhulu ezimalini okufanele
uzisebenzise ukuze kusizakale izwe lakithi lonke.

Okunye futhi engikukhathalele yikuthi ngiyazi ukuthi ukulingana ngokobulili
obebukade bukhona sonke lesi sikhathi okumanje isifakwe phansi koMnyango
wakho, ngizocela impela ukuthi njengeqembu leNkatha ukuthi welekelelwe
ngayo yonke indlela ngokuthi inkece ibekhona. Ngoba ngiyazi ukuthi
ukuhlupheka kwethu kubhekene nenselele yezingane ezihlukunyezwayo, omkethu
abahlukunyezwayo, kanti futhi ubhekene nabo bonke labantu abakhubazekile.
Futhi nezinto zokuhamba ezenele azikabibikho kuleli lizwe ezikwazi ukuthi
zisize laba bantu abangakwazi ukuzihambela ngenxa yokukhubazeka kwabo.

Kepha thina njengeqembu leNkatha sizosesekela lesi sabiwomali ngoba
sizofeza izidingo zabantu nakuba nginokungabaza ukuthi kungase kwenzeke
lokho ngenxa yobuncane bemali oyinikeziwe. Kuyimfanelo ukuthi lezi ziNdlu
zikhumbule ukuthi uma usugxekwa kusasa, akwaziwe ukuthi ugxekwa nje ube
wanikezwa uzuka esikhundleni sokuthi unikezwe usheleni. Ngithi-ke egameni
leqembu leNkatha siyasesekela lesi sabiwomali sakho. Sikufisela inhlanhla
nokuthi uMnyango wakho ukwazi ukusimama kanti futhi ubheke nezigebengu
ukuthi zingadli kakhulu kulenkecana engekho. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Deputy Chairperson of this House, hon mama uMemela, hon
Minister, hon members of this House, what I am saying to this continent is
that what excites us here in South Africa is that all the departmental
Budget Votes are always dealt with openly. It is done in this way so that
everybody knows what is taking place in the departments.

Although we support the existence of this department, there are some issues
which are a cause for concern for me – like the budget that is allocated to
your department. I would therefore like to know whether you will be able
meet all the needs of all the impoverished South Africans?

Another thing I want clarity on is whether the budget of R156 million that
has been allocated to you for a period of three years will be enough to
have those processes or programmes running which are set aside by the
department to assist both our poor people and those who were rich within
our communities.

I am not sure whether you will be able to accomplish your mission without
the help of these joint Houses because they must be able to assist you in
helping our poor people. I know that when a policy like this is drafted,
since this is a new department, all that will be part of the same work that
exists, and I also know that that has a major impact on the funds which you
are supposed to use in order to improve the standard of living of the whole
nation.

One other thing that concerns me is that I know that the concept of gender
equality has always existed and it has now been incorporated into your
department. As the IFP we request that you be assisted in any way possible
to receive the necessary funds to do your work. I am aware that we are
faced with the challenge of assisting abused children and abused wives, and
that you are also dealing with people who are living with disabilities.
There is also not sufficient transport for these people who cannot walk on
their own as a result of their disabilities.

But we, as the IFP, are going to support this budget because it will meet
the needs of our people, although I still have doubts as to whether that
will be possible due to the small allocation you received. It is a matter
of necessity for these two Houses to remember that, should you be blamed in
future, it should be borne in mind that you are falsely blamed because you
were allocated 5 cents instead of 10 cents. I am saying this on behalf of
the IFP; we support this budget. We also wish you good luck and hope that
your department can be stable and be able look out for fraudsters so that
they cannot steal the meagre funds you have. Thank you.]

Me C LABUSCHAGNE (Wes-Kaap): Voorsitter, Minister en agb lede, baie dankie
vir die geleentheid om vandag aan hierdie debat deel te neem. Hierdie
begrotingsdebat vestig weereens die aandag op ’n paar aspekte wat in ons
Suid-Afrikaanse konteks deur almal as uiters belangrik, noodsaaklik en
onontbeerlik beskou word, naamlik die stand van vroue en kinders in Suid-
Afrika, aspekte wat die jeug en hulle toekoms raak, asook aspekte wat
persone met gestremdhede verseker dat hulle ten volle deel is van die
gemeenskap en die samelewing in Suid-Afrika.

Die skep van ’n nasionale ministerie hiervoor word dus deur die DA en die
Wes-Kaap regering verwelkom, aangesien dit noodsaaklik is om bestaande
nasionale beleidsraamwerke ten opsigte van vroue, kinders, die jeug en
persone met gestremdhede te koördineer, asook om die nuwe beleidsraamwerke,
gegrond op weldeurdagte feite en inligting, waar dit toepaslik is te skep,
en om, tweedens, bestaande, gefragmenteerde wetgewing te hersien en aan te
pas om geïntegreerde dienslewering van hierdie aspekte te bespoedig en te
vergemaklik, asook om dit binne die hoofstroom te plaas.

Die taak van hierdie ministerie ten opsigte van geslagsgelykheid, jeugsake
en persone met gestremdhede kan net begryp word as ons na die stand van
hierdie aangeleenthede in ons land kyk. Suid-Afrika word tans gekenmerk
deur ’n hoë syfer van kinder- en vroueverkragting. Onlangs het die
Nasionale Vervolgingsgesag in ’n vergadering wat ek bygewoon het die
statistiek gegee dat daar 2 085 sake van seksuele geweld teen vroue en
kinders aangemeld is die afgelope ses maande in slegs vier howe in die Wes-
Kaap.

Gesprekke met vroue by ’n onderhoudshof in die metropool het aan die lig
gebring dat vroue tot twee jaar wag dat onderhoudsake hanteer en afgehandel
word. Intussen is dit nie net die vrou nie, maar ook die kinders, wat in
gebreke bly ten opsigte van bestaansmiddele. Tans bestaan die opvatting by
die gemiddelde vrou dat hierdie stelsel en prosesse van onderhoudshowe die
Suid-Afrikaanse vrou faal. Ons doen dus ’n beroep op die Ministerie vir
Vroue, Kinders, en Mense met Gestremdhede om indringend ondersoek in te
stel na die regstelsels en prosesse om hierdie probleme uit die weg te
ruim. Dit is een van die groot oorsake en bydraende faktore van armoede
onder ’n groot groep enkellopende vroue.

Wat die jeug betref, is dit onrusbarend dat soveel jeugdiges in Suid-Afrika
skool verlaat op ’n vroeë ouderdom voordat hulle matrikuleer, en dat daar
geen effektiewe stelsel en prosesse bestaan om verdere geleenthede vir
hulle te skep om toe te tree tot die arbeidsmark nie. Selfs jongmense wat
tersiêre opleiding ontvang het, kan nie outomaties en met gemak tot die
huidige arbeidsmark toetree nie. Genoemde aspekte is slegs breë kategorieë
van die werklikhede ten opsigte van vroue, kinders, jeugdiges en mense met
gestremdhede in Suid-Afrika.

Die problematiek ten opsigte van MIV/Vigs, tienerswangerskappe, kinder- en
vrouehandel, eiendomsregte vir die geskeide vrou en die weduwee, asook die
veelvuldige behoeftes van gestremdes en bejaardes is aspekte wat nog nie
eens aangeraak is nie en wat baie intense en lang debatte behoort te ontlok
om genoemde komplekse sosiale, ekonomiese en maatskaplike aspekte aan te
spreek dat, soos reeds genoem, beleid en wetgewing in plek moet wees om
programme en projekte op nasionale vlak te implementeer, sowel as om
provinsiale en plaaslike regeringsvlakke te ondersteun. Dit is dan ook vir
my verblydend om te sien dat dit deel is van die mandaat van die nuwe
ministerie.

Telkemale word die klem gelê op die belangrikheid van die gesin as basis
vir ’n gesonde samelewing. Die jeug is die toekoms van ons land, en die
wyse waarop gestremdes en ander kwesbare persone hanteer word vergestalt
die karakter van ’n nasie. Ten spyte hiervan is gesinsgeweld, verkragting,
moord, misdaad, dwelmmisbruik, bendegeweld, tienerswangerskap, en noem maar
op, die nuus wat daagliks die koerante se voorblad haal.

Die provinsiale regering van die Wes-Kaap rig dus ’n ernstige versoek aan
die Ministerie vir Vroue, Kinders en Mense met Gestremdhede om hulle te
beywer om navorsing te doen oor wat die werklike oorsake van die geweld in
die Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing is, en om programme en projekte te
implementeer op nasionale, provinsiale en plaaslike regeringsvlakke, in
samewerking met nie-regeringsorganisasies.

In ons land, wat gekenmerk word deur verskeie mylpale, waarvan die grootste
mylpaal gelykheid en vryheid vir almal is wat vervat is in die Grondwet van
Suid-Afrika, is dit egter tans ontstellend om te sien dat ons vinnig
vordering maak op die pad van volkome vryheid en gelykheid, maar, ten spyte
daarvan, dat ons ’n siek nasie is. Ons is emosioneel en geestelik siek, en
dit word weerspieël in die hoeveelheid geweld teen vroue en kinders op alle
vlakke. Dit is vir my regtig baie jammer, ten spyte van die feit dat ek die
begrip “om in die hoofstroom te plaas” verstaan, en dat hierdie aspekte in
elke departement self hanteer moet word, dat daar so ’n geringe begroting
gegee word aan so ’n belangrike departement. Ons sal graag wil sien dat met
die aansuiweringsbegroting daar nog verandering sal wees.

Dit sal vir ons baie jammer wees as die tendens voortduur dat daar gepraat
word, dat daar wette geskryf word, en dat daar strukture en raamwerke
geskep word om hierdie aspekte aan te spreek, net soos met Maatskaplike
Ontwikkeling, maar wanneer dit daarby kom om “to put your money where your
mouth is” [daadwerklik op te tree], die begrotings van juis hierdie
ministeries gesny word. Die klagtes bly dieselfde en die probleme groei,
dus sal die Wes-Kaap regering met groot belangstelling die vordering van
hierdie departement dophou om te sien of die huidige regering werklik daad
by woord voeg. Die skep van ’n ministerie is ’n wonderlike inisiatief, maar
ongelukkig los dit nie die probleme op nie. Die probleme kan nie opgelos
word sonder ’n grondige begroting nie.

Voorsitter, die verdere aspek waarna u ook verwys het, is vroue- en
kindergesondheid. Een van die mees onrusbarende feite wat aan die lig gekom
het en bekend gemaak is deur die Raad vir Geesteswetenskaplike Navorsing,
RGN, onder die opskrif “The Health of Women and Children,” is dat ten spyte
van die feit dat 90% van babas in Suid-Afrika tog in hospitale gebore word,
ons sterftesyfer steeds styg. Met ander woorde, 7% van Suid-Afrikaanse
kinders haal nie die ouderdom van vyf jaar nie. Wat is die oplossing, of
moet ons liewer vra waaraan dit toegeskryf word?

Dit kan slegs toegeskryf word aan die feit dat ons nie gesondheidsorg van
’n hoë gehalte in ons hospitale het nie. Ons wil ’n beroep doen op hierdie
ministerie om ook na die gesondheid van vroue en kinders in die breë aspek
te kyk en hulle te beywer vir gesondheidsorg van ’n beter gehalte in
hospitale, veral in die landelike distrikte.

Die provinsiale regering van die Wes-Kaap sou graag wou sien dat die
begroting van die Departement van Vroue, Kinders, en Mense met Gestremdhede
nie net gespandeer word om ’n raamwerk te skep waarbinne programme en
projekte geïmplementeer kan word nie, maar dat werklike, praktiese
programme en projekte op grondvlak geïmplementeer word wat die geleenthede
skep vir genoemde gemarginaliseerde groepe, en ook aan hierdie persone die
geleentheid gee om ook in hulle gemeenskappe werklik te kan ontwikkel en om
bemagtig te word om persoonlike keuses uit te oefen oor hul eie lewenstyl,
hul eie loopbaan, en hul eie toekoms.

Laastens wil ek ’n beroep doen dat bemagtiging vergestalting moet kry deur
die uitbreiding van menseregte, maar in die vorm van die kweek van
verantwoordelikheid. Suid-Afrika is ’n land wat gekenmerk word deur
gelykheid en vryheid, en daarom wil ek net vra dat verantwoordelikheid
geskep word deur byvoorbeeld ’n manifes vir verantwoordelikheid. Baie
dankie en sterkte met u groot taak. [Applous.] [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Ms C LABUSCHAGNE (Western Cape): Chairperson, Minister and hon members,
thank you for the opportunity to participate in this debate today. This
budget debate once again draws attention to a few aspects that in our South
African context, are regarded by everyone as extremely important, essential
and indispensable, namely the position of women and children in South
Africa, aspects which affect the youth and their future, as well as aspects
which assure persons with disabilities that in South Africa they are fully
part of the community and of society.

The creation of a national Ministry in this regard is therefore welcomed by
the DA and the Western Cape government, as it is essential to co-ordinate
existing national policy frameworks in respect of women, children, the
youth and persons with disabilities, as well as to create, where
appropriate, new policy frameworks based on well-considered facts and
information; and secondly to review and adapt existing, fragmented
legislation to expedite and facilitate integrated service delivery of these
aspects, as well as placing them within the mainstream.

This Ministry’s task in respect of gender equality, youth issues and people
with disabilities can only be understood when we look at the position of
these issues in our country. South Africa is currently characterised by a
high rate of rape of children and women. In a meeting which I attended
recently, the National Prosecuting Authority released the statistic that in
the past six months 2 085 cases of sexual violence against women and
children had been reported in just four courts in the Western Cape.

Conversations with women at a maintenance court in the metropole brought to
light that women wait up to two years for maintenance cases to be heard and
finalised. Meanwhile it is not just the women, but also the children, who
are left wanting in respect of means of support. Currently the average
woman is of the view that the system and processes of maintenance courts
are failing the South African woman. We are therefore appealing to the
Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities for an intensive
investigation of the legal systems and processes in order to remove these
problems. It is one of the major causes and contributory factors of poverty
among a large group of single women.

As regards the youth, it is alarming that so many youths in South Africa
are leaving school at an early age before they have matriculated and that
there are no effective systems and processes to create further
opportunities for them to enter the job market. Even young people who have
received tertiary education cannot automatically and easily enter the
current job market. Said aspects are merely broad categories of the
realities in South Africa regarding women, children, youths and people with
disabilities.

The problematic nature of HIV/Aids, teen pregnancies, child and women
trafficking, property rights for divorcees and widows, as well as the
multiple needs of the disabled and the aged are aspects that have not even
been touched upon, and which ought to occasion many intense and long
debates in order to address said complex social, economic and community
aspects so that, as already mentioned, policy and legislation must be in
place in order to implement programmes and projects at a national level, as
well as to support provincial and local government tiers. It is therefore a
hopeful sign for me to see that this forms part of the mandate of the new
Ministry.

Time and again the importance of the family as the basis for a healthy
society is emphasised. The youth are the future of our nation and the way
in which the disabled and other vulnerable persons are treated embodies the
character of a nation. Despite this, domestic violence, rape, murder,
crime, drug abuse, gang violence, teen pregnancies and you name it
constitute the news that reaches the front pages of our newspapers on a
daily basis.

The provincial government of the Western Cape therefore earnestly appeals
to the Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities to worth
towards research into the real causes of the violence within South African
society and, in conjunction with nongovernmental organisations, to
implement programmes and projects at national, provincial and local
government levels.

In our country, which is marked by various milestones, the biggest of which
is the milestone of equality and freedom for all as enshrined in the
Constitution of South Africa, it is, however, alarming to see that we are
making rapid progress on the road to total freedom and equality, but that,
in spite of this, we are a sick nation. We are emotionally and spiritually
sick, which is reflected in the amount of violence against women and
children at all levels. It is a great pity to me, despite the fact that I
understand the notion of mainstreaming and that each department itself will
have to deal with these aspects, that such a small budget is allocated to
such an important department. We would like to see some change regarding
that in the additional estimates.

It would be very sad if the trend were to continue that a lot of talking,
drafting of legislation and creation of frameworks and structures to
address these aspects takes place, as with Social Development, but that
when it comes to putting your money where your mouth is, the budgets of
these very Ministries are cut. The complaints remain the same and the
problems are growing, so the Western Cape government will be watching this
department’s progress with great interest in order to see whether the
current government will stop talking and start doing. The creation of a
Ministry is a wonderful initiative, but unfortunately it does not solve the
problems. The problems cannot be addressed without an adequate budget.

Chairperson, another aspect to which you have also referred is women and
children’s health. One of the most alarming facts to have come to light and
which has been published by the Human Sciences Research Council, the HSRC,
under the heading “The Health of Women and Children” is that despite the
fact that 90% of babies in South Africa are born in hospitals, the death
rate is still increasing. In other words, 7% of children in South Africa do
not reach the age of five years. What is the solution, or should we rather
be asking what this can be attributed to?

It can only be attributed to the fact that we do not have health care of a
high standard in our hospitals. We want to appeal to this Ministry also to
look at the health of women and children in the wider sense and to strive
towards health care of a better standard in hospitals, especially in the
rural districts.

The provincial government of the Western Cape would like to see that the
budget of the Department of Women, Children and People with Disabilities is
not only spent on the creation of a framework within which programmes and
projects can be implemented, but that actual, practical programmes and
projects are implemented at grass-roots level which will create the
opportunities for the said marginalised groups and will also give these
people the opportunity to be able to really develop within their
communities and become empowered to exercise personal choices regarding
their own lifestyle, their own careers and their own future.

Lastly, I would like to make an appeal that empowerment be embodied by way
of extending human rights, but in the form of fostering responsibility.
South Africa is a country which is charactised by equality and freedom,
which is why I just want to ask for the creation of responsibility by way
of, for instance, a manifesto for responsibility. Thank you and all the
best with your big undertaking. [Applause.] [Time expired.]]

Ms U KEERATH (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chair, hon Minister, members of the
Council, women have made remarkable gains in education, health and the
recognition of human rights but, despite this progress, much more needs to
be done. Deep poverty among women remains all too prevalent. Two thirds of
women’s total time spent in developing industrial countries is unpaid, and
among 1,3 billion illiterate adults, two thirds are women.

Discriminatory laws governing marriage, matrimonial property, land,
inheritance, divorce and family persist. Violence against women at home, in
the workplace, and on the street continues unabated.

These challenges persist not only at home but also in other areas, such as
women’s health care, especially reproductive health where women are more
likely to be infected with HIV and affected by Aids than men. Also, women
are unable to access antenatal facilities. Many hospitals in KwaZulu-Natal
still exhibit high rates of infant mortality. Many women cannot access the
equality courts and maintenance courts. Despite the constitutional
guarantees of freedom, liberty and access, most women have not been able to
translate these rights into tangible gains for themselves.

The very low budget allocated to this Ministry is a cause for major
concern, and I think many of the previous speakers have alluded to this. It
is mind-boggling to understand how this Ministry, a brand-new Ministry,
will fulfil all of its functions with a limited budget.

It is imperative that gender has to be taken into account when financing
all decisions. Just in this morning’s Business Day, research shows that sub-
Saharan women spend 40 billion hours per year collecting water. This is
equivalent to France’s entire labour force. The report also says that women
are more vulnerable to climate change, because they are more likely to be
poor and more likely to be vulnerable to water-borne diseases; so we need
to know that gender is being taken into account whenever we talk about
decisions.

As we review our track record and achievements towards gender equality, we
need to be fully aware and informed of new challenges. The current level of
transformation must be heightened, and the Minister spoke about 73
companies listed on the JSE which did not have a single woman on the board
of directors.

Whilst women constitute 52% of the overall population, they only make up
45% of South Africa’s working population. We must not tolerate superficial
changes, and we cannot pay lip service to this. We must ensure that equity
targets are being met.

To address the flagrant abuse of women’s human rights, persistent gender
discrimination and the potential of millions of girls and women to
contribute to development, whether economic, social or political, requires
collective action and this, in turn, also requires collective resources. We
know about the elimination of all forms of discrimination which, I think,
is a vision and mission of this department, but this can only be translated
into real gains if the budget is gender-friendly.

These programmes must not be seen as programmes but must be seen as
investments in the lives of women and children. It is about developing the
productive capacities of the vulnerable. Yet, more remains to be done to
integrate gender equality dimensions into our normative policy and
operational work, to ensure that the twin goals of economic growth and
expansion of human capabilities are attained. Here again, gender and
developmental opportunities must go hand in hand. I am afraid that time is
also racing with me!

Another area that I am deeply concerned about is human trafficking, and
even as we begin to count down the days to the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup,
this problem remains a real one. There is also drug trafficking, forced
prostitution and pornography, and the Minister referred to that.

We are also concerned about the escalating cases of abuse at schools,
because most of these girls – females – have a double burden when they are
either disabled or oppressed because of their gender.

Also, Madam Minister, you spoke about access and transportation of people
to the stadiums, and this also has to be addressed. We cannot exclude the
disabled; we cannot have them maimed; we cannot have them marginalised.
Whilst we know that this is a brand-new department, one would expect more
resources to match the programmes.

Madam Chair, we are extremely concerned about the financial and human
resources. Gender needs must not be pushed to the periphery. Gender needs
must be in the nucleus. They cannot be pushed to the periphery. Sorry, my
time has almost expired. We must ensure that this will change in the
future, and adjustments must be made to ensure a gender-sensitive budget.
KwaZulu-Natal supports the budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, and hon members, for 14
years women, children and people with disabilities have not been asking for
policy formulation from the government. They have been clamouring for
action and service delivery. Even today, this is what they are still asking
for.

Minister, unfortunately government is becoming much too big and much too
expensive. As with Greece and Portugal, our country too may very soon be in
a predicament. We are exhausting state revenue at a very rapid rate on
government itself. This leaves little for ordinary people to benefit from
government programmes.

This department, for example, is consuming nearly R100 million of
taxpayers’ money. How much of this will directly benefit people on the
ground? At the same time, the fastest growing item on the budget line is
the cost of servicing government debt. To put this in perspective, multiply
the budget of this department by 728 and that is the amount of money
government has to allocate, this year, to service its debts. Tax money is
not going into socioeconomic programmes and as the economic squeeze
tightens, government will offer ordinary people less and less. The promise
of a better life for all rings very hollow today.

We in Cope want to see gender equality being achieved but we believe that
this Ministry is being set up to fail. When it fails because of all the
circumstances that surround it, it will be said that a woman failed the
women of this country. It was wrong to make women’s affairs a woman’s
responsibility. To have absolved men just like that was equally wrong. What
has happened to all the women activists of our country that they allow such
an ill-conceived deployment to occur?

In addition, this department is also responsible for ensuring the
attainment of children’s rights and responsibilities. To begin with, over
1,5 million children of South Africa are orphans. The number of child-
headed households is staggering. All of these problems concerning children
are of a great magnitude. They are very, very serious problems. How will
the government advance the rights of these 1,5 million orphans? How will it
help to resolve the problem of child-headed households?

On the question of people with disabilities, it is noble of the government
to ask for all issues concerning people with disabilities to be
mainstreamed. Last year, Deputy President Motlanthe promised that people
with disabilities would be beneficiaries and equal partners in all
governmental programmes to halve unemployment and poverty. When will this
be fulfilled?

This year’s theme concerning persons with disabilities is “Making
Millennium Development Goals inclusive”. This is to be achieved through the
empowerment of people with disabilities and their communities. We would
like to see programmes being implemented countrywide. We want to see
government action; and not government in distraction.

Chair, we in Cope are very uneasy. This Ministry has an enormous
responsibility. If the Minister proves me wrong and succeeds with all her
strategic objectives to the satisfaction of all the people, I will be only
too happy to eat humble pie. If, on the other hand, what we believe is
going to happen does happen, then money, opportunity and trust will be
permanently lost.

Minister, we beg you to prove us wrong. We beg you to succeed. We urge you
to make this Ministry relevant and save it from the irrelevancy into which
it was moulded. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L L ZWANE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Minister Mama Mayende-Sibiya,
and hon members, KwaZulu-Natal is one of the provinces that was very
excited about the introduction of the Ministry of Women, Children and
People with Disabilities. We felt that it was time the voice of women was
heard and a platform created to address their needs and aspirations. We can
never thank the President of our country enough for the introduction of
this Ministry.

There is a lot of work to be done by this Ministry, as the Minister said in
her speech that it is going to monitor other government departments to
ensure that gender is mainstreamed and that children’s rights as well as
the rights of people with disabilities are taken care of. But, as the
KwaZulu-Natal province, we still want to say that a very small budget has
been allocated to execute this monitoring.

Minister, we would have expected more to be given to your Ministry since it
concerns women. We know that there is a lot of work to be done with regard
to addressing women’s issues that have bugged our society for centuries. We
have a lot of work to do with regard to training women to understand the
pieces of legislation that affect them because, in most cases, they are
exploited or abused simply because they don’t understand how to use the
legislation that is there for them. That is an area this Ministry needs to
focus on.

In many cases, children are abused simply because they’ve not been given
training to understand the legislation provided for them to  assist them to
stand up for their rights. But then that protection also goes with training
to understand their responsibilities as young people.

Your task is going to be a bit complicated and difficult, because we
understand that there are no MECs at the level of provinces that are
dedicated to these programmes which fall within the offices of the
premiers, and as such we are going to demand a lot from this Ministry. We
want to see the Minister trotting around the provinces engaging,
addressing, and discussing issues with women. This is going to take a lot
of her time and it needs to be budgeted for. This Ministry is as important
as any other department. As women, we need to support it in every way we
can to encourage the Minister to do her duties and those of the Ministry
properly.

Regarding the issue of people with disabilities, Minister, in KwaZulu-Natal
we have ensured that the 2% allocated to employ people with disabilities is
implemented by the departments. But there is a need to monitor whether
these things do happen in an effective way or are implemented in full.
Broadly speaking, as KwaZulu-Natal we look forward to your guidance,
support, strengthened communication and visibility so that at the end of
the day we don’t cast aspersions on the Ministry. We look forward to
supporting you and ensuring that your programmes are well received by the
different provinces.

In conclusion, as other speakers have said earlier, I want to say that we
are aggrieved that we have been allocated so little, but I want to assure
you that the province of KwaZulu-Natal, or rather, the mighty province of
KwaZulu-Natal, supports this budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister and departmental
officials ...

... ke tšhaba go bušeletša tšeo maloko ao a boletšego pele ga ka a šetšego
a di boletše. Re tla be re binabina felo go tee, gomme ga re nyake go
binabina felo go tee. Fela ke nyaka go thekga dinthla tše pedi tše tharo
tše e lego gore maloko ao a tlilego pele ga ka a šetše a di boletše.

Ke ema le ntlha ya gore kgoro ye e abetšwe ditekanyetšo tše nnyane le ntlha
ya gore kgoro ye e sa le ye mpsha gomme e swana le ngwana yo a abulago.
Fela ka morago ga nako ye e rileng, e tla kgona go ema ka maoto gomme ya
tataiša ya kgona go ya pele. Ga e gona kgoro ye e ka rego e sa le ye mpsha
ra be re šetše re e šupa ka menwana. Re tlile mo ra bolela gomme ra dumela
gore kgoro ye ke e mpsha, fela re šetše re thomile go e šupa ka menwana. Ga
re a swanela gore re e šupe ka menwana. Ge re e šupa ka menwana re swanetše
gore re tsebe gore ye meraro ye e šupile rena go swana le nna gona bjale ge
ke eme mo gomme ke šupa ka monwana.

Re le komiti re ile ra kopana le kgoro ye gomme ra tšweletša go ipelaetša
ga rena ka taba ya dipeeletšo. Re ile ra tsinkela lenaneotshepedišo leo le
thadilwego la kgoro. Re humane gore ke lenaneo leo le nago le maikemišetšo
a go dira gore kgoro e hlongwe pele ka botlalo ka gore ge e ka se hlongwe
ka botlalo, e ka se šome. Re a tseba gore ge e šetše e hlomilwe ka botlalo,
e tla šoma. Le bjale, re na le lehutšo la go feta legonono gore kgoro ye e
tlo šoma. Ga se ya re ge Mopresidente a hloma kgoro ye a e hloma a se na
maikemišetšo a gore e tlo dira eng.

Re a tseba gore go na le batho ba gaborena bao ba sa itekanelago le bana.
Re na le dipholisi tšeo re di hlamilego re le ba ANC gore di kaonafatše
maphelo a batho ba. Re a tseba gore basadi ba swanetše go matlafatšwa, e
bile re šetše re batametše goba re le go yona 50/50 ya go laetša gore
basadi ba matlafaditšwe. Ga ke tsebe gore batho bao ba sa dutšego ba bolela
gore basadi ba matlafatšwe ba bolela ka eng ka gore ke pholisi ya rena yeo
e rego re matlafatše basadi, ebile re ba matlafaditše.

Ke nyaka go boela polelong ye nngwe yeo e boletšwego ke mohl Worth. Ke
kwele ge mohl Worth a efa polelo ya go laetša gore ga a tsebe tshepedišo ya
mmušo le ya Kabinete. O boletše ka Mokgatlo wa Bosetšhaba wa Tlhabollo ya
Baswa wo o welago ka fase ga Mopresidente. Fela yena o nyaka gore Tona ya
Lafapha la Basadi, Bana le Batho bao ba sa Itekanelago a ikarabele tabeng
ye. Tona a ka se ke a ikarabela tabeng ye ka gore e ka gare ga ofisi ya
Mopresidente. Mohl Worth o be a swanetše go šišinya gore dikgokagano ka
gare ga lefapha le la gona bjale le le mpsha di sepetšwe gabotse gore di
tle di kgone go hola batho ba gaborena. Bjale, ga re nyake gore ka lebaka
la ge a nyaka go fihlelela morero wa dipolotiki, a bolele dilo tše di sa
swanelago go lebana le lefapha le itšego gomme a di lebantšhe le lefapha le
le sa lebanago le tšona. Re kgopela gore a boele a yo bala, a lebelele gore
na mošomo wa mmušo le Kabinete o sepela bjang.

Re le ba ANC, ka fase ga komiti ye e lebanego le kgoro ye, re re kgoro ye
re tla e thekga. Tona o tla humana thekgo ya rena ye e tseneletšego kgorong
ye, e se go thekgo ye e aroganego. Re tlo dira gore Lefapha la tša
Ditšhelete, e lego Boswaramatlotlo bja Setšhaba, le kgone go fa kgoro
ditšhelete tšeo di swanetšego ge go tlo lebedišišwa tša ditšhelete gape
ngwageng wo. Se ke go dira gore kgoro ye e fiwe tšhelete gomme e kgone go
dira mošomo wa yona wo o e lebanego.

Re re bjalo re le ba ANC. Re thekga ditekanyetšo tša lefapha gore lefapha
le tšwele pele le šome. Ke a leboga. [Legoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follow.)

[... let me not reiterate what other members have already mentioned. If we
do that there will be no progress on this matter and this is not what is
desired. However, I would like to mention two or three things in support of
what has already been said prior to my speech.

I agree that this department has been allocated an insufficient budget for
the reason that it is at its tender stage like a crawling baby. After some
time it will be mature enough to operate on its own. We cannot point
fingers at this new department for a lack of service delivery. Some time
ago we unpacked issues around this department and concluded that it is
still developing, but to my surprise we lay blame on it. We are not
supposed to do that. If we do that, we will in turn be laying blame on
ourselves since the other three fingers are pointing at us as we are
pointing one at the department.

As a committee, we had consultations with this department and raised issues
of concern about investments. We looked at matters closely at the
department’s strategic planning workshop. We found that the plan has well-
defined objectives for efficiency and development. We know that once it is
fully established, it will make it. As of now, we still have confidence
that this department will succeed. The President did not just establish
this department in vain; he had a mission.

We know that there are fellow citizens who are disabled. As the ANC, we do
have well-established policies for the betterment of their lives.  We know
that women are to be empowered and we are almost at the half-way mark in
terms of their empowerment. I don’t know why people keep on raising the
issue of women empowerment while we actually know that they are empowered,
for our policy states clearly that women are to be empowered.

Let me refer to what the hon Worth highlighted.  In  his  address,  I  could
pick a few hints to suggest that  the  hon  Worth  confuses  the  government
system and that of the Cabinet.  He  made  mention  of  the  National  Youth
Development Agency as if it was under the  Presidency.  But  he  wanted  the
Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities to respond on  this
matter. The Minister cannot respond on this matter for it is in  the  office
of the President. Hon Worth was supposed to suggest  that  communication  in
this new department be well administered for the benefit of our  people.  We
would prefer him not to raise matters which do not concern  this  department
for political correctness; he should rather be advised to  direct  questions
to the relevant department. We ask him to go back and look carefully at  how
government works, especially the Cabinet.

As the ANC, under the  portfolio  committee  of  this  department,  we  will
support it. We will support the Minister to  the  fullest.  We  will  ensure
that the Department of Finance, which is the  National  Treasury,  allocates
enough money for the second budget allocation this year. This is to make  it
possible for it to function properly. As the  ANC,  we  support  the  budget
allocation of the department and we say let  the  beat  go  on.  Thank  you.
[Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Deputy
Chairperson, I was hoping to borrow from my concluding 15 minutes.

One area that I have to emphasise is our international role. We collaborate
with a number of international and continental bodies and instruments that
the country is signatory to. In this regard, we are required to report
periodically on the progress made at the national level in the
implementation of these instruments.

We are going to ensure that all reports to these international and regional
bodies are consulted on and finalised in time for submission. Furthermore,
we are undertaking to address the backlog in reporting and will ensure that
all outstanding reports are submitted during this financial year.

We participated in the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women
which reviewed 15 years of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and its Platform for Action in New York in March this year. During Women’s
Month in August this year we will hold a national conference to discuss the
outcome of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Woman, UNCSW, and
develop a programme of action towards Beijing +20.
This conference should also discuss the measures we need to take to ensure
that we observe this decade, 2010 to 2020, as the decade of African woman,
as declared by the African Union. Hon Keerath, the issue of unpaid work
done by many women of Africa should be part of this discussion.

We will work towards the ratification of the Southern African Development
Community, SADC, Protocol on Gender and Development and ensure the
domestication of this protocol into the revised policy.

As I go through the responses, I wish to thank the hon members for the
robust debate that we have engaged with this morning. I wish to say that we
take note of all the inputs of the hon members.

Regarding the debate on programmes and projects of the department, I
appreciate the support expressed by members for the collective goal of an
inclusive and caring society.

Member Worth, on the challenges facing the CGE, I must emphasise that we
are engaging with the CGE on measures to resolve its challenges. I also
want to reassure this House that we will follow through on the
recommendations of Scopa. The country cannot afford to lose an institution
like the CGE. All of us, the department and Parliament, need to work
together to make it work.

With regard to the limited resources given to the department, I welcome the
input made by the hon members and I would like to reiterate what I said
earlier in my speech. The amount allocated to the department and agreed to
by Cabinet, is limited compared to the magnitude of the task at hand.
However, we will use this amount to ensure that we do the work before us
and ensure that the policy of our government to mainstream the programmes
throughout the government system is implemented.

We will certainly play our oversight role to ensure that the whole of
government has programmes and funding that benefit women, children and
people with disabilities.

Mhlonishwa weqembu leNkatha, sibonga kakhulu ngamazwi asigqugquzelayo.
Sasebenzisana kahle kakhulu noMntwana kaPhindangene kanye noNkosikazi
Zanele Magwaza-Msibi ekugqugquzeleni usuku lwamakhosikazi eVryheid ngonyaka
odlule. Sifisa ukuthi sibambisane ikakhulukazi ekuthuthukiseni abantu
bakithi emakhaya. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Hon member of the IFP, thank you very much for the words of encouragement.
We worked very well with Inkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Mrs Zanele Magwaza-
Msibi in promoting Women’s Day in Vryheid last year. We wish to work
together especially in the development of our people in the rural areas.]

I have noted the concerns raised by the Western Cape. Through you, Deputy
Chairperson, I would like to say to hon Labuschagne and hon Feldman that
they must be assured that we shall walk the talk. We shall deliver on our
mandate to increase developmental opportunities for women, children and
people with disabilities. We will all work together.

I would like to thank all those, as I said earlier, who have supported us
with this challenging task of setting up the new Ministry and department
over the past year. The Presidency, in particular, has played a central
role in assisting us and providing administrative and other forms of
support to ensure that we establish this institution. We appreciate that
very much.

I also wish to thank my organisation, the ANC, for its vision and the
continued support and understanding with regard to the challenges faced by
the people of South Africa. I also wish to thank other parties who have
given support in different ways and indicated the willingness to work with
us to ensure that the challenges of our people are addressed.

I also want to thank my colleagues in Cabinet, the chairperson and members
of the Select Committee on Women, Children and People with Disabilities.
Thank you very much to all of you.

My appreciation goes to the many women’s organisations, children’s rights
groups and organisations representing persons with disabilities who have
engaged with us to ensure that we create an entity that can respond to the
expectations of our sectors.

In conclusion, I need to say that the best measure of our performance will
be the extent to which we make a difference in the lives of our people,
especially women, children and persons with disabilities. I can say with
certainty that with such strong support from the select committee, we are
going to make a major difference in this term of office.

We will be in the streets and we hope to see members supporting the
programmes that we are going to implement over a period of time, starting
with the launch of, for instance, the week of the rights of the child. We
are also going to hit the ground running with the 2010 Fifa World Cup
programme and other such programmes.

We will lean on the support of the members of this House as we seek, even
with limited funds, to make a difference in the lives of our people in the
country, especially those who are represented by this Ministry.

Let us work together towards a common vision of a nonsexist and nonracial
South Africa that does not discriminate on the basis of sex, religion, etc.
Let us work towards a society that is caring and inclusive, and that
develops the human potential of its women, children and persons with
disabilities.

Let us work towards a society where the women and young people of our
country will walk the streets of South Africa without fearing any form of
attack from any quarter by anybody. I say to this House, confidently, that
as we move forward together, we will be able to achieve such a society in
the future. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Proceedings will be suspended for
lunch and will resume at 14:00. Thank you.

Business suspended at 11:59 and resumed at 14:02.

                              Afternoon Sitting




                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 25 - Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries:
The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Amandla! All power!
HON MEMBERS: To the people!

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: To the farmworkers!
[Laughter.] Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon Mahlangu,
chairperson of the select committee, esteemed members of the NCOP,
chairperson of the portfolio committee on agriculture, members of executive
councils, acting director-general, and all our senior government officials,
heads of departments from the provinces, chief executive officers of the
state-owned enterprises, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, and
comrades, sanibonani, dumelang, goeie middag, good afternoon!

Africa has just hosted the World Economic Forum on Africa under the theme:
“Rethinking Africa's Growth Strategy”. Addressing the World Economic Forum
on Africa in the closing address, President Jacob Zuma said:

   If we in Africa were to improve trade amongst ourselves we wouldn’t have
   to call for foreign direct investments, instead foreign investors would
   come to us on their own.

I would like to emphasise that they would come running to us. To achieve
this, we have to intensify the investment in infrastructure, improve on
research and development and increase value chain activities. With the dawn
of democracy, the commercial agriculture sector carved a market in global
trade where the current government vehemently assured and safeguarded
markets.

Rewards from this vibrant sector must be equitably shared with the majority
of our people. In attempting to address this, government is wrestling with
the need and hunger for land and agrarian transformation, on the one hand,
whilst keeping and deepening the vibrancy of dominant, developed,
commercial agriculture, on the other.

The democratic government, led by the ANC, has been wrestling with this
challenge. Over the years, and with practical hindsight, a compelling fact
is the usefulness of and reliance on free-market forces to direct resources
in resolving this issue of access to land to enable improved and sustained
livelihoods.

It is within this context that we will have to fashion a developmental
state that must lead to the establishment of a vibrant and all-inclusive
economy in our countryside. The first step towards the realisation of this
has been the integration of the three components of agriculture, forestry
and fisheries, which has now been concluded and a fully fledged department
established.

On intergovernmental relations, the department now has a broader mandate
than before. By definition, it is impossible for us to realise our mission
without co-operating and collaborating with others. In this regard we will
work closely with the Departments of Water and Environmental Affairs as
well as Rural Development and Land Reform, whose work overlaps in many
respects with ours.

It is important that we review and refine the implementation of our
commitments to the World Trade Organisation, WTO, so that we can reposition
ourselves in the global trade sector. Our country has not fully used the
provisions of the agreement in the WTO and substantial scope still exists
for an increase in government support to South African farmers. South
African agricultural support notified to the WTO in recent years is about
R6 billion to R8 billion. This support is all classified as Green Box
support by the WTO. Thus, this is support that is non–trade distorting and
non-production distorting.

This amount includes expenditure in relation to agricultural research,
training and extension services, pest and disease controls, veterinary
services and disaster aid. It also includes expenditure by other
departments such as the Department of Education under the school nutrition
programme, classified as domestic food aid.
There are other various provisions in the Green Box, related for example to
environmental programmes and certain income support measures that South
Africa has not made use of. Under these provisions, South Africa may
substantially increase its support to the agricultural sector provided
certain rules are adhered to.

Direct price support is classified as Amber Box support by the WTO. In this
regard, the upper limit for South Africa is just over R2 billion. This
support was last utilised in the year 2000. It may be expected that this
provision will be reduced substantially once the Doha negotiations are
concluded.

In addition to the Amber Box, WTO rules provide for de minimis support.
This support is not included in the Amber Box provided it is below a
certain threshold. Comrades, why am I explaining this? Under South Africa’s
current commitments as a developed country, this threshold is approximately
10% of the gross value of its production. The available amount under this
provision can be as much as R9 billion per year that may be used for price
and production distorting support.

In total, the policy space available to us may be as high as R11 billion.
We have not made use of this support since the year 2000. South Africa has
not made use of the provision of just over R500 million for export
subsidies. Article 6.2 of the Agreement on Agriculture provides for input
and investment subsidies for resource-poor producers in developing
countries.

We should fall under the category of developing countries. This provision
is uncapped. South Africa has not made use of this provision and there
seems to be substantial space for us to support our farmers in this regard.
I am repeating, there is substantial space for us to start supporting our
farmers.

South Africa has substantial policy space for an increase in farmer
support, provided certain basic provisions are adhered to. Again, I am
repeating: provided that we adhere to certain basic provisions.

We will have to look closely for room to manoeuvre with regard to our
tariff commitment. We are aware that space in this regard is limited due to
the bilateral trade agreements concluded between the European Union with
SADC and the European Free Trade Association, Efta.

In relation to WTO rules, considerable space still exists for an increase
in the level of protection, as for most products the bound rates are
considerably higher than the current applied rates. However, applied rates
can only be increased at the most favoured nation level and not at the
level of bilateral agreements.

An analysis, on a line by line basis, will be required to establish the
actual policy space for agricultural products. We will have to look at
tariff lines that are excluded from tariff concessions under the various
bilateral agreements, or where the major supplier of a product is not part
of one of the bilateral agreements. We are convinced that substantial
policy space exists in South Africa’s tariff book.

The reason I am speaking to you at length about this is not because I have
suddenly decided to turn into a neoliberal, but because each line should be
reviewed on its own merits to establish whether we have space to increase
tariffs so that a stream of imported goods does not flood our markets at
cheap prices, thus compromising the production of primary agriculture in
our country. Primary agriculture and food security, especially for black
farmers and smallholder farmers, has been compromised because of the flood
of cheap imports entering our economy.

At the practical level, in view of South Africa’s bilateral trade
agreements, we don’t just have to look at commercial or large farmers, but
also at the space and widen it for smallholder farmers.

One of the fundamental innovations of the current administration is the
emphasis on planning, monitoring and evaluation. It is our view that the
evaluation of the performance of government should not only be done at the
end of the five-year term. Performance should be monitored on a quarterly
basis. If the department and the Ministry are not performing, they should
receive score cards and public results on their performance. [Applause.]

It should be an integral part of our style of government to come back to
this House and report on the progress or lack thereof, and why it is
there. Monitoring and evaluation systems in the department will extend to
the provincial departments of agriculture. Our state-owned entities will be
strengthened by the signing of memoranda of understanding and service level
agreements with stakeholders before the end of the third quarter.

These agreements will hold people to report on progress made in the
provinces as well as in state-owned enterprises. A comprehensive
statistical database will be developed to address the insufficient data we
have in our entire sector, particularly on black farmers.
We are aiming to create a single funding instrument to promote agrarian
transformation and development. The common development funding facility
will consolidate all funds, for example the Comprehensive Agriculture
Support Programme, Casp; Agri-Bee; Micro-Agricultural Finance Initiative of
South Africa,  Mafisa; LandCare; and Ilima/Letsema.

A black farmer cannot start by applying for Casp. Casp will send him to
Agri-Bee, and Agri-Bee will send him to Mafisa, which will also send him to
LandCare, and it in turn will send him to Ilima/Letsema - and by that time,
the person does not have airtime anymore! [Laughter.] The facility will
ensure that agrarian support is accessible to all economic actors in the
countryside.

In as far as food security, economic development, trade and marketing are
concerned, South African products have found their way onto retail shelves
globally. Unfortunately our retail shelves globally are only full of
products from commercial farmers. Very few black farmers have their food on
the shelves in our country, let alone globally.

Following a commodity value chain approach, the department will support the
sectors through investment in food processing technology as well as
research and development. The research and development will be biased
towards black economic development. The department will facilitate and
enhance the development of new markets in the SADC region and on the
African continent. The expansion of markets will go into Asia, South
America and other Western markets.

To facilitate and increase on this trade, the department will increase
access to valuable production and processing infrastructure for local
products. This will also include diversification of export products through
the creation of organisations which will help smallholder farmers access
markets and build links with the formal sector value chains. The department
has launched accredited co-operative learning materials for agricultural co-
operatives. Training in this regard is commencing this month and is
conducted by 63 facilitators in all nine provinces, aiming to
comprehensively train 250 co-operatives in this financial year.

There will be an up-scaling of existing co-operatives and other farmer
formations along commodity lines to exploit economy-of-scale opportunities,
promote bulk buying and create local markets. In all empowerment
endeavours, special attention will be given in order to promote the
equitable representation of unemployed youth, women and disabled people to
satisfy social requirements. The department will also seek to increase
shareholding of the historically disadvantaged individuals in the sector.

With regard to agrarian reform projects, our food security initiatives are
aimed at improving food security amongst the most food insecure and
vulnerable communities. The objective is broad and requires the involvement
of other departments. Through the development of the national food security
framework, we will foster co-ordination of food security interventions
through public-private partnerships. The department will roll out a
mechanisation programme in support of intensified food production in all
nine provinces.

In Mpumalanga we will further up-scale the province’s Masibuyele Emasimini
campaign in all 18 municipalities, reaching a total of 35 160 households
with 62 583 ha of land cultivated. This mechanisation will especially
support production and cultivation of indigenous crops. This project will
be launched by the President on 17 June 2010 in Mpumalanga, and you are all
invited. Please come because we will be having very good umqombothi
[traditional beer] and diretlo [offal]. [Interjections.] Hon Chairperson,
you are also invited. [Laughter.]

The country’s rainfall pattern shows a shift in rainfall towards the
eastern parts of the country, leaving the areas lying in the west drier.
Irrigation infrastructure, including potable water infrastructure, will be
distributed, especially in the former homeland areas, for economic and
social development. Support for household production will continue with the
provision of support in the form of seeds, seedlings and fertiliser packs.
This effort will revive the practice of cultivating food crops to achieve
household food security.

The issue of food safety, together with traceability of products, is
emerging as one of the fundamental aspects in the global regulation of food
trade. This is more the case as climate change has brought diseases and
pest outbreaks, which require a tactical refocus on advanced prevention and
response strategies.

The departmental scientific and research institutions, namely the
Agricultural Research Council, ARC, and the Onderstepoort Biological
Products, OBP, conducted a scientific analysis of the outbreak of  Rift
Valley Fever. They have also developed and distributed a new vaccine to
bring the disease under control and containment.

Working together with the affected provinces, the department further
strengthened the means to enhance a swift response to any future outbreaks.
We are further engaged with Namibia and China to reopen markets which were
closed because of the Rift Valley Fever.

In as far as Casp is concerned, an important yardstick in measuring our
performance has to be the extent to which our budget addresses subsistence
and small-scale farmers. These are the principal motivating forces of
agrarian transformation in our country. A budget of R862 million has been
allocated to Casp to address support for food production both for
subsistence and for the market.

The department will embark on projects in food production; agro-processing;
infrastructure development - water, dams, irrigation systems and fencing;
co-operatives and stokvels - the social economy; as well as the green
economy or agro-ecology. The Casp outputs for this financial year include
the establishment of 1740 food security projects; the creation of about
800 jobs; training and improvement of knowledge and skills of 5 000
beneficiaries to ensure that about 8 000 on-farm and off-farm
infrastructure targets are completed and are functioning.

For the past 11 years LandCare has taken the lead in promoting sustainable
land management practices, reversing land degradation in rural areas and
contributing towards job creation and poverty eradication. In this current
financial year, the programme will implement 1 516 junior care management
projects, construct 2 405 gabions and 300 conservation structures, erect 1
424 km of fence, create 14 257 jobs on LandCare projects and eradicate 8
725 ha of alien invasive plants.
The removal of alien invasive plants actually creates quite a substantial
number of jobs. We are doing it more intensively. We will improve 3 340 ha
of grazing and manage 400 ha of veld grazing. This will be supported by a
budget of R54,5 million.

Agricultural extension services, which include farm planning and economic
advice to farmers, will be strengthened by the further development of on-
farm management tools through a centralised online farm system.

We will recruit 253 extension personnel in support of the extension
recovery plan. About 2 482 extension officers will undergo extensive
training and will be equipped with Smart Pens to enable them to collect and
analyse data on site. It is our experience that white commercial farmers
gained skills through the extension recovery programme they had under
apartheid. Their skills did not come to them through dreaming or osmosis.

All provinces will also pilot the use of the digital pens whose dual
purpose includes monitoring the farm visits by extension officers. They
won’t go to a farm and just report to us that they were there. The pen will
tell us if they really were there. We want to ensure that they will no
longer lie to us. In order to ensure the visibility and accountability of
this service, a national extension performance monitoring tool will be
finalised. Extension officers will also be evaluated and their performance
monitored.
The colleges of agriculture will be turned into agricultural training
institutes. We will commence with the drafting of the Bill for agricultural
training institutes. The Bill will enforce the approved governance and
financing model for agricultural training institutes and their norms and
standards.

According to the latest statistics, the forestry production sector employed
46 000 people in 2007. The challenge is that the sector has recently moved
from a net exporter to a net importer of forestry products. Forestry
contributed only 1,6% to the manufacturing gross domestic product, GDP, and
0,3% to our economy as a whole. Our strategic objectives are to stabilise
the sector and maintain existing jobs in the short term, and restore its
status as a net exporter and position the sector for high-end niche
products and markets in the long term.

There is real scope for the industry to develop. Conservative estimates
identified 100 000 ha in the Eastern Cape, 6 000 ha in Limpopo, 10 000 ha
in Mpumalanga and 39 000 ha in KwaZulu-Natal. This land is still available
for afforestation projects. You can imagine how many jobs could be created.
We still have the potential to create 15 600 jobs countrywide.

The potential of employment opportunities is in the downstream processing
industry. There is potential to improve yields of the existing category of
existing plantations. There is also a possibility to convert existing
wattle jungles into commercial plantations.

The sector must move towards the high-end value addition segment with the
focus on superior design coupled with niche products and markets. We
mustn’t just produce furniture for Ellerines, but also for Joshua Doore.
They must develop high-quality furniture for distinguished income earners.
It is critical that we compete through quality and high standards. To
achieve this, the sector will have to improve its productivity. We will
have to ensure that there are enough designers and artisans for the
furniture industry, as well as enough raw material and timber supplies.

Plans are quite advanced to establish a furniture centre of competence.
Such a centre will facilitate the procurement of high-level skills; address
research and development needs of the industry and disseminate information
on technological and industry trends. We will establish furniture clusters
in KwaZulu-Natal, the Western Cape and Gauteng. These clusters will promote
the sharing of physical infrastructure, knowledge and information, as well
as joint marketing of products.

We are also planning to promote charcoal production through exploiting the
huge reserves of wattle that are in the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.
This will create jobs in the rural areas, as there are low capital
requirements. For an investment of only R900 000 we can employ 50 people.
The potential exists for wood waste management, both in saw milling and in
furniture manufacturing. Therefore, our challenge in this sector is new
afforestation, skills development and technology upgrading, and value
addition for small enterprises, as well as promoting competitiveness and
high-value products in the furniture industry.

Environmental impact assessments, or EIAs, can be very costly for poor
communities. The department is going to support the afforestation programme
by paying for the costs for conducting these EIAs so that licences can be
issued to allow planting to proceed. The potential of forestry as a sector
is vast and beyond timber; it includes medicinal plants, edible fruits and
harvesting carbon credits. To address key issues in this sector, the
department has received an allocation of R501,4 million.

With regard to marine and fisheries coastal management, the integration of
the fisheries function has been finalised. We are now one family. Our
immediate challenge is to conclude the small-scale fisheries policy. It has
taken us one full year to have the fisheries component as part of this
department. This is important for both food security and sustainable income
generation.

Our marine resources are not infinite. Therefore, it is important for us to
develop our inland fisheries capacity through hatcheries to support a
vibrant aquaculture sector. In addition, more work will have to be done to
explore and exploit the potential of mariculture. An aquaculture
demonstration centre is currently being constructed on the Gariep Dam in
the Free State province with the assistance of the Chinese government. The
centre will provide training and research for the development of our inland
fishing opportunities.

We have to address the illegal fishing in the 1 million km² of our
exclusive economic zone. In this regard, government security agencies have
come on board to work with us to address this menace. A government Cabinet
process is at an advanced stage with regard to getting approval for the
conditional reopening of the commercial abalone fisheries.

About R6 million has been allocated for interim social relief for entities
and individuals adversely affected by the previous closure of abalone
harvesting. A further R213 million will be invested in job creation
opportunities to benefit fishing communities along the West Coast of the
Western Cape and the Northern Cape who lost their jobs and income. The
intention is to develop sustainable coastal livelihoods, eliminate illegal
fishing or poaching, and build fishing infrastructure, including the
development of hatcheries.
Transforming this country further is not going to be easy, but it is
necessary and unavoidable. Our doors remain open to all the social players
in our sector. An approach is needed to deliver a dignified means of
existence for the majority of South Africans. This requires that all
stakeholders should keep their doors open and explore all options to find
solutions to the sometimes uncomfortable challenges facing us in the
sector.

One group of unacknowledged and yet important stakeholders is the workers
in our sector. These are the men and women who work on the farms, forest
plantations and the seas. These are the unsung heroes and heroines, who
live and work under very difficult circumstances. They feed the nation yet
they do not have enough to eat.

We have already engaged in a series of farmworker summits unfolding in all
provinces and this will culminate in the National Farmworker Summit in July
2010. Again, please do attend because you will hear your constituencies and
farmworkers speaking.

Ons sal alle deelnemers in die landbousektor bymekaar moet bring om saam te
besluit oor hoe die landbou-, bosbou- en visserybedrywe die ekonomie in ons
land kan stimuleer. Gesamentlik, saam, moet ons werkbare planne ter tafel
bring om seker te maak dat almal in ons land, veral die armes,
voedselsekerheid het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We will have to bring together all stakeholders in the agricultural sector
in order to jointly decide how the agricultural, forestry and fisheries
sectors can stimulate the economy of our country. We should jointly table
workable plans to ensure food security for everybody in our country,
especially the poor.]

Together we can do more. Together with the Deputy Minister, Dr Pieter
Mulder, we would like to thank all the MECs, the acting director-general
and the entire staff component of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries. I would also like to thank the Chairperson and hon esteemed
members of the NCOP for the guidance, direction and also the endless,
nightmarish calls! Hon members, I tried to respond to your questions, but
sometimes I didn’t get to you fast enough. I would like to sincerely, and
humbly apologise for whenever I failed you.

Lastly, I would like to thank the state-owned entities in the sector for
their co-operation and support in ensuring that programmes that are to be
delivered are going to be successful and would be in the best interests of
the communities of our country and of Mzansi for sure! I thank you. Ke a
leboga. Enkosi kakhulu. Baie dankie. [Thank you.] [Applause.]
Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs, hon members and
department personnel, good afternoon. Minister, I would like to start by
thanking you for sending a team from the department to the Intsika Yethu
Municipality, specifically to the Ncora Irrigation Scheme in the Chris Hani
District Municipality in April this year.

The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs conducted oversight
on two irrigation schemes in the Eastern Cape and what we observed in Ncora
was shocking. This restituted farm was not operational and all the
infrastructure, equipment and livestock with an estimated value of R7
million that had been provided to the community, as part of the restitution
process, was auctioned off for about R35 000. The buildings and
infrastructure were vandalised. We have completed our oversight report on
this case and are now waiting for the final report from your department,
Minister, so that further action can be taken against the responsible
parties.

The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries has great potential
to assist our government in the fight against poverty as these sectors play
a central and critical role in providing employment, producing food for the
country and generating income, as well as in the subsistence of the rural
poor.

The roles that agriculture, forestry and fisheries play in food security,
through providing goods and services to the rural poor, make them very
important sectors in a developing country like South Africa.

These three sectors have the potential to revive the rural economy of South
Africa, and with appropriate policies and support they can make a
significant contribution to addressing the country’s current socioeconomic
challenges. Although these sectors remain a priority, our government is
faced with the challenge of balancing these priorities with other priority
sectors such as education, health and rural development.

Rural development and the creation of employment are top government
priorities that will receive specific focus during the MTEF period, as
mentioned by the President in the 2010 state of the nation address and the
Minister of Finance, Mr Gordhan, during the presentation of the Budget
Speech.

To ensure improvement in rural productivity and enhancement of rural
livestock, the focus on rural development necessitates a strengthened and
effective collaboration between the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries and the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform.

Agriculture is expected to play a central role in rural development by
linking food security with the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme,
CRDP, as well as with the Land and Agrarian Reform Project, whilst forestry
and fisheries are key economic drivers for the country.

Therefore, our government’s priorities through which agriculture will play
a role in rural development during the MTEF period include improving
government’s support to small-scale and emerging farmers through the
integration of agricultural support programmes with land reform; ensuring
that 60% of the rural households can provide for their food needs by 2014;
and creating jobs, particularly for the youth.

Furthermore, the department plans to complete an agricultural production
strategy in 2010 to promote the growth and development of subsistence,
smallholder and commercial producers through different commodity groups and
strategies. This should be fully supported as this is what is needed for
the sector.

The departmental policy’s central focus is to address the challenges that
are faced by rural and vulnerable people by empowering them to create co-
operatives and small, micro and medium enterprises, SMMEs; to facilitate
access to development finance; and to improve capacity-building and
mentorship. These initiatives are all urgently required and fully supported
by the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

The agriculture support service programme is a new programme that provides
agricultural training; extension and advisory services; scientific research
and technology; risk and disaster management services; and the promotion of
equitable access and commercial viability of emerging farmers. This is a
service that is fully supported and required for the sector.

The forestry programme priorities include developing a strategy and a fund
for the SMMEs in the sector; developing a strategy to address timber
shortages; establishing extension support for emerging growers and
entrepreneurs; and reducing the regulatory burden on small and emerging
businesses. This programme is responsible for ensuring sustainable
management of plantations, natural or indigenous forests and woodlands to
realise their optimal social, environmental and economic benefits.

The priorities of the fisheries programme include establishing and
revitalising state-owned hatcheries; developing aquaculture development
zones; cage culture pilot projects in state-owned waterworks and coastal
areas; and doing research and development on candidate culture species.

All these mechanisms are fully supported as they relate to the key focus
areas of our government. The department also needs to address the issue of
fishing rights and quotas for our marginalised communities – too many
fishing communities are out of work and poverty-stricken.

The core business and mandate of the Marine Living Resources Fund is to
manage the development and sustainable use of the country’s marine and
coastal resources, as well as to protect the integrity and quality of the
marine and coastal ecosystem.

However, due to the split of the Marine Living Resources Fund’s functions
between the two departments, the allocated funds to operate the research
and surveillance vessels were not transferred to the Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries along with the fund. The fund is only
allocated a government grant for the marine aquaculture function. This is a
very serious concern, particularly with regard to the monitoring and
surveillance of our seas, as the country faces challenges with regard to
poaching of marine resources.

Marine research is also important as it guides marine activities and
provides the scientific basis for setting the catch limits which the
fishing industry can harvest in a sustainable manner during its commercial
operations. In its strategic plan for 2010-11, the department plans to do
research on the catch limits for 22 fishery sectors and ecosystem
interactions. However, the fisheries budget is not adequate to enable all
these activities, as almost 95% of the programme budget is spent on
compensation of employees. This is an area of concern for the Select
Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

Currently the department administers three conditional agricultural grants
to provinces, namely the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme,
Casp, Ilima/Letsema and the LandCare programme grants. In this MTEF period,
Casp, which aims to provide support to newly established emerging farmers,
is allocated a R2,9 billion grant which is spread out as R862,4 in the 2010-
11 financial year; R979,3 million in 2011-12; and R1 billion in 2012-13.

The Casp grant also includes the extension recovery plan, which focuses on
improving extension services through training and provision of equipment
for extension officers.

The department’s outputs for Casp are all based on infrastructure
provision, namely fencing, livestock, poultry structures, boreholes, water
systems and tractors. This is a serious concern as the required support for
emerging farmers goes beyond infrastructure provision.

Given the provided infrastructure, the government is silent on concrete
plans on how it will improve and increase agriculture production; provide
post-settlement support; build capacity and improve farmers’ skills,
including agribusiness training; and improve information systems for
planning and decision-making; as well as how it will improve farm income
through job creation and food security. These are all desired outcomes for
Casp, but can never be met by only providing infrastructure.

The department measures performance by the number of projects and
beneficiaries involved in these projects. However, it fails to give details
of the benefits that have accrued and their impact on the communities in
relation to the funds that were invested.

The LandCare programme, which aims to optimise productivity and the
sustainable use of national resources, is allocated a grant of R173 million
in the MTEF period. The LandCare programme does very little for sustainable
use of agriculture and natural resources. While some of its activities are
commendable, some are misplaced as, for example, in the Eastern Cape where
a flagship LandCare programme project was a wool production project run by
the National Wool Growers’ Association, NWGA. This saw lots of sheep-
shearing sheds being erected throughout the province.

This specific project, although it has improved income from wool production
in some areas, has, however, done very little for sustainable resource use,
as some of these areas where shearing sheds were erected did not even have
grazing land for the sheep.

In order to ensure the optimal use of financial resources, to be effective
and to avoid duplication, there is also a need for integration of the
LandCare programme with other government programmes with similar
objectives.

In conclusion, I would like to assert that the department has a major task
ahead. However, I know that the Minister has capable hands and leadership.

Angayenza yonke le nto siyifunayo iphumelele. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
[She can accomplish all that we need. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, hon Minister ...

... die Minister praat so baie mooi Afrikaans dat die boere in die Vrystaat
baie bly sal wees. [... the Minister speaks Afrikaans so beautifully that
the farmers in the Free State would be pleased.]

I would also like to thank our MEC present - I just see one here - Ms
Qabathe from the Free State; it’s good to have Free Staters here.

Firstly, I wish to thank the department for their budget presentation to
the committee, our researchers and also our committee chairperson, Mrs
Qikani, who serves the committee in a very professional manner, I must say.

The new Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries was established
in July 2009 and came into effect on 1 April 2010. The budget for this
department is some R3,658 billion which, needless to say, is totally
inadequate. There must be a renewed focus on the need to ensure an adequate
supply of safe, nutritious and high-quality food at affordable prices.

The smallholder subsector continues to be underproductive and economically
unsustainable. The majority of land reform initiatives are failures, as the
beneficiaries do not obtain post-settlement financial and other support.
The department must ensure that there are more extension officers with
improved qualifications - and that is in the report - and better veterinary
services.

Extreme weather and climate conditions impact negatively on agricultural
production and the livelihood of communities. Persons with an interest in
farming need to be identified and trained to ensure that production is
maintained. Many claimants to land wish to own ground, but have no
inclination or passion to farm or to become commercial farmers; and so
productive land goes to waste, which is something that South African can
ill afford.

Furthermore, according to National Treasury, a shortage of capital and
skills, increases in input costs and low commodity prices have led to more
than two million — some people say it is five million — hectares of idle
agricultural land and abandoned buildings.
Our committee went on an oversight visit to Ncora and Qamata Irrigation
Schemes in the Eastern Cape, as alluded to by our chairperson. There is a
large dam, the Lubisi dam, with canals and holding ponds fed by
gravitational force. The ground is fertile and there is water, but little
support from the department. Once upon a time there were dairies,
butcheries and shops; now it is only devastation as the buildings and
infrastructure have been systematically stripped and plundered.

I believe there are other such neglected irrigation schemes in the country.
Whilst travelling in the Eastern Cape, the extent of the soil erosion was
also noted. Many people could be gainfully employed on a short-term basis
to build stone walls or fill dongas and not merely fence them off, as this
does not help to reverse the damage caused.

Government is now proposing a share scheme for Agri-BEE farmers with the
aim of reaching land reform targets and replacing the willing-buyer,
willing-seller principle. The allegations that the willing-buyer, willing-
seller principle is responsible for the failure to reach the 30% target of
land transfer to disadvantaged people is also indicative of a poor
understanding of the land reform policy; while it is also an admitted fact
that 90% of the transferred land is unproductive.

Small agriculture businesses can hardly survive economically, as they
operate in small net profit margins ranging between 2% to 5% on capital.
Consequently, small and medium commercial farmers are in no position to
divide the income between more shareholders.

No owner of property can be forced to dispose of their rights without fair
compensation. The ignoring of this basic principle will result in the total
collapse of food production and the banking system. The DA proposes that
government should implement a successful model first, based on partnership
and/or mentorship agreements for the failed farms under the land
restitution process, before risking the existing successful productive
farms. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms N W Magadla): Chairperson, hon Minister Tina
Joemat-Pettersson, hon MEC present, hon delegates and hon members, 18 May
is an important day in the calendar of political events of South Africa. It
is the day on which the former deputy president and secretary-general of
the ANC Mr Walter Sisulu was born.

Mr Walter Sisulu was born on 18 May 1912, the same year the ANC was
founded. If he were still alive he would have turned 98 years old today. He
passed on in the same month he was born, that is on 5 May 2003, a few days
before his 91st birthday.

In remembering the late Mr Walter Sisulu, who sacrificed his life for the
liberation of his people, I’m reminded of what another stalwart, former
President Nelson Mandela, said about him:


  Many of us have gained positions, received accolades and have been
  acclaimed, but none of us match the leadership and humility of a great
  man - Walter Sisulu.

Indeed, these observations about Mr Sisulu should inspire us. Leaders like
the late Mr Walter Sisulu were humbled by the fact that the masses of our
people looked up to them for guidance and leadership.

The aim of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries is to
support and promote agriculture, forestry and fisheries through policies
and programmes that seek to enhance economic growth, food security and
rural development.

As we debate this Vote we must remember that our people know what they have
asked us to do. People want us to assist them with food production and food
security - especially for the poor - as well as with opportunities for
economic development in rural areas. This could be achieved through a
comprehensive rural development strategy linked to agrarian reform, which
builds the potential for rural sustainable livelihoods, particularly for
African women.

In response to this, the NCOP has identified agriculture, rural development
and land reform as forming part of its oversight priorities for this term
of Parliament. We will be looking with keen interest at the delivery of
services in these areas.

The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs received briefings
on 14 April 2010 from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
on its policy and budget. This provided an opportunity for the committee to
consider the strategic plan of the department in relation to the policy and
Budget Vote. This meeting enabled the committee to determine its
recommendation to this House in as far as the budget of the department is
concerned.

From the briefing by the department, the committee has recommended that the
department needs to put in place systems and processes to ensure that the
land reform process facilitates development of the rural economies through
transformation of agriculture and forestry, in order to ensure food
security and the eradication of poverty. We will continue to engage the
department in this regard.

During this term of an activist Parliament, we have agreed that we will be
robust in exercising oversight because we want to do things differently.
This must start with our ensuring that we unblock the blockages that are
there in the delivery of services to our people. Oversight and
accountability are central to creating a Parliament that is responsive to
the needs of the people. It entails monitoring and reviewing the actions of
the executive organ of government. Our approach this year is underpinned by
the fact that this year is a year of action, and food security is one of
the five key priorities of the ruling party.

In his state of the nation address this year, His Excellency President
Jacob Zuma stated clearly that as public representatives we have to work
closely with the communities. He said that we need to mobilise people to go
back to the fields to produce their own food. This was reiterated by the
premier of my province, KwaZulu-Natal, hon Dr Zweli Mkhize.

I am happy to note that my province has already started with this
initiative and is continuing to intensify this partnership through the One
Home, One Garden and One School, One Garden campaigns and many other
agricultural support activities.

We urge the department to continue to support and empower women, especially
rural women, to actively participate in the agricultural sector. Programmes
such as Women in Agriculture and Rural Development and Youth in Agriculture
and Rural Development, should play a critical role in promoting food
security, thereby safeguarding human life.

The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries is responsible for
production and resource management, agricultural support services, trade
and economic development, food safety and biosecurity and marine
aquaculture, as the chairperson has alluded. It therefore goes without
saying that agriculture has a critical role to play in boosting our economy
through backward and forward linkages to the sectors.

There are already clear signs in some provinces where there have been
government interventions to support people that those people are ready to
make use of the land to support themselves and to earn a living. During our
visit to Limpopo through the NCOP’s Taking Parliament to the People
programme in March this year, the people in the Greater Sekhukhune District
Municipality raised a number of issues, including the following.

They said there is no monitoring of agricultural projects, and that
compromises the success and long-term sustainability of projects. Also,
there is often a refusal by some people who own land to release land for
development purposes. They want the department to ensure that farms that
are adjacent to the main roads are properly fenced - a matter the province
said they were taking up already. Lastly, the department should ensure that
it monitors the progress of emerging farmers who have been trained.

These issues and many others, which were raised by the people of Limpopo
during the NCOP’s Taking Parliament to the People programme, are critical
in strengthening the capacity of the agricultural sector. We are going to
consider them, as this House, and interact with all the relevant role-
players so that we can find sustainable solutions.

In concluding my input, let me remind you of the wise words of Mr Walter
Sisulu in 1964, when he said:


  As long as I enjoy the confidence of my people, as long as there is a
  spark of life and energy in me, I shall fight with courage and
  determination for the abolition of discriminatory laws and for the
  freedom of all South Africans irrespective of colour or creed.

As public representatives, it is our responsibility to ensure that our
people enjoy the freedom they made sacrifices for. The ANC supports the
Budget Vote for the department. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr H GEYER (Western Cape): Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and hon
members, I thank you for the opportunity for me to attend today. South
African agriculture is at a defining moment. We are at a crossroads. While
the world is grappling with the threat of food security, we are grappling
with the redress of our history through access to land for all our
citizens.

The question is this: Can we redress land issues, on the one hand, without
eroding our ability to provide food security, on the other? This requires a
balancing act between subsistence farmers, new farmers and our commercial
sector. This is a tough challenge indeed.

The Minister mentioned several key focus areas in her budget address. This
year’s budget seeks to speak to seven issues: administration; economic
development, markets and trade; food security and agrarian reform;
fisheries management; forestry production and resource management; policy,
planning and evaluation; and agricultural production, health and food
safety. Allow me to make a few remarks touching on some of these.

Deputy Chair, the Minister mentioned internal capacity problems in her
department, and I quote from her speech to the National Assembly:

  The department has a clear road map for dealing with capacity issues.
  Vacancies will be filled quicker. The current vacancy rate of 17% will
  decrease to at least 5% by next year. The priority will be to fill
  critical senior management positions before the end of this quarter. This
  includes the position of the director-general of the department.

I want to congratulate the Minister on identifying a well-staffed and well-
functioning department as a point of critical importance. The Minister’s
department has a crucial role to play in supporting agriculture, but also
in transforming agriculture. We support her in this quest, and wish her all
the best in this regard.

We are optimistic about the Minister’s acceptance of equity schemes as a
tool for promoting access to land. The Western Cape government believes
that equity schemes are the best way to achieve sustainable land reform.
Equity schemes can be embarked on without jeopardising food security, as
the skills that ensured the success of the original business stay intact.
However, we need to be aware of the high transaction costs associated with
transforming a one-man business into a multiownership enterprise. These
transaction costs are high, especially for small and medium-sized
businesses.

There are no known silver bullets to solve our land challenges, and we want
to encourage and also support the Minister to proceed with caution.

Rural development is a strategic priority of the national government.
Agriculture has the ability to play a leading role in rural development. It
makes sense to also support existing agricultural enterprises in our rural
areas, as these businesses are, in many instances, the mainstays of our
rural towns.

They provide employment opportunities and pay rates and taxes. These agri-
businesses are the source of much-needed revenue, for infrastructure,
amongst other things. So, Deputy Chair, perhaps a little more support for
the wheat farmers will have positive spin-offs for rural development.

However, we can also apply this argument to commercial agriculture as a
whole. Support commercial agriculture and you are also promoting rural
development. We are, therefore, pleased to hear that the hon Minister has
stated today that she will support our farmers. She also stated that we
should guard against flooding our markets with products from overseas
producers. If we manage this properly, we will make things easier for our
up-and-coming, new farmers.

When we say this, we must be honest with each other, because talk is cheap.
I want to draw the Minister’s attention to the following: In Port Nolloth a
mariculture abalone farm of 146 ha was fenced in and not developed further.
This is a waste of money.

A second case I would like to point out occurred in Alexander Bay. Just
last year, the oyster farm in Alexander Bay, which once had 1,3 million
oysters, was stripped by the community property association, the CPA. I
anticipate that these cases, and others, will receive the hon Minister’s
urgent attention.

Rural safety is an area of critical concern. We are, therefore, excited
about the Minister’s commitment towards addressing this issue. We are
looking forward to more concrete measures in this regard. Rural safety can
only be achieved if all the role-players - the South African Police,
organised agriculture and organised labour - work together. However, all
workers, farmworkers and inhabitants of our rural towns have a
responsibility in this regard.

Deputy Chairperson, the Western Cape winelands recently hit the headlines
in the media regarding mining prospecting applications. This was a badly
planned project. As we have been told, outdated maps were used to plot the
targeted, so-called prospecting areas. The maps were so outdated that the
consultants found a fully developed residential area where the prospecting
was to take place.

This is an unprofessional approach and is not acceptable. It causes panic
amongst residents, who suddenly hear that prospecting is going to take
place right in their back yard.

Let us, as the Western Cape government, be very clear on this issue. I want
to assure the hon Minister that we will always protect high-value
agricultural land. It is not only mining that is competing for agricultural
land.

The ever-increasing need for housing, particularly in the city of Cape
Town, is also putting pressure on agricultural land in our province. Let us
never forget, however, that we also need to eat, and without agricultural
land and farmers, we will not have food in this country. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you very much, hon member. Hon
members, just for the record, and to avoid a situation where somebody might
think that there has been a coup here, I am not the Deputy Chairperson of
this Council. Thank you very much, hon member. May I then call on the hon
De Beer of “die kongres van die mense”[Congress of the People] Cope.

Mnr O DE BEER: Voorsitter, u is absoluut korrek met u verwysing na die
kongres van die mense! [Chairperson, you were absolutely correct when you
referred to the congress of the people!]

Chairperson, hon Minister, hon colleagues, my office sent an official
invitation to you, Minister, to come and engage with the people of the West
Coast in Saldanha. I hope you are going to accept it.

In money terms, agriculture’s share of the economy has declined drastically
since 1930. Formerly, it was a highly regulated sector. In the past,
farmers received subsidies and financial assistance. Since the 1980s,
farming has been deregulated. The agricultural sector is now expected to
respond to free-market conditions.

Boere is nou op hulle eie. Die koste van boerdery-insette is aanhoudend
besig om te styg. Die vraag van voedselversekering moet nou vir ons almal
’n saak van ernstige kommer raak. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)
[Farmers are now left to their own devices. The costs of farming inputs are
continually on the rise. The question of food security should become a very
serious concern for all of us.]

Minister, what is the state of our agriculture today? Farmers are failing
because of climate change and cheaper imports. Europe has the Green Box
subsidy system. All but 10% of the farmers benefiting from restitution have
failed.

In the past, farmers provided job opportunities for a vast number of South
Africans. Today this is not the case. During the 10-year period from 1988
to 1998 the commercial farming sector, for example, shed a staggering 140
000 regular jobs, a decline of 20%.

Die regering ondersteun nie genoeg die bestaansboerdery in Suid-Afrika nie.
In die verlede, het baie landelike gemeenskappe hulle eie kos voorsien.
Vandag is dit nie meer die geval nie. Minister, is die landbou in ’n
krisis, of nie?

Die ander kant van die munt vertel ons dat organiese landbou die gesondheid
van die grond asook mense en ekosisteme behou. Ongeveer 30 000 ha wêreldwyd
word nou organies gekweek. Organiese landbou kombineer tradisionele
innovasie en wetenskap om die gedeelde omgewing te ondersteun en om
voordeel te trek, asook om eerlike verhoudings en ’n goeie kwaliteit van
lewe vir almal wat betrokke is te bevorder. Hoe ondersteun die departement
organies gekweekte produkte om ’n skoner en veiliger omgewing te bevorder?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The government does not give enough support to subsistence farming in
South Africa. In the past, many rural communities supplied their own food.
Today that is no longer the case. Minister, is agriculture in crisis, or
not?

On the other hand, with organic farming the health of the land, people and
ecosystems is maintained. Worldwide organic farming takes place on
approximately 30 000 ha of land. Organic farming combines traditional
innovation and science to support the shared environment and to benefit
from it, and to promote honest relationships and a good quality of life for
everyone who is involved with the process. How does the government support
organically cultivated products in order to promote a cleaner and safer
environment?]

Rift Valley Fever has had an enormous, negative impact on the lives of many
farmers and citizens. Are the provinces equipped to react more effectively
to such outbreaks? May we also ask the Minister if there is any precaution
in place to safeguard all livestock in the country? Is there an extensive
system of inspection?

Landbou is ’n ernstig betwiste terrein in Suid-Afrika as gevolg van ons
geskiedenis. Hoe veronderstel die departement om ’n blywende en regverdige
oplossing te vind?
Minister, die visbedryf in Suid-Afrika is tans besig om onder moeilike
omstandighede gebuk te gaan. Vissery verteenwoordig ’n relatief klein
sektor binne die nasionale ekonomie van Suid-Afrika. Die Wes-Kaap is die
middelpunt van die industrie en is die dominante werkgewer in gebiede soos
Saldanha, St Helena-baai en Doringbaai.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Agriculture is a seriously contested area in South Africa due to our
history. How does the department envisage finding a lasting and equitable
solution?

Minister, the fishing industry in South Africa is facing serious challenges
at the moment. The fishing industry represents a relatively small sector
within the national economy of South Africa. The Western Cape is the centre
of the industry and is the dominant employer in areas such as Saldanha, St
Helena Bay and Doring Bay.]

A serious issue within this sector is illegal fishing, especially involving
the Far East. This increased involvement has stimulated illegal fishing.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Ms M QABATHE (Free State): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of the
National Council of Provinces, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank
Mam’uMagadla for reminding us of how important this day is. It is very
humbling for me to address this august House on such an important day.
We agree with our hon Minister that the murders and human rights violations
of farm workers, farm dwellers and farmers can no longer be tolerated. We
have to collectively fight for safety on farms. The contradictions and
conflicts need the attention of both black and white.

That is why in the Free State the department of agriculture and the
department of police, roads and transport have jointly donated two crime-
fighting response kombis to Bultfontein Distrikslandbou, which were
converted into mobile communication centres. This is intended to assist in
the effective response to disasters and combating stock theft, farm
killings and crime in general. And positive results have been reported
already.

In working together with both black and white farmers, farm workers and
farm dwellers, we are jointly going to have a clean-up campaign at Hoopstad
and Bultfontein townships.

Mmoho re hlasela ditshila. [Together we are tackling dirt.]

Hon member Worth is our witness, as he is from the Free State, that the
Free State agriculture budget speech was hosted jointly with the white
farmers. We are in a process of building a nation.

Chair, the security of land tenure for our farm workers and farm dwellers
is a constitutional matter. It is, however, regrettable that conflicts and
confrontations between farmers and farm workers are still a daily
occurrence.

One of the challenges facing farm workers is a lack of access to legal
assistance when their basic human rights are being trampled on. This
situation is created by the abject poverty in which they live. There is,
therefore, a need to have an integrated, co-ordinated, interdepartmental,
intersectoral, co-operative approach that involves all role-players
committed to changing the current situation. It is for this reason that the
Free State department of agriculture will this year call for expert advice
from academia in order to support the review of the current land tenure
systems, in particular the Extension of Security of Tenure Act.

As farm workers are the only labour force required to grow the agricultural
economy, if the laws protecting them are weak, the sector will also
collapse, and vice versa. The need to support such initiatives cannot be
overemphasised.

We have already collated a database of 78 cases that are still dragging at
our courts of law whilst farm workers and dwellers are vulnerable on the
streets. The SA Human Rights Commission and the SAPS are of great
assistance in this programme.

We have invited final-year law students to go and do a case study on all
the 78 cases in order to check the policy gaps and weaknesses. The outcome
of such results will be presented to our farm workers summit in order to
strengthen our resolutions for the summit.

The Freedom Charter states that the state shall help entrepreneurial
farmers with implements, seeds, tractors and dams to save the land and
assist the tillers. This is continuing to become a reality as we continue
to provide farmers with mechanisation, production inputs and farming
infrastructure.

Through this programme, we aim to enhance food security, farmer support and
settlement. To date, 31 Free State farmers have benefited from the
mechanisation programme. I must also mention that a total of 127 farmers
has benefited from agricultural inputs such as seeds and fertilisers in the
different regions of the Free State.

We will continue to provide farmers with support in the new financial year
through the Letsema/Ilima programme and we will implement more than 47
projects to a total amount of R26 million.

We have already completed our assessment and identified the gaps that need
to be filled. The assessment is in response to the Minister’s instruction
that the departments of rural development and land reform and agriculture
and the Land Bank compile a joint rescue plan for all the farms that are in
distress. We are busy helping these farms together with the national
department as led by our Minister.
We will further support the development of more competitive markets. We
will help farmers who are seeking to be commercialised through research and
development. We will establish commodity-based co-operatives and increase
the number of farmers producing for markets.

We also welcome the move by the hon Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, to distribute R50 million worth of
tractors in provinces in an effort to rebuild the culture and capability of
food production. This will truly support our farmers as we had already
started implementing a similar programme in the previous financial year. A
total of more than R2 million was spent on such an initiative.

I am glad to announce that this year, under Casp, the department of
agriculture in the Free State will be implementing 63 projects to a total
budget of R75 million, which will in turn support 2 191 farmers and create
284 employment opportunities.

I am glad to announce that the department of agriculture in the Free State
has helped two Thabo Mofutsanyane farmers with R2,5 million and R1 million
respectively, to help them become breeders of Nguni and Shorthorn cattle.
We have done this to ensure that we establish black agricultural
entrepreneurs in areas that are regarded as a niche.

We are venturing into areas where transformation is still to be seen.
Agriculture is doing well this time, hon De Beer. Surely the times you are
referring to were during the apartheid era.

The Free State province, like many other provinces, experienced an outbreak
of Rift Valley Fever. This outbreak affected our agricultural business
adversely. In response to the outbreak, we deployed a response team
comprising veterinarians and animal health technicians in conjunction with
the Department of Health.

We further procured 400 000 doses of the vaccine worth R1,2 million to
immunise animals in the province. Through this response, we were protecting
the investment of our farmers, particularly in the export trade, which has
brought a total of R188 million into the Free State province through the
export of animal products to the SADC and European countries.

In support of the Minister’s policy on fisheries, I want to emphasise what
she has just said: Although the province is without a coastline, this did
not deter the department from identifying fish farming as a new sector in
order to diversify the economy in the province.

The department is currently in the process of constructing an aquaculture
training and demonstration centre at the Gariep Dam in Xhariep district.
The centre is envisaged as a fingerling supply station to rural aquaculture
community projects in the Free State province and outside the province. The
research station will provide training to agricultural scientists,
technicians and farmers.

It is hoped that the skills acquired at the centre will contribute
significantly to the fishing industry, not only provincially but
nationally. The project has been supported by the Chinese government with a
total investment of R45 million. The project has created 100 temporary jobs
during the construction phase and eventually will create six permanent
technical jobs, excluding the opportunities that it will create as a
business.

The impact of the project will benefit the broader SADC in terms of fish
farming. Through the Minister’s assistance, we have a partnership with
Potatoes SA to make Kgolokweng an agriprocessing hub for frozen potatoes
and instant mashed potato. We are doing this together with them.

We want to say, Chairperson, that we fully support the Minister’s budget
speech and the tabling here of the Vote. We are proud that she does not
just talk, but is also a person who propels action. I thank you.
[Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Mhlonishwa Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, abamele
izifundazwe zakithi, amalungu ale Ndlu ahloniphekile, Ngqongqoshe inhliziyo
yami iyajabula ukuzwa ukuthi kukhona ozokusho okwethembisayo ngalokhu
okubizwa nge-food security kulelizwe lakithi. Ngiyajabula nanoma ngazi
ukuthi kuzoba nezinselele ezinzima ezingase zibekhona kulokho.

Ngithi nani kufanele nithathe lokho enikubona kwenzeka kwamanye amazwe,
okokulekelela uhulumeni ukuze akwazi ukwelekelela abalimi ekutheni bakwazi
ukukhiqiza ukudla esingakwazi ukukuthenga ngentengo ephansi lapha ezweni
lakithi. Lokho kufanele kwenzeke nalapho ngisuka khona le emakhaya, kwanja
ayiphume, lapho ngazi kahle ukuthi inhlabathi isezandleni zamaKhosi.

Ngizocela ukuthi uNgqongqoshe akubhekisise ukuthi abantu bakithi
bayaqeqeshwa yini kwezolimo na. Nokuthi bayanikezwa yini izinsizakusebenza
zezolimo - ogandaganda njengoba uNgqongqoshe eshilo. Nanokuthi baqeqeshwa
ngohlobo lwesimanje yini kanti futhi lezo zinsizakusebenza bazisebenzisa
ngakho yini ukuze bakwazi ukusizakala.

Mina njengomtakaPhiwana Zulu nginombono owehlukile ukuthi kube khona
ogandaganda noma izinsizakusebenza zikahulumeni ezinikezwa abantu abathile
ngoba benezikhundla kodwa ngibona ukuthi kufunele bazisebenzise babuye
babonelele umphakathi.

Ngithi njengoMnyango kuwumsebenzi wenu ukuqinisekisa ukuthi izisebenzi
zikahulumeni kuba yizona eziphatha lezi zinsizakusebenza zikahulumeni ukuze
zikwazi ukuzinikeza abalimi lapho bekhona khona. Ngoba uma uzonikeza mina
kanje kuzoba sekuba nabanye abantu engingasizi ngoba ngingabathandi kahle,
kanti uma unikeze umsebenzi kahulumeni uyazi ukuthi unesibopho sokuchaza
ngokwenzekayo kuhulumeni. Kodwa uma ngabe unganikeza mina njengeNkosi
anginasibopho sokuchazela noma ngubani ngokwenzekayo.

Lezi zinto engikhuluma ngazo Ngqongqoshe ngifisa ukuthi uzibhekisise kuzo
zonke izifundazwe zakithi, futhi kubhekisiswe nokuthi izinsizakusebenza
zikahulumeni ziya endaweni yoMnyango lapho nathi esizokwazi ukufinyelela
khona njengabantu abakhethiwe.

Njengeqembu leNkatha siyakusekela kwisabiwomali osenzile esizonikeza
izifundazwe zethu amandla okuthi zikwazi ukusiza abantu. Kufuneka
ubenendlela, noma abantu abazobheka ukuthi lezo zinsizakusebenza ziyaya
yini ebantwini, nokuthi futhi izinto ziyenzeka yini. Kungabi yizisebenzi
zakho ezizama ukutshela abantu, kodwa akuhlalwe phansi kube nezindaba
ezixoxwayo, lapho abantu besho khona ukuthi bangalima kanjani ngoba ukulima
akufiki nohulumeni. Ubabamkhulu, iNkosi uDinizulu wayelima, kudliwa,
kubuswa. Namanje sifisa kube njalo Ngqongqoshe, kwenzeke lokho kubhekisiswe
kahle ukuthi lezi zinto ziyabasiza yini abantu.

Ngithi njengeqembu leNkatha siyasesekela isabiwomali sakho. Engicabanga
ukuthi uma uNkulunkulu ekusizile uyokwazi ukuthi ubhekane naleminyaka emine
ezayo esikusalele, usesikhundleni ukwazi ukusiza ukuba kuhlangatshezwane
nezidingo zakithi. Ngithi nibasize ngezinto zokulima. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo.
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, our provincial
representatives, hon members of this House, hon Minister, my heart is
filled with joy when I hear that you are going to say something promising
about what is known as food security in our country. I am joyful even
though I am aware that there might be challenges with regard to that.

You also need to do what is being done in other countries that will assist
the government in helping farmers produce food that we can buy at a lower
price here in our country. And that should also be done where I come from –
the most remote rural areas – such as places where it is a known fact that
the land is in the hands of the amakhosi.

I request the Minister to check whether our people are trained for
agriculture or not, as well as whether they are furnished with agricultural
equipment – like tractors, as the Minister had already mentioned. Could the
Minister also ensure that they receive updated training and also see
whether that equipment is being used properly for farmers to be able to
find all the help they need.

I, Phiwana Zulu’s son, have a different opinion – that tractors or
government equipment should not be allocated to some people because they
hold certain positions but I am of the opinion that they should use them
and reconsider the community.

I am saying that it is your duty as the department to ensure that public
servants manage the allocation of this government equipment, so that they
allocate it to the farmers wherever they are. Because if you allocate it to
me like this, there will be other people whom I might not assist because I
don’t like them. But if you allocate this task to the public servants you
know that they have to be accountable to the government. But if you
allocate this task to me as an inkosi, nothing binds me to account to
anyone.

Hon Minister, I am requesting that you look into all these things that I
have mentioned which are taking place in all our provinces and also ensure
that the government’s property is delivered to a department’s premises
where we, as the representatives of the people, can also have access to
them.

As the IFP we support this budget you have put forward that will empower
our provinces to empower the people. You need to have a mechanism, or
people who will see to it that that equipment gets to the people, and check
to see whether things are happening. It should not be your employees who
are trying to influence people, but they must sit down with them and
discuss issues, where people would say how they are going to farm, because
agriculture did not arrive with the arrival of government. My grandfather,
iNkosi Dinuzulu, was farming, so there was food and comfort. We wish the
same even now, hon Minister, and that those things should happen and we
should also check whether these things are helpful to the people.

I am saying that, as the IFP, we support your budget. If God helps you, you
will be able to face the challenges of the remaining four years of your
term in this position and be able to assist in meeting the needs of the
people. I am saying assist them with agricultural equipment. Thank you,
Chairperson.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MEC, hon members and
distinguished guests, I greet you all.

Sihlalo, ngizothanda ukuqala ngokuhalalisela amapulazi amabili noma
amathathu angale la ngiphuma khona, sengathi namanye amapulazi angabonela
kuwona. Ngicela ukuthi uMnu Johan Engelbrecht noMnu Phillemon Bafikane Moya
baqhubeke nokuphatha kahle ipulazi i-Hirsaw Estate Farm. Elinye i-
Ystervarkfontein Farm eliphethwe uMnu John Mlakalaka Fieet sengathi naye
angaqhubekela phambili ngokuliphatha kahle.

Linye iphutha esilenzayo, ukuthi esikhathini esiningi uma sithuthukisa
abalimi abamnyama, ngokuthi sibanike imfuyo, njalo sicabanga ukubanika
izinkomo zohlobo lwaManguni kuphela. Asicabangi ukuthi nabo kubalungele
ukuthola amabhramani ama-bonsmara, amasimentali kanye nezinye izinhlobo.
Ngqongqoshe ngijabule kakhulu ukuthi uzovula iphrojekthi yakho eMpumalanga,
kodwa ukhohlwe yinto eyodwa, ubale umqombothi kodwa wangayibala imampuru.
[Uhleko.]

Ngizothanda ukukhumbuza uMKhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ukuthi kusukela
emandulo ngenkathi izifika namthwalo zifika lapha eNingizimu Afrika,
zathola abantu bakule ngabadi behweba ngezimbiwa, ngemfuyo, nangokudla,
njalonjalo. Lokho-ke kuyakhombisa ukuthi isizwe esimpisholo sasinalo ulwazi
olunzulu kwezolimo.

Imvelo ngokwayo ingufakazi omkhulu wokuthi isizwe esimpisholo singabalimi
ngokwendabuko. Lokho kufakazelwa ukuthi kunenyoni ebizwa ngokuthi
“ukholwane” okuthi njalo uma kuthwasa ihlobo ikhumbuze abalimi ukuthi
“phezu komkhono”, okusho ukuthi sekuyisikhathi sokulima.

Futhi-ke ngaphandle kokungathekisa okwamabhoxongwane alusa imfuyo
ekwaluseni bebekwazi ukwetha imfuyo amagama beyazi futhi nangemibala. Uma
kufuywe izinkomo bebekwazi ukuchaza izimpondo zazo ukuthi zime kanjani
ezenkomo ngayinye. Okuhlaba umxhwele ukuthi bebekwazi nokuchaza imisindo
eyenziwa yimfuyo ngokwehlukana kwayo njengokuthi: igalukuni uma likhala
lithi: ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, firstly, I would like to congratulate the management of the
two or three farms from the area where I come from, and I wish that other
farms could also emulate them. I would like to commend Mr Johan Engelbrecht
and Mr Phillemon Bafikane Moya for effectively managing the Hirsaw Estate
Farm and ask them to continue to do so. The other farm is Ystervarkfontein
Farm, which is managed by Mr John Mlakalaka Fieet, and may he also carry on
doing a good job.

The one mistake we make most of the time when we develop black farmers by
allocating livestock to them, is that we always think of giving them Nguni
cattle only. We do not think that they are also entitled to get the
brahmans, the bonsmaras, the simmentals and other kinds of livestock.

Hon Minister, I am overjoyed that you will launch your project in
Mpumalanga, but you have forgotten one thing: You only mentioned the
traditional umqombothi beer but you did not mention the mampuru [mampoer].
[Laughter.]

I would like to remind the NCOP that in the olden days when the immigrants
first came to South Africa, they found the indigenous people trading in
minerals, livestock, food, etc. This then indicates that black people had a
profound knowledge of agriculture.

Even nature itself bears great testimony to the fact that black people are
farmers by nature. There is a bird known as the Kholwane [cuckoo] which
also testifies to that, for it always announces the arrival of spring to
those who plough by singing: “Get your hoes and work”, meaning that it is
time to plough.

And besides the herd boys speaking figuratively, they also had the skill of
giving names to livestock and they also knew these animals by colour. They
could also define the shape of each cow’s horns. What is most exciting is
that they also knew how to distinguish the sounds made by different
animals, for example when a turkey gobbles it says ...]

... want gister het ek nie kos gekry nie. [... because I didn’t have
anything to eat yesterday.]

Liphendule ihansi lithi... [Interjections.] [And the goose would respond by
saying ...]

... ja, ja, vra nog [yes, yes, ask for more].

Eminyakeni eyedlule ubabamkhulu wayehlala eMpumalanga epulazini limbe ngase-
Morgenzon. Kwabakhona umlungu ofikayo kulelo pulazi, owayengenalo ngisho
nelilodwa nje idada leli, wabe esecela ukukhusela kumkhulu. Umkhulu
wayenesipani zezinkabi eziyisithupha ayelima ngazo kodwa wayengenawo
amalungelo wokuyothengisa umbila esigayweni. Ngakho-ke ngesikhathi
esakhusele kumkhulu, wacela ukulima isiqeshana sendawo ukuze akwazi
ukumelekelela uma sekuyiwa esigayweni. Kwatholakala ukuthi uma sekufikwa
emakethe le ndaba ayisalungi ngoba umkhiqizo awubange usathola inani
eliwufanele. Kwamthukuthelisa lokho ubabomkhulu wase ethi akasayingeni
leyo. Okubuhlungu ukuthi wagcina esekhishwa ngendluzula kulelo pulazi.

Ngichaza ukuthi Ngqongqoshe, kufanele sihlonze izimakethe ezizokwazi ukuthi
zisetshenziswe abelungu nabantu abamnyama, lapho esizozizwa semukelekile
khona. Enye into ebuhlungu futhi eyinselele ukuthi, iningi labalimi manje
seliyekile ukulima ukudla, kodwa seliyafuya kuphela njengoba sikhuluma nje.
Kanti abanye abelungu banciphisa imfuyo, baphendula amapulazi aba yiziqiwi
zezinyamazane.

Abanye abalimi sebelima i-organic food, okusho ukuthi esikhathini
esingengakanani indaba yokudla izoba yinselele enkulu lapha kwelakithi.
Bese ngibuye ngizikhalele, ukuthi uma uyilungu lePhalamende lokho akusho
ukuthi uyohlala uyilo njalo. Ngakho-ke kufanelekile ukuthi nathi
singamalungu ePhalamende sibe nawo amalungelo okuhlomula kulokhu okwenziwa
uhulumeni, ngoba okwamanje uma uyilungu lePhalamende noma ngabe uyalithanda
ipulazi kodwa kawufanele ukuba nalo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Some years ago my grandfather was living on a certain farm in Mpumalanga
near Morgenzon. A certain white man who came to live on that farm had
nothing, not even a single duck. He then asked my grandfather for shelter.
My grandfather had a span of six oxen he used for ploughing, but he did not
have rights to sell his maize at the mill. Therefore, while the man was
still living in my grandfather’s shelter, he asked for a piece of land to
plant some maize so that my grandfather could access the mills through him.
But when he got to the market he found that things did not go well because
of the meagre amount that was paid out for his produce. That upset my
grandfather and he said that he was not going to be part of that setup
anymore. Sadly, in the end, he was forcefully removed from his farm.

What I am saying, hon Minister, is that we must identify markets that can
be accessed by both black and white farmers, where we could all feel
welcome. One other sad and challenging thing is that most of the farmers
have stopped planting food now, and are only keeping livestock as we speak,
whilst others are reducing their livestock and converting their farms into
game reserves.

Some farmers are now planting organic food, meaning that in the near future
food security will be a major challenge in our country. And I am also
making an appeal for myself that if you are a Member of Parliament that
does not mean that will always be the case. Therefore it is appropriate
that we too as Members of Parliament should benefit from what the
government is doing, because for now, if you are a Member of Parliament
even if you like farming you cannot own a farm.]

The prevailing structure of commercial agriculture is the outcome of
centuries of dispossession, labour coercion and state subsidies for the
chosen few. Since 1994, commercial agriculture has continued to develop in
a manner that is characterised by a growing concentration of ownership and
farm size, underutilisation of vast tracts of land, capital intensity, job-
shedding and casualisation of labour.

While deregulation, liberalisation and the resulting competitive pressure
on the sector have eliminated many of the privileges of the large-scale
farm sector, various aspects of policy and legislation still reinforce the
legacy of the past, making it difficult to redistribute land to the modern
and competitive smallholder sector.

At the same time, commercial agriculture has also reacted to legislation
intended to protect the rights of the workers and farm dwellers by sharply
reducing their number, resulting in significant job losses and the painful
evictions of people living on farms.

Commercial farming has been one of the pillars of our economy. There has
been a notable, consistent domestic supply of horticultural, livestock,
forestry and aquacultural intermediate and final goods. To a considerable
extent, this has guaranteed the local availability of food, timber and
other such necessities. The demand for these goods has been high and has
gradually pushed the prices to a range that the poor cannot afford.

Market forces have been dominantly dictating the distribution of
intermediate and final goods. The resulting inaccessibility of goods to the
toiling masses of our people has been worsened by occasional price-fixing
of wheat and dairy products by the cartels, which exercise a strong
monopoly on the agricultural sector in the country.

The ANC government has to ensure that the interests of the farm dwellers’
children are paramount and that their rights to quality education are
promoted, protected, and fulfilled. In the same vein, the ANC government
must ensure that the poor are protected from the greedy and profit-chasing
tendencies of some food producers and retailers.

The ANC 2009 election manifesto expressly states that -

  The ANC is committed to creating an environment that ensures that there
  is adequate food available to all, that we grow our own food and protect
  the poor communities from the rising prices of food and eradicate hunger.

Yingakho-ke Ngqongqoshe ngigcizelela ukuthi sinenkinga, yalezi zinselele
engizibalile. Ngakho-ke, ngicela sizibheke, lapho nabantu bakithi
sebetshala ama-organic food, ngoba wonke umuntu efuna inzuzo, kodwa
bayakhohlwa ukuthi akutshalwe ukudla, ngoba emva kwesikhathi sizobe
sibhekene nezinkinga ezinkulu. Ngqongqoshe, i-ANC isisesekela ngokuphelele
isabelomali sakho. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)
[That is why then, hon Minister, I am saying that we have major problems
regarding the challenges I have just indicated. I want us therefore to look
into them – even our black farmers are planting organic food just because
everybody wants profit. They forget that they should plant real food
because we will be facing major problems in the near future. Hon Minister,
the ANC completely supports your budget. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, I would
like to thank all the members who participated in the debate, specially the
chairperson of the select committee and the MEC of the Free State, who have
greatly enriched my understanding of the sector. I understand that this is
not my speciality and by listening to you today, I became a lot wiser and
better informed.

I am particularly impressed by the manner in which you have spoken on
behalf of your constituencies. Today I want to tell you that for us
agriculture is about improving productivity and making sure that there is
economic development and growth in our agricultural sector, that we create
decent employment, and that there is a skilled and capable workforce.

We are emphasising that there is an efficient, competitive and responsive
economic infrastructure network. This includes on-farm and off-farm
settlements, fencing, roads, dams and irrigation facilities.
I am just giving a brief summary because I cannot respond to all questions
raised in five minutes. I have taken down copious notes. I am going to
request copies of all the speeches that have been made, so that I can study
and read them very carefully.

One of our important outcomes is that we will have vibrant, equitable and
sustainable rural communities, with food security for all. Our
environmental and natural assets will be well protected and continually
enhanced. One of our main and key objectives is to have a better Africa and
a better world as a result of our contributions to global relations.

Our first step would be to have high-level performance agreements, which we
have already signed with the President. We will then convene meetings with
our MECs, our stakeholders, in order to sign delivery agreements. We will
also sign delivery agreements with the select committee of this House.

In these delivery agreements we will decide who does what, by when, and
with which resources. We will separate our delivery agreements into
implementation forums. In these implementation forums we will look at our
different committees and clusters, so that they will be responsible for
monitoring and evaluating certain sections of our agricultural performance.

The lead agencies, as they exist in our provinces, will be supporting
agencies. They will also map out a growth plan which we will use to produce
a matrix that will give us specific instruments for each province. Those
instruments will depend on what we want to achieve, what it is that we
haven’t achieved and how well we use our compliance; not to just talk, but
to develop substance on certain issues, particularly in agriculture.

We are going to look at projects in terms of commodity-based development,
where we encourage commodity-based co-operatives, as the Free State MEC has
already indicated. Those co-operatives will pool their resources, and we
will bring them together in a radius. That radius will then be responsible
for delivering to a particular market.

We have realised that our smallholder farmers do not have the economies of
scale to produce productively or commercially. So we are now taking a
sectoral approach to farmers, where we promote farming in clusters. We can
then use our smallholders’ capacity to farm in clusters as a way of
developing them into commercial farmers.

In conclusion, I wish to thank all those who have contributed to the
agricultural sector and to the state of agriculture. We are asking
Parliament to monitor our progress and to withhold money where we are not
spending it efficiently. The national Parliament has the right to withhold
money where it sees that it is not being used effectively and efficiently.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 15:39.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           WEDNESDAY, 12 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:
          a) South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Government Notice No R. 269 published in Government Gazette No
       33087 dated 9 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/658), in
       terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 289 published in Government Gazette No
       33109 dated 13 April 2010: Correction Notice:  Amendment of Schedule
       No 3 (No 3/659), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
       No 91 of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 341 published in Government Gazette No
       33140 dated 30 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1403),
       in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R. 342 published in Government Gazette No
       33140 dated 30 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/330), in
       terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 357 published in Government Gazette No
       33165 dated 7 May 2010: Correction Notice:  Amendment of Schedule No
       1 (No 1/1/1404), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
       No 91 of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R. 358 published in Government Gazette No
       33165 dated 7 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/331), in
       terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


    (a)    Notice of Intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(c) of
        the Constitution, 1996, to Naledi Local Municipality (Free State).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

                             FRIDAY, 14 MAY 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on the South
        African Gender Barometer Project - 2009.


    (b)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  on  the
        Gender in the Curriculum - 2007.


    (c)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on Widowhood
        Rites and Rights - 2008.


    (d)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE)  on  Threads
        of Pain and Resilience - 2008.


    (e)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  in  the
        Private Sector- December 2008.


    (f)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  on  the
        National Dialogue on Elections 2009.


    (g)     Research Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE)  on
        the Victims’ Charter – February 2009.


    (h)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  on  the
        National Monitoring Election - 2009.


2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs
     a) General Notice No 313 published in Government Gazette No 33116
        dated 16 April 2010: Regulations:  Proper administration of the
        Vredefort Dome World Heritage Site:  Invitation to submit written
        representations on or objections to the draft regulations, in terms
        of the World Heritage Convention  Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

     b) Government Notice No R.259 published in Government Gazette No 33072
        dated 31 March 2010: Regulations:  Fees for the provision of
        aviation meteorological services, in terms of the South African
        Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of  2001).


     c) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Listing Notice 1:  List of activities and competent
        authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2) and 24D of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  1998).


     d) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Listing Notice 2:  List of activities and competent
        authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2) and 24D of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  1998).


     e) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Listing Notice 3:  List of activities and competent
        authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2) and 24D of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  1998).


     f) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Environmental Management Framework Regulations of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     g) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations under
        sections 24(5), 24M and 44 of the National Environmental Management
        Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Development on Budget Vote
   31 and Strategic plan: 2010/11-2012/13 of the Department of Mineral
   Resources, dated 12 May 2010.

      The Select Committee on Economic Development, having considered Budget
      Vote 31: Department of Mineral Resources, reports that it has
      concluded its deliberations thereon.

   Report to be considered

2.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
ON THE JOINT OVERSIGHT VISIT WITH THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT TO KWAZULU-NATAL – MTUBATUBA AND UMHLAUTUZE MUNICIPALITIES, 02-
06 NOVEMBER 2009.

CREDA INSERT - T100514e-insert1 - PAGES 1448 – 1479

                             MONDAY, 17 MAY 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     1) Report of the South African delegation to the 26th session  of  the
        SADC Parliamentary Forum held in Zimbabwe from 18  to  27  November
        2009.    Report   available   on   the    parliamentary    website:
        www.parliament.gov.za .

Referred  to  the  Parliamentary  Group  on  International   Relations   for
consideration.

                            TUESDAY, 18 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Legal Practice Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of Justice
         and Constitutional Development.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Development.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the National Audit
        Outcomes for 2008-09 [RP 173-2009].

