---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 October 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-10-26
---

TUESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The Deputy Speaker announced that the vacancies which occurred owing to the
resignations of Dr T S Farisani and Adv Z L Madasa had been filled by the
nomination of Hosi T L P Nwamitwa-Shilubana and Ms A Z Ndlazi with effect
from 8 October and 18 October 2010 respectively.

The members had made and subscribed the oath in the Deputy Speaker’s office
on 21 October 2010.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move, on
behalf of the ACDP, on the next sitting day of the House:

  That the House debates the significance of South Africa receiving a seat
  on the United Nations Security Council, albeit not a permanent seat,
  particularly in view of South Africa’s previous controversial stances when
  it served on the council, including the country’s much-derided defence of
  the military junta in Burma and even of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir,
  when one would have expected the country to have spoken forcefully and
  unambiguously on the human rights abuses in these countries.


Mr L S NGONYAMA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House debates the urgent need to stop the Companies and
  Intellectual Property Registration Office, Cipro, from becoming a serious
  disincentive to entrepreneurs wanting to own and operate a business
  company in South Africa on account of the ease with which hackers can
  steal a registered company.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the reasons why alleged guilty persons implicated
   in a Deloitte & Touche forensic report, involving fraud committed at the
   respective Tshwane and Durban offices of Metrorail, have not yet been
   investigated and brought to book.

Dr W G JAMES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That this House debates the minimum standards of infrastructure, of
  teacher quality and of intellectual content we should aim for for our
  children to acquire at public and private schools.

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the achievements and challenges in the areas of
   forensic detective and prosecution services that improve or hamper the
   efforts to reduce the overall levels of crime.

Mr J J SKOSANA: Hon Deputy speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of this House I shall move:

  That the House debates mechanisms to increase water conservation in
  communities.

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the development and adoption of policies that take
   into account the strategic role of information and communication
   technology in our economic growth, economic infrastructure, investments,
   government administration, poverty alleviation programmes and service
   delivery.

Mr I M OLLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That this House debates possible amendments to labour legislation to
   prevent violence and destruction of property during strike action and to
   come up with solutions on how to hold unions accountable for the actions
   of their members, and means by which members of the public who incurred
   damages during strikes can seek compensation from unions.

I hope the hon Nzimande is listening.

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I
shall move on the next sitting day of the House:

  That this House debates the failure of the National Youth Development
  Agency to meet its core mandate of looking after the interests of all
  South Africa’s youth and whether this organisation should be restructured
  or disbanded.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on the next sitting day of the House on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the effectiveness of South Africa’s  current
   economic policy in reducing the high unemployment rate and in reducing
   the number of citizens who rely on grants from the state, and to come up
   with policy solutions to improve the performance of the economy.

Mr S C MOTAU: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on the next sitting day of the House on behalf of the DA:

   That this House debates the nearly R40 million in fruitless and wasteful
   expenditure incurred by PetroSA and the Central Energy Fund during the
   past financial year as outlined in the Auditor-General reports, and to
   come up with means to hold office bearers of these organisations
   accountable and measures to improve financial governance in these
   institutions.

Prof C T MSIMANG: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I
shall move on the next sitting day of the House on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House debates the rapid deterioration of South Africa’s water
   quality and safety and the influence this has on food security.

                      ALBERTINA SISULU’S 92ND BIRTHDAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that 21 October 2010 marked the 92nd  birthday  of  Albertina
        Sisulu, affectionately known as maSisulu, a woman who has dedicated
        her life to champion the rights of  the  people  of  South  Africa,
        especially women and children;

     2) acknowledges the many contributions she made, as  an  activist  par
        excellence and nurse, a wife and a mother to the nation;

     3) further acknowledges the contributions she  made  when  elected  to
        become a Member of Parliament in 1994;

     4) recognises that she joined the ANC Women's League in the  late  40s
        and became active in the Federation of South African  Women,  which
        lobbied for equality, was also part of the organising team for  the
        historic anti-pass protest of 1956 and became the first woman to be
        arrested under the General Laws Amendment Act  of  1963  and  faced
        detention for 90 days without charge;

     5) further recognises her active participation in the preparations for
        the launch  of  the  United  Democratic  Front  and  her  continued
        participation in the UDF, even after being arrested;

     6) wishes maSisulu a happy 92nd birthday; and

     7) thanks her for all the sacrifices she made for this country and its
        people, both black and white.

Agreed to.

                   19TH COMMONWEALTH GAMES IN DELHI, INDIA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that the 19th Commonwealth Games took  place  from  3  to  14
        October 2010 in Delhi, India;


     2) further notes that, despite initial challenges, India rose  to  the
        occasion to produce a safe and successful event;


     3) acknowledges the efforts by the Indian government, the Commonwealth
        Games Federation, the Organising Committee,  participating  nations
        and all others involved, that contributed to the spectacular event;


     4) further acknowledges the success  of  the  South  African  team  in
        finishing 5th overall on the medal  standings,  which  included  12
        gold, 11 silver and 10 bronze medals;


     5) congratulates all competitors who took part in the Games; and


     6) applauds the spirit of human dignity, perseverance and overall good
        sportsmanship that characterised the 2010 Commonwealth Games.

Agreed to.


       RESCUE OF THE 33 CHILEAN MINERS TRAPPED UNDERGROUND FOR 69 DAYS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes the heroic rescue of the 33 Chilean miners after enduring  69
        days of ordeal in a hot, humid shelter some 700 meters underground;


     2) further notes the significant role played by the South Africa-based
        company, Murray and Roberts, in providing the rescue team with  its
        drilling machine to drill a pilot hole to reach the trapped miners;


     3) recognises that South Africa and the mining  sector  in  particular
        can learn from this extraordinary feat; and


     4) commends the Chilean authorities and all those who took part in the
        rescue efforts.
Agreed to.

            COMMEMORATING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE UNITED NATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that 24 October marks the day when  the  United  Nations  was
        formally established after  a  majority  of  its  founding  members
        ratified a treaty setting up the world body 65 years ago;


     2) further notes that in 1971  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly
        adopted a resolution recommending that the day  be  observed  as  a
        public holiday by member states; and


   (3)      recognises that this day is traditionally commemorated worldwide
        by meetings, discussions and exhibits on the goals and achievements
        of the United Nations.

Agreed to.

  RATIFICATION OF DECISION BY ACTING SPEAKER TO APPOINT AD HOC COMMITTEE ON
            COMMISSION FOR GENDER EQUALITY FORENSIC INVESTIGATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House in terms of Rule  214(2)  ratifies  the  decision  by  the
   Acting Speaker, published in the Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee
   Reports on 19 October 2010, p 2923, to appoint an Ad Hoc Committee on the
   Commission for Gender Equality Forensic Investigation.

Agreed to.

               ANC WISHES MATRICULANTS SUCCESS IN THEIR EXAMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M T KUBAYI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC would like to wish all
matriculants writing their exams, which commenced yesterday, all the
success. We further support the Silence Campaign that calls for all members
of the community to reduce noise levels in support of the class of 2010.
This is to create an environment that is more conducive for them to focus
on their exams.
We further call for less partying, for taxis to reduce noise levels and for
residences to reduce noise levels, and we request taverns and shebeens to
also support this campaign by ensuring that they close their taverns and
shebeens early, and reduce their noise levels within communities,
especially in our rural areas and townships.

We understand and believe that all this will not only be to the benefit of
the matric class of 2010, but also to all learners and students writing
their exams at this time.

Finally, we encourage all learners and students who may feel depressed and
who are not coping to utilise the services, provided by our government and
NGOs in the country, of call centres for counselling purposes. We are
looking forward to improved matric results, and we say “Good luck” to all
the learners and all the students who are writing their exams. Thank you.
[Applause.]

           SUDDEN TERMINATION OF INVESTIGATION INTO THE ARMS DEAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M H STEELE (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the decision to terminate the
arms deal investigation might seem like a successful short-term solution to
an embarrassing political problem, but it simply leaves too many questions
unanswered. What is in the more than 40 boxes of documents collected by the
Scorpions? What of the more than one million electronic messages, which Gen
Dramat reported to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, as
being the subject of the Hawks’ investigation? And how much of the more
than R450 million, which the same general confirmed, was paid in bribes?

The trouble with the way this investigation was terminated is that these
questions remain unanswered. And when questions go unanswered, the
speculation continues. What noted columnist Allister Sparks called the
“stench of corruption” at the heart of the arms deal will continue to
tarnish the reputations of all who were involved.

If one googles the words “arms deal South Africa”, some 325 000 hits
appear. The bibliography of books on the arms deal grows every year, all of
which means the scandal isn’t going to go away until an independent
judicial inquiry finally unpacks the contents of those boxes.

Those people involved in the arms deal who have an interest in any
investigation being stopped, should not feel that they can breathe easy.
The DA will not stop pursuing this issue. Thank you. [Applause.]

           MANY WHISTLE-BLOWERS DYING IN MYSTERIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Madam Speaker, something is very rotten in the state
of South Africa. Assassins for hire are being used by some key persons in
the ANC government with a lot to hide from whistle-blowers and witnesses.
All the while, the criminal justice cluster has been unable to do anything
about the many whistle-blowers dying in mysterious circumstances. Criminals
are literally getting away with murder. Not surprisingly, South Africa is
looking more and more like it is becoming a mafia state.

To add insult to injury, the wife of the Minister of State Security is at
present being tried as a drug-importing and Mandarine disciple taker.
Already the ANC has conflated state with party. Now state security itself
may very well ... [Interjections.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, there is a point of order. What is the
point of order, Mr Frolick?

Mr C T FROLICK: I just need a point of clarity, Deputy Speaker. We are
under the impression that the hon member has been suspended by his party,
but he is here in Parliament. [Laughter.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Hon Deputy Speaker, that is not a point of order.
[Interjections.]
Mr M E GEORGE: In the meanwhile, in the guise of protecting state
information through the Protection of Information Bill, the ANC-led
government will silence criticism and allow criminality in government to
reach new depths.

The assassination of Nkambule is an omen of bad things to come for those
who dare to reveal criminality in high places. What makes the mysterious
death of Nkambule particularly significant is that he met with Gen Bheki
Cele, shared information with him, and was then arrested. Shortly after
that he died in mysterious circumstances.  Did the state have a hand in his
death?

We raise this question, because of the four assassins who were identified,
three have already died. A judicial commission of inquiry is needed to lay
bare the activities of the assassins and their paymasters. How the ANC
responds will be critical to the future of South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, some of the members are conversing
aloud and in terms of Rule 46 that is not allowed. [Interjections.] May I
perhaps remind some of the ANC members what the Rule says: During debate no
member ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a point of order or what?

Mrs J D KILIAN: I am asking the Deputy Speaker on a point of order to
please ask the ANC Whippery to enforce the Rules of the House.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please sit down, hon member.

                    PERFORMANCE AGREEMENTS WITH MINISTERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the task of the Presidency is to lead,
manage and develop the strategic agenda of government, and oversee and
continually monitor the realisation of government’s programme of action
especially under the current economic climate.

Since the ANC assumed power in 1994, we have made the point consistently
that government programmes should be geared towards changing the lives of
our people and uplifting them.

President Zuma has responded to this challenge by creating new mechanisms
to ensure that there is continuous monitoring and evaluation of programmes
aimed at eradicating poverty and improving service delivery to the poorest
of the poor.

For the first time in the history of South Africa, Cabinet members are
signing performance agreements. The ANC welcomes and supports the signing
of these contracts as it is a testament to the commitment the ANC-led
government has made towards eradicating poverty, fighting crime, and
providing affordable and quality health care and education. Working
together as various spheres of government, the Presidency is changing the
way government works, showing us that together we can do more. I thank you.
[Applause.]

     REASONS BEHIND DEPARTURE OF MRS MARY METCALFE FROM HER POST IN THE
                 DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Hon Deputy Speaker, last week the IFP called on
the Minister of Higher Education and Training to admit to the real reasons
behind Mrs Mary Metcalfe’s decision to leave her post as the Department of
Higher Education and Training’s Director-General.

We strongly believe that there appears to be a major cover-up of the real
reasons of her departure. To make matters worse, we are now shocked to read
that Minister Nzimande’s special adviser, Gwebinkundla Qonde, will be the
department’s next acting director-general. Again, political affiliation
seems to be the main reason for Qonde’s promotion rather than academic
qualifications and experience.

As far as the IFP is concerned, the nature of Mary Metcalfe’s departure is
bad news for education in South Africa. Education is the key to unlocking
South Africa’s potential but critical challenges remain, such as access to
and the affordability of education. These are challenges which Mrs Mary
Metcalfe had set out to conquer.

Therefore, we call on Minister Nzimande to come clean on what led to Mrs
Mary Metcalfe’s decision to depart. We call on the Minister to leave no
stone unturned in ensuring that the matter between them is resolved for the
benefit of education and the future of the youth of South Africa. I thank
you. [Applause.]

             ID WISHES 2010 MATRICULANTS SUCCESS IN THEIR EXAMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J J MCGLUWA (ID): Deputy Speaker, the matric class of 2010 has had to
endure more challenges this year than any other matric class of our new
democracy. The public servants’ strike and the Soccer World Cup caused
major upheaval and saw students out of the classroom for longer than usual.

Schools were left to come up with their own recovery plans and, owing to
the unresolved salary negotiations, unions appallingly instructed teachers
not to attend school and even resorted to destructive activities.
Throughout this, the department gave the impression that they were not
interested in the impact this was having on senior learners.

It caused a lot of grievances between Members of Parliament, parents and
also learners themselves as the matter was not attended to with urgency.
With fear running high that matric pupils would be far from ready as the
examinations started drawing closer, we are however pleased that, according
to reports, the first day of the matric exams has been successful.

Unfortunately, the Soccer World Cup also cost matriculants precious
preparation time. Although the department has said that the school year had
not been shortened despite the extended June school holidays, the impact
thereof has done so.

The ID hopes that the matriculants can rise above all these challenges they
were forced to endure this year. We wish them every success for their
examinations. I thank you.

     RE-ELECTION OF SOUTH AFRICA TO THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the re-election of
South Africa as a nonpermanent member to the United Nations Security
Council for the period 2011 to 2012. The ANC views the re-election of South
Africa to the UN’s most powerful seat as a vote of confidence in the role
that the country is playing in international diplomacy, particularly in
championing the African agenda in areas such as peacekeeping, security,
human rights and economic development.

Furthermore, the ANC reaffirms South Africa’s continual commitment to the
creation of a new world order, and the advancement of international peace,
security and human rights.

We further call on the Department of International Relations to communicate
South Africa’s positions clearly and coherently to the nation to avoid
misunderstandings and misinterpretations of South Africa’s positions in the
United Nations, as happened with Myanmar. I thank you. [Applause.]

          REMUNERATION AND PROVISION OF CERTIFICATES FOR TRADITIONAL LEADERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N T GODI (APC): Madam Deputy Speaker, in our meeting with the Minister
for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs soon after his
appointment, the APC raised two issues which we believe needed his urgent
and sustained attention.

These matters related to traditional leaders, especially the remuneration
and provision of certificates for headmen and headwomen, as well as the
issues of boundary disputes in Meraphong, Matatiele and Moutse. Since then,
the APC is aware that the lack of certificates for some serving traditional
leaders persists. The issue of remuneration for some traditional leaders
remains unresolved.

The APC makes a strong call for the urgent resolution of these matters,
taking into account that they are long-standing and impact negatively on
the traditional leaders concerned.

On the boundary disputes, only Meraphong has been successfully resolved, in
line with the popular will of the people. The APC understands that in the
case of Matatiele and Moutse, a testing of views referendum was held. The
APC urges the Minister to make the outcome of these referenda public and
use them as a basis for settling these long-simmering boundary disputes. If
not, the millions used in these referenda will amount to fruitless and
wasteful expenditure. This would be a violation of the Public Finance
Management Act.

South Africa has been promised that an era of dialogue and openness has set
in. Let this be the experience of the residents of Matatiele and Moutse.
The remuneration of some traditional leaders and the settling of boundary
issues in Moutse and Matatiele are long overdue. They need urgent
resolution. The APC calls for and supports their speedy and undelayed
resolution. Thank you.

                         SHORTAGE OF SOCIAL WORKERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr J C KLOPPERS-LOURENS (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, South Africa faces a
critical shortage of social workers. In light of this, the prospect of the
Huguenot College in Wellington being closed is too terrible to even
contemplate. This college produces 90 well-trained social workers and
community development workers every year. It has received applications from
600 prospective students for enrolment in 2011.

This private college relies on partnerships with public higher learning
institutions, but these partnerships have fallen foul of the Higher
Education Act. I recently visited the college to see first-hand the
excellent work that it does in training students to perform social work. I
received a petition from the students, outlining the plight of the college
and containing an urgent appeal to Minister Nzimande to intervene to keep
the doors of the college open. This petition will be given to the Minister.

I am pleased that, in the interim, the Department of Higher Education and
Training has indicated that it is prepared to respond to the DA’s urgent
appeal to prevent the college from closing, and that the Minister realises
that South Africa can ill afford to have even fewer qualified social
workers. I will be following the Minister’s efforts closely to ensure that
the commitments of the department are indeed carried out. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                      ANC WELCOMES BY-ELECTIONS VICTORY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the outcome
of the by-elections held on 6 October 2010 in all four provinces. The ANC
emerged with an overwhelming victory.

We are particularly pleased with the inroads we have made in the Western
Cape where we took over two wards in Oudtshoorn ... [Applause.] ... which
formerly belonged to the ID. This by-election being the first to be
contested by the DA-ID coalition in the ward demonstrates the people’s vote
of no confidence in the Zille-De Lille marriage of convenience. The
outcome, ahead of next year’s local government polls, further points to the
strengthening of the ANC support base in the Western Cape and is a strong
showing that the organisation is on the verge of reversing past losses.
[Interjections.]

Out of a total of 18 by-elections - 12 in the Eastern Cape, 3 in the Free
State, 1 in KwaZulu-Natal and 2 in the Western Cape – the ANC won 17 wards.
In the Eastern Cape, the Free State and KwaZulu-Natal, the ANC retained all
15 of the wards it won in 2006, except 1 lost to an independent candidate
in the Eastern Cape.

Viva, ANC! Viva! Together, we can do more. [Applause.]

                           KILLING OF IFP MEMBERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K P SITHOLE (IFP): Deputy Speaker, the IFP is calling for urgent police
intervention following the murder of two more prominent leaders of the IFP
in Gauteng. Mr Bhunu Zungu from Ward 61, Jeppestown, and the chairperson of
the IFP in Nancefield, Mr Thandazani Shange, were gunned down on Friday
night.

This brings the number of IFP members who have been shot and killed in
Gauteng in recent weeks to four. While we are not sure of the motive behind
these attacks, it is clear that they are not isolated incidents. We are
worried that these might be politically motivated killings. There has been
a steady increase in attacks on IFP leaders in Gauteng, yet we have seen no
arrests in any of these cases. We appeal to the Minister of Police to
intervene immediately so that we can bring to an end these senseless
attacks. I thank you. [Applause.]

                           PROBLEMS AT SABC BOARD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J D KILIAN (Cope): Deputy Speaker, Cope supports the concerns expressed
by the Portfolio Committee on Communications recently, but believes it
falls short of fingering the real problems, namely the close friendship
between the board chairperson and senior ANC leaders, which has led to
political interference in the running of the board.

Another key reason is the serious management capacity problems that also
undermine the effective functioning of the SABC board. Serious skills
shortages and breaches of regulations were highlighted in a presentation
made to Parliament by 11 out of 12 nonexecutive board members and tabled on
24 August.

Cope is perturbed by the resignation of four board members recently, which
is within the first 10 months of their term of office. We fear that more
resignations may follow unless the board chairperson is called to order or
preferably asked to resign.

By waiving the three-month notice period of the two most recent
resignations, President Zuma and the ANC sent an ominous message to the
board members that they should heed his master’s voice or get out. These
members were willing to serve a full three-months’ notice period to avoid a
governance crisis at the SABC.

This sudden-death type of resolution is a clear manifestation of the ANC’s
obsession to take control of the public broadcaster. It should also send a
spine-chilling message to media houses in South Africa that this government
will not tolerate critical thinking. Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Interjections.]

                LIFTING THE USA-IMPOSED EMBARGO AGAINST CUBA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S L TSENOLI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, today the United Nations
General Assembly will once again consider the item: “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba” during its 65th period of sessions of the General
Assembly.

Last year, 187 member states voted in favour of this resolution. Despite
this overwhelming democratic outcome, the United States continues to ignore
the world body’s decision.

We in the ANC fully support our government for consistently supporting this
resolution before and since its adoption by the overwhelming majority of
members of the United Nations. We believe that this clear expression of
democracy must be respected by those who want us to believe them to be
champions of democracy.

Cuba and the Cuban people are correct in identifying this embargo as the
most important factor undermining their country’s natural development. It
inhibits even other partners of the United States itself and its own
citizens from freely conducting social and economic relations with Cuba.

No respectable reason or justification exists for the continuation of this
embargo against the wishes of the majority of governments of the world. No
reason exists for our government representatives in the United Nations to
change their principled support for Cuba on the matter during voting.

We appeal to the United States to respect the outcome of the result of the
vote as it expects others to do in other situations. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                      CRIME IN PINETOWN, KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the high level of crime in
Pinetown in KwaZulu-Natal has resulted in residents, frustrated by the lack
of leadership at their local police station, taking to the streets to vent
their anger.

The tipping point was the tragic murder of local matric learner, Llewelyn
Bond, during a hijacking last week. While the number of murders dropped
overall in South Africa during the last reporting period, the number of
murders in Pinetown increased.

In addition, the residents of this west-Durban suburb suffered a 60%
increase in burglaries at residential premises. The Pinetown police
station, like so many police stations around South Africa, faces chronic
shortages of resources. Its vehicle complement is 50% of what it should be,
while its staff complement is only 70% of what it should be.

It is pleasing that Llewelyn’s murderers were apprehended, but this will
bring little comfort to his family or the community. The murder should
never have happened.

Crime-prevention efforts in Pinetown are weak. The fault cannot be laid at
the door of the community policing forum, the CPF, which has members who
are engaged and who want to be part of the solution.

On Sunday, over 500 community members gathered in the town hall to express
their anger. They want the station commander, Brigadier Zama, removed from
his position. I have a petition which I will be giving to the Minister.

The DA supports this call. We urge the national and provincial
commissioners and the Minister of Police to install an experienced and
capable commander, and to ensure that he or she is given the resources to
achieve the security that the residents of Pinetown are entitled to. I
thank you. [Applause.]

       REGULARISATION OF ZIMBABWEAN NATIONALS RESIDENT IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T M A GASEBONWE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on 20 September 2010 the
Department of Home Affairs commenced the process of issuing permits to all
qualifying Zimbabwean nationals. This came after the department announced
that all Zimbabwean immigrants had to apply for the relevant documents and
register their status in the country, because a special dispensation,
allowing Zimbabweans crossing into South Africa the right to live, work,
attend education facilities and access basic health care for a period of
six months, was coming to an end.

Since the start of this process, all nine provincial Home Affairs offices
have been processing applications. The ANC-led government has received
praise for this policy of regularisation from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, during the meeting of the 61st session of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We acknowledge that the
department has experienced some challenges during the roll-out process, and
urge it to deploy more officials to assist and ensure that all applications
are processed by the cutoff date.

This special dispensation will come to an end on 31 December 2010.
Therefore, we urge all Zimbabwean nationals to take full advantage of the
opportunity to regularise their stay and to comply with South Africa’s
immigration laws. Thank you. [Applause.]

                         SHORTAGE OF SOCIAL WORKERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you, Acting Speaker. I
just wish to assure the member, as she has also pointed out, that as the
department we are actively dealing with the matter of the Huguenot College.
I have indeed asked the relevant branch in my department to prioritise
dealing with this matter.

But I do wish to point out that this matter was not brought to my attention
for the first time by the DA. It had already been raised with me a while
back by my colleague, the Minister of Social Development, Minister Molewa.
[Interjections.]

It is good that the DA has raised this issue, but it is very opportunistic
to claim that this matter has been raised by the DA for the first time.
[Interjections.] We are not asleep. We are aware. As this government, we
are concerned. That is why, indeed, we do have a programme to ensure that
we train more social workers in this country.

Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo! [Ihlombe.] [Thank you, Chairperson! [Applause.]]

               ANC WISHES MATRICULANTS SUCCESS IN THEIR EXAMS
             ID WISHES 2010 MATRICULANTS SUCCESS IN THEIR EXAMS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Indeed, we also
want to join all the members of the House in wishing the matric class of
2010 success in their exams. We also want to take this opportunity to thank
private individuals who came forward to assist our learners; the business
community that came out in numbers also to give support; the learners’
parents; and also the very teachers who, after coming back from the strike,
did work very hard to make sure that we could recover lost ground.

I am quite confident that, indeed, we have recovered lost ground. As we
have been saying to our learners on an ongoing basis, they must stay
focused, because no amount of complaints, blame - ID member - or even self-
pity will help them through their exams. All they have to do is to work
hard. It is only by working hard and staying focused that they will
succeed.

This year, 2010, is their year. They should feel successful and succeed and
not blame anybody, as it won’t help them. So, don’t tell them about
anything that happened which won’t appear in the exams, about who did what
to them. They just have to refocus, and that’s the only way they will
succeed. Thank you, Deputy Chair. [Applause.]

       REGULARISATION OF ZIMBABWEAN NATIONALS RESIDENT IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I just like
to thank the hon Gasebonwe for the statement on the Zimbabwean
dispensation. In order to update the hon member and other members, as of
yesterday we had received 33 117 applications, and we have already
adjudicated 9 890 of them.

As you know, we also announced amnesty for those who return the South
African documents that they received fraudulently, if they follow the
procedures and get their own documents. We have already given amnesty to
1 046 people who have returned their documents to us. So, this process is
going very well.

I would like to also just say that we have opened an additional office. We
have 42 offices that are dealing with this matter, so this should be
adequate. We also have 246 dedicated staff dealing with this matter.
Tomorrow we will add another 51 staff. So, we think, this should be enough
to deal with this matter.

We would like - as the hon member did - to call on the Zimbabweans to use
this opportunity and not wait until 31 December, because the offices are
there, and some of them are actually underutilised. However, as there have
been too many applications in Gauteng, we have opened a special additional
office in Harrison and Market Streets to deal with this matter. We are
confident that we are well equipped to deal with it, as long as they come
on time and not wait until the last minute. Thank you. [Applause.]

           MANY WHISTLE-BLOWERS DYING IN MYSTERIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES
                           KILLING OF IFP MEMBERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Deputy Speaker, I don’t believe that the member
here really asked the question he did. Hon George, perhaps because you are
a member of the committee, you would have served this House better by
explaining to the House that since the appointment of the new Provincial
Commissioner in Mpumalanga, people are being arrested. Now, how Mr Nkambule
died – that will be investigated by the police. I thought you would commend
the police on that, especially as a member.

To the hon member from the DA: I will await your paper. I don’t know
whether it’s a ... What did you say, a petition? Oh, okay. I’ll wait for
your petition, but please don’t include operational matters because I won’t
deal with them. There are people who deal with those things. Whether an
officer is fit to hold office is a matter for operations, not a matter for
a Minister. Otherwise, I will await your petition. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

                  SOUTH AFRICAN CITIZENSHIP AMENDMENT BILL

                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to remind you that, after the
debates on the Second Reading of this Bill and the next two Bills
previously on the Order Paper, the decisions on the Second Reading of the
Bills were postponed. Are there any objections to the South African
Citizenship Amendment Bill being read a second time?
Declarations of vote:

Mr M MNQASELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, on 16 September this year, during the
debate on the same Bill in this House, I made it clear that the Minister
had misled this House and the public. An alarming amendment to section 6 of
the Citizenship Act allows for citizens to be deprived of their citizenship
because of their engagement in a war that the government does not support.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: There is no way that the member made it clear that the hon Minister
had misled the House. I think he must withdraw that, because that’s a very
serious statement to make about an hon member. [Interjections.]

Mr M MNQASELA: She did mislead the House.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member will continue. We will review and come back
to that.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order:
The previous speaker got up and said that that was a serious matter. This
is a serious matter, this is a serious House and I take exception to the
hon Minister telling me to shut up. [Interjections.] I take exception to
the hon Minister telling me to shut up and I’d like her to withdraw that.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members ...

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I never
uttered such words. I have never spoken to that person in my life.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Trollip, are you saying that the Minister said you
must shut up?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: That is precisely what I am saying, Madam
Deputy Speaker, and I am now saying that the hon Minister has spoken to me
before in her life. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we allow the member to continue?

Mr M MNQASELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, this section applies to all citizens,
not only naturalised citizens. All citizens will be rendered stateless if
the current Bill goes through as is. The Minister asserted here and in the
media that this applies only to naturalised citizens. We are opposed to
that as it is not true.

If we pass this Bill, we will be in contempt of section 20 of the
Constitution. The right to citizenship can be limited, but certainly not by
arbitrary decisions of the Minister.

The DA’s legal opinion tells us that this Bill cannot withstand
constitutional scrutiny. The Minister has been reported as now
acknowledging that the proposed amendments did not sufficiently articulate
the Bill’s intention. She undertook to table a proposal in this Parliament.
It would be very pleasing if you, hon Minister, did so and the DA will
support that proposal if you bring it forward.

However, it is important to note that this Bill, as it stands, is highly
likely to be unconstitutional, and can have life-changing impacts. Even the
Minister, in the statements that she has made publicly, agrees with us
regarding the Bill. You know where you spoke, Minister, when you said: This
Bill has implications and it needs to be brought much closer.

In addition, this Bill proposes that children who are born to parents who
are foreigners will qualify for naturalisation when they turn 18. This will
have very serious implications for their education and the DA proposes that
these children should qualify for naturalisation at least at the age of 16.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Hon Deputy Speaker, section 3(3) of Chapter 1 of the
Constitution empowers this House to formulate legislation pertinent to the
acquisition, loss and reacquisition of citizenship. In considering the
Bill, which was debated at the last sitting of this House, a number of
pertinent issues were discussed in the process of formulating the Bill into
its current state.

I would remind the House that clause 6(b) of the Bill empowers any citizen
who has lost his or her citizenship to appeal to the Minister in order to
reinstate such citizenship that has been revoked.

The other issues that have also been mentioned here by the previous speaker
have been discussed and debated at length in the said Bill that is before
us. Our submission as the ANC is that we proceed with the Bill as it
stands. Thank you. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

  AYES - 207: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Ainslie, A R; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K
  O; Bhengu , N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Botha,  Y
  R; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I; Cebekhulu, R N; Cele, M A  ;
  Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Coleman, E M; Cwele, S C;  Dambuza,  B  N;  De
  Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dlakude, D E;  Dlamini-Zuma,  N  C;
  Dlulane, B N; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B;  Frolick,
  C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gcwabaza, N E; Gelderblom, J  P;  Gigaba,  K  M  N;
  Gina, N; Gololo , C L; Gona, M F; Goqwana, M B; Gumede, D M; Hanekom  ,  D
  A; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat-Pettersson,
  T M; Johnson, M; Kekane, C D; Kenye, T E; Kganyago, N  M;  Khoarai,  L  P;
  Kholwane, S E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G  W;  Kubayi,  M  T;
  Landers, L T; Lebenya- Ntanzi, S P; Lekgetho , G; Line, H; Lishivha, T  E;
  Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madikizela- Mandela, N W; Madlala, N
  M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau, K  R;  Magazi  ,  M  N;
  Magubane, E; Makasi, X C; Makhuba, H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele,
  Z S; Malale, M I; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Mandela, Z M D; Mangena, M
  S; Manuel , T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A  D;  Maserumule,  F  T;
  Mashatile, P; Mashigo, R J; Mashishi, A C; Masilo,  J  M;  Masutha,  T  M;
  Mathebe, D H; Mathibela, N F; Matlanyane, H F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M;
  Mavunda, D W; Mayende-Sibiya, N A; Maziya, M; Mbili,  M  E;  Mdaka,  M  N;
  Mdakane, M R; Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhize, H B; Mkhulusi,  N  N  P;
  Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G; Mncwango, M A; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M
  C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Moss, L
  N; Motimele, M S;  Motshekga,  M  A;  Motshekga,  M  S;  Mphahlele,  L  M;
  Mpontshane, A M; Msimang, C T; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E  N;
  Mtshali, E; Mushwana, F F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni , S
  T; Ndlanzi,  A  Z;  Nelson,  W  J;  Nene,  N  M;  Newhoudt-Druchen,  W  S;
  Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N  N;  Ngele,  N  J;  Ngwenya,  W;
  Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa , D G; Njikelana,  S  J;  Nonkonyana,  M;
  November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, Z C; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T
  L P; Nxumalo, M D ; Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E;  Nzimande,  B
  E; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pandor,  G  N  M;  Petersen-Maduna,  P;
  Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T;
  Ramatlhodi, N A; Ramodibe, D M; Saal, G; Schneemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M
  J; Selau, G J; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N;
  Singh, N; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, K P; Skosana, J J; Skosana, M B; Smith,  P
  F; Smith, V G; Snell, G T; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Suka , L; Sulliman,  E
  M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thibedi, J  D;  Thobejane,  S  G;  Tinto,  B;
  Tobias, T V; Tsebe, S R; Tseke,  G  K;  Tsenoli,  S  L;  Tshivhase,  T  J;
  Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B ; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der  Merwe,
  S C; van Rooyen, D D; van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L  E;  Zondi,  K  M;
  Zulu, B Z.

  NOES - 81: Bosman , L L; Botha, T; Carter, D; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O;
  De Freitas, M S F; Dexter, P D; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M;  Du  Toit,  N  D;
  Ellis, M J; Figlan, A M; Gcume, N P; George, M E; Greyling, L  W;  Harris,
  T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kganare, D A; Kilian, J D; Kloppers-Lourens, J
  C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lekota, M G  P;
  Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A; Lovemore, A T; MacKenzie, G D; Madisha,  W  M;
  Marais, E J; Masango, S J; Max, L; Maynier, D J; Mbhele, P D; McGluwa,  J;
  Michael, N W A; Mnguni, P B; Mnqasela, M; More, E; Morgan, G R;  Motau,  S
  C; Mubu, K S; Ndude, H N; Ngonyama, L S;  Nhanha,  M  A;  Njobe,  M  A  A;
  Ntshiqela, P; Ollis, I M; Paulse,  S;  Pretorius,  P  J  C;  Rabie,  P  J;
  Rabotapi, M W; Ramatlakane , L ; Robinson, D; Rwexana, S P; Schafer, D  A;
  Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smalle, J F; Smiles, D C; Smuts,  M;  Steele,  M  H;
  Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Stubbe, D; Swart , M; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Tolo,
  L J; Trollip, RAP; Van Dalen, P; Van de Linde, J J; Van den Berg, N J; Van
  der Westhuizen, A P; Van Dyk , S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Vukuza-Linda, N Y;
  Waters, M; Wenger, M.

  ABSTAIN - 2: Dikobo, K J; Holomisa, B H.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

                BIRTHS AND DEATHS REGISTRATION AMENDMENT BILL

                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

Bill read a second time.

                     MAGISTRATES’ COURTS AMENDMENT BILL

                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

Bill read a second time.

                           DEFENCE AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Deputy Speaker, after
consultation with my colleagues, I thought to use the first minute of this
debate to inform the House of an unfortunate incident that happened on the
border between Mozambique and South Africa yesterday. We had two
fatalities. One was a South African, a member of the Reserve Force, the
other, a Mozambican. One Mozambican woman was critically injured.

We, together with the Mozambican government, have formed a joint commission
to look into the matter so that we can deal with it as expeditiously as
possible. In the meantime, another Reserve Force member who was involved in
the incident is in the hands of the police, and we are also looking at
possible wrongdoing on his part. I thought I should inform members, because
it does involve our neighbours; it does involve our responsibilities.

The second amending Bill of the Defence Force Act has been occasioned by
three separate issues that needed our urgent attention. The first is the
creation of a new dispensation for the Defence Force, with the
establishment of the Defence Force Commission. The second is the creation
of an obligation by Reserve Force members to serve in peace time, and the
third is the definition of “military command”.

To this end, this marks the end of a saga around a Bill, a saga based on a
deliberate misunderstanding intended to inflame and misrepresent. However,
I will come back to this later on. As it marks the end of the saga, so it
ushers in the beginning of a better dispensation for the Defence Force and
the opportunity to deal with the needs of our soldiers in a very unique
environment that requires unique responses.

When we took over government in 1994 and adopted a minimalist approach to
our Constitution, our intention was very clear. Defence had to be changed
from what it was in apartheid days to reflect the ethos of the present. In
our engagement and our eagerness to do this, we rode roughshod over a
number of matters. We are now saddled with a situation where the conversion
of the Defence Force to a department of state is not working and which
impedes the development of a force as a force. We have sought, therefore,
to pause awhile and create a dispensation that responds to the uniqueness
of the Defence Force.

The Constitution requires the SA Defence Force to be “a structured
institution managed as a disciplined military force”. Internationally,
service in the military differs from that in the civilian sector. The high
standards of patriotism, discipline, courage and self-sacrifice that are
demanded in the execution of these duties are very unlike those which you
find in the civil service. Unity of command and obedience to legitimate
orders from superiors are the foundation of military cohesion and the
attainment of military objectives.
By their very nature, these prerequisites underscore the uniqueness of
military service and therefore require a different approach towards
determining conditions of service within the military. The proposed
establishment of the National Defence Force service conditions responds to
this need and seeks to create a unique military service dispensation
outside the general Public Service.

With this legislation, we create the commission that will do for the
Defence Force what the Public Service Commission does for the Public
Service. The Minister for the Public Service and Administration issues
regulations that govern the Public Service. The regulations governing the
Public Service can hardly be the environment in which we manage a military
force.

Through this legislation today, we will now have the Minister of Defence
issuing the regulations for the Defence Force. These regulations are called
- and I underscore this - conditions of service for the Defence Force, with
recommendations that come from the commission. In the Public Service, these
conditions are called conditions of service of the Public Service. So too,
in the Defence Force, do we call them conditions of service for the Defence
Force. They will cover a whole range of matters, from promotions to rank,
and many others. In short, conditions of service cover the totality of how
the state relates to the Defence Force, and the terms of engagement, as it
were.

Unfortunately, the reading by some of us, fuelled also by the media, has
been a misreading of the conditions of service relating to salaries and
living conditions. It is not about what you have been reading in the media.
The Bill relates to conditions of service, which is a technical term used
exclusively in the Public Service to mean the conditions under which both
the state and the entity will abide as they continue to conduct their
relationship.

Through this Bill, the commission that will be established will align us
with internationally accepted best practice. A commission of this nature is
part and parcel of the governance structures of the Defence Force. We have
sought and received a great deal of support from the Public Service
Commission. They see in this sectoral, but much-needed help in their
constitutional mandate. We have negotiated what we will be responsible for
and remain committed to ensuring that we will provide the Public Service
Commission with reports on our work on an annual basis.

Having said that, please allow me to offer my profound gratitude to the
Interim National Defence Force Commission, whose job included assistance in
crafting the Bill before you now. For the past two years, the department
has been engaged in studies involving several countries, and when the
interim commission was established, the work was handed over for them to
complete. I wish to thank them most sincerely, and especially those of them
who are in this House, for the hard work they have put into this.
I want to underline here that the creation of the Defence Force Commission
had nothing to do with the protesting soldiers. It is a commission mooted
two months before the protests in this House during my Budget Vote speech
on 3 July 2009. It is an institution we established in the intelligence
services in 2002 and it worked very well. It gave me the experience that I
sought to bring into this environment.

It is an institution the Defence Force has been battling to establish for
some time, and at this point I would encourage the hon Lekota to listen.
Had the hon Lekota not been busy fighting for the leadership of the ANC, he
might have attended to this much earlier. However, we are here now and we
are attending to the matter, hon Lekota. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

When the interim commission has concluded its work, the report will be
presented to Cabinet and, thereafter, tabled here. I repeat, for emphasis,
that the establishment of the commission was not in response to the
deplorable conduct that took place at the Union Buildings. Instead, the
Bill establishes a mechanism to deal with the unique position of the
Defence Force and the governance that it requires. I move on.

Secondly, the Bill, in its amendment, fills a lacuna we experienced in the
appointment of Chiefs of the Defence Force. What we have defined here is
“military command”. This is spelled out in the Constitution, section
202(1), and it directs the President to appoint the military command of the
Defence Force. The Constitution, however, does not define or provide any
guidance on who would constitute the envisaged military command. The
Defence Act, 2002, also does not provide any guidance in this regard. The
proposed insertion of a new section 4(a) of the Defence Act Amendment Bill
seeks to address this lacuna in the law and create certainty as to the
composition of the military command.

The military command, as agreed to by the portfolio committee, consists of
the following: the Chief of the Defence Force, the Chief of the SA Army,
the Chief of the SA Air Force, the Chief of the SA Navy, the Surgeon-
General, the Chief of Joint Operations, the Chief of Defence Intelligence,
the Chief of Human Resources, and the Chief of Logistics. This composition
is informed by the level of the posts, which is a three-star-level general,
and the responsibility for the command of the forces under them.

Finally, the Bill also regularises the deployment of the Reserve Force in
peace time, a much-needed step that will assist us in overcoming a number
of impediments. Reserve Force members currently serve on a voluntary basis
or render service in terms of a contract. Put simply, they are only
compellable to serve during war time or a state of national defence. Now
that we have this Bill before us, we are hoping to utilise this much-needed
resource to assist us in the work that we are doing, especially around the
borders.
I thank all of those members of the committee who supported the Bill. The
Defence Force needed this a long time ago, and now that we have come to
this, I would like to thank them most sincerely, despite the glitches that
we had with assenting to this Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M S BOOI: Thank you, Deputy Chair and Deputy Speaker. Thank you,
Minister, for being able to put into perspective what we think is very
important regarding Defence and Military Veterans. The work is done and we
have engaged on it. We have gone through the legislation and it is in front
of Parliament now. Different members of our committee have really applied
their minds. As the Minister has already indicated, we are very thankful
for the type of work that we have been able to do together.

The work that we have done has always been in consideration of the ordinary
soldier in terms of what is expected of him and what he expects from
Parliament. We have managed to do that work.

I must indicate, Minister, to you today again, that the level of reporting
that has taken place through your annual report and through your speech
today clearly indicates to us that the winds of change are taking place
within Defence itself. We do sincerely hope that the contribution that we
are making as Members of Parliament will be able to help you to strengthen
your hand in being able to do what is in front of you.
Regarding a concern that was expressed on the role that should be played by
the service commission, we have been able to get around it. Regarding the
matter that has been raised in that it might create some
unconstitutionality, we have been able to deal with it.

We have indicated to you and to the broader service that what was called
irregular expenditure – an amount of R1 billion – we have been able to sort
out today. We have applied our minds and, within the Bill, we have been
able to say that we are giving you back that power, the power to be able to
decide. It is a necessary power that we thought should be legislated.

The issues that have been indicated in terms of the Bill, that there is a
dysfunctional Military Bargaining Council and Military Arbitration Board,
are challenges. We are very clear in our minds as Members of Parliament
that it is not our obligation to assist the trade union movement to be put
together with Defence. Your job is not to go and create unions. If there
are those who are interested in doing that, let them do that. But we have
an obligation to be able to make decisions on behalf of Defence.

So, when we introduce section 55(3) that gives you the power to make
decisions on behalf of Defence with the interim commission, we are quite
clear that you deserve to do that because it is not your responsibility to
make sure that the Military Bargaining Council and the Military Arbitration
Board function. We do know, as a matter of fact, that you tried it and you
tested it, former Minister, and that it was always judged against you.

As Members of Parliament, using the institution itself and our power for
legislating, we have arrived at that particular decision and we have given
the power back to the Minister to be able to make that type of decision.

With the primary Bill, we would constitute those structures. But we say
that that power should rest with the Minister to use whenever she thinks
things are very difficult in the department and she is unable to tolerate
them.

We have also applied our minds quite strongly to the issue that has been
raised by one of our members in terms of national security and the
commission itself. We thought it was an important development, and we need
to be able to protect it and be able to give power to it because the
permanent national commission will have a lot of access to the department
itself and that might touch on sensitive areas. We thought that that power
should not be taken away. Our encouragement is that whenever you come
across confidential reports in the department, those reports must not be
accessed by the department.

In terms of the mindset of the committee, we are dealing with a military
institution that deals with life and death. It is very important that we
should be able to protect those men and women who are active in the
department. This is not to say that we don’t recognise transparency; we do,
but we say that there will definitely be a lot of sensitive information
that will go through the hands of the commission, and that has to be
protected in the interests of our own country and the security of the
country. We do give that power to the national commission to reflect on it.

We have also dealt with the issue that if ever a Reserve Force member, or
anyone of us here, feels that he cannot go through the processes put in
front of him and feels that his democratic rights are being taken away, we
will definitely maintain, after applying our minds, that we are not here to
criminalise different people who want to come in as Reserve Force members.
However, we maintain that it is in the interests of those who want to play
an active role in the Defence Force that we should encourage them to go
into the Reserve Force. But it is recognisable that we should also not
undermine our Constitution and some of the rights of individuals. We
therefore crafted the Bill in a manner that it protects that particular
right so that people do try all mechanisms. But at the end of the day, the
appeals board and final person who appeals will be the Minister herself.

We have been very clear that this is a ministerial commission, and not a
presidential commission. We have given quite number of powers to the
Minister to be able to run the Ministry and the commission itself. We were
not blind to that. We are quite conscious about it after having applied our
minds to and engaged with it.

Even at the level of looking at the different commissions, we are giving
you that particular power regarding the nominations and creation of the
nomination board, not because of overzealousness, but after a lot of
interrogation and reflection within the committee on the challenges and the
nature of these types of commissions and where those types of powers
reside. The committee has come to the decision that it is not a
presidential commission, but a ministerial commission.

For us to be able to make these types of decisions and to give the Minister
the capacity to make decisions, it should remain her responsibility that
she gets to be the one who controls the commission and makes sure that the
commission does deliver on the expectations because it is an advisory body
to her. It is not a body that lies all over; it’s an advisory body that is
going to assist the Ministry to have the capacity to be able to do and make
decisions within the institutions. For us, that is a very dynamic and
progressive thinking to allow the Minister to be the one who takes full
responsibility.

With regard to the reflection on the military command, as the Minister has
already outlined, we thought that those powers, as reflected in the Bill,
are powers that could be shared. But after reflecting on the Constitution,
we realised that that responsibility is the sole responsibility that we
would have to give to the President himself. That is what the committee
seems to have come to an agreement on - that the military command has to be
commanded by the President himself as Chief of Defence, as directed by the
Constitution. We have been able to give that responsibility to him to be
able to reflect on it.

I must again thank the different members who were part of the committee.
While there have been issues that we would all have eagerly wanted to be
expressed earlier, throughout the work that we have been able to do in the
past two weeks, it became very clear to us, that, one, the defence of the
Constitution was very important and that’s what members have been able to
apply their minds to as they created legislation; and, two, it was very
important that we maintained the integrity of Parliament, which has been
maintained without a fight or tension between any people. We think the Bill
reflects all those things, and the challenges have been incorporated in a
helpful manner.

On behalf of the committee, I still want you to be able to say to the
Minister that we do want to thank the interim commission that has been able
to play that role. On our behalf, I would like to pass on our thankful
regards to the commission for the manner that it handled this particular
matter. We will be able to strengthen all these things in the near future.
We do know from where we are seated that we have encouraged a relationship
between ourselves and the commission. When the commission gets constituted,
it will have to come back to Parliament, after it has reported to the
Minister, and make sure that it does put a report before Parliament.

We have incorporated one or two sentences to say that sometimes you have to
make some of the reports public so that you can know what is going on. So,
Parliament will be the type of institution to sit down and receive those
reports, go through them, reflect on them and see if they are able to help
the ordinary soldier. That’s the challenge, and we want to thank all
members of the committee. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr D J MAYNIER: Chairperson, the Defence Amendment Bill triggered an
unprecedented political battle between the executive and the legislature,
the outcome of which reflects poorly on the state of our constitutional
democracy. The debate today should, therefore, focus not just on the merits
of the Defence Amendment Bill, but also on the political battle that the
Defence Amendment Bill triggered.

The Defence Amendment Bill’s primary objective is to establish a permanent
Defence Force Service Commission. The Defence Force Service Commission’s
purpose is to advise the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans on the
improvement of service conditions in the Defence Force. We support the
establishment of the permanent Defence Force Service Commission, because it
will go some way towards improving the service conditions of our soldiers
in the Defence Force. However, that should not be taken to mean that we
support all the provisions in the Defence Amendment Bill which, in the end,
was rammed, legislative warts and all, through the Portfolio Committee on
Defence and Military Veterans.

On 26 August 2009 more than a 1 000 soldiers participated in a protest
march which turned violent when soldiers went on the rampage in front of
the Union Buildings. These soldiers did irreparable harm to the reputation
of the Defence Force. But, at the same time, they focused political minds
on the deplorable service conditions in the Defence Force. To her credit,
the Minister moved swiftly to put a battle plan in place to deal with
service conditions which included, despite what the Minister may say,
establishing an interim National Defence Force Service Commission.

The commission was established, inter alia, to investigate and provide
advice to the Minister on remuneration and service conditions in the
Defence Force. By visiting several military formations, the commission
aimed, in their own words, “to gain a deeper understanding of the nature
and depth of the issues facing the SA National Defence Force”. The
commission was evidently so shocked by what they found, that they described
service conditions in the Defence Force as a “ticking time bomb”.

Because of this, the commission produced two interim reports which were
submitted to the Minister before the end of 2009. The interim reports were
reportedly explosive and concluded that troop morale was so bad that it
could threaten state security. This, of course, is a devastating
indictment, not only of the civilian leadership of the Defence Force, but
also of the military leadership of our Defence Force.

The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans requested copies
of the interim reports, because the interim reports were, after all, the
only official findings and recommendations on service conditions in the
Defence Force. But the Minister dug in her heels and refused to make the
interim reports available. This triggered, firstly, a sort of Mexican
political standoff, and then a full-scale political battle between the
Minister of Defence and Military Veterans and the Portfolio Committee on
Defence and Military veterans. What follows is a very short summary of
these events.

The portfolio committee “loaded” with a legal opinion advising that the
Minister could be compelled to produce the interim reports; then the
portfolio committee “fired” - with a letter urging the Minister to produce
the interim reports; the portfolio committee then “took cover”, because it
was not long before the Minister “fired back” with a legal opinion advising
that the interim reports could not be produced because of executive
privilege.

But the Minister made a fundamental error, because she did not score a
“political headshot” and so it was not long before the portfolio committee
fired back: requesting that the reports be produced within a reasonable
period of 30 days; stating that until the interim reports were received,
deliberations on the Defence Amendment Bill would be suspended, and
suggesting that if the interim reports were not produced, the portfolio
committee reserved the right, as a last resort, to compel the Minister to
produce the interim reports.

The fact that the portfolio committee had effectively given the Minister a
deadline to produce the interim reports and had threatened what amounted to
a “legislative go-slow” was a major escalation in the political battle. One
could almost hear the political alarm bells ringing, not only in the
Presidency, but also in Luthuli House.

At this point the Minister fired back, but this time with some very heavy-
calibre political weapons which included the Deputy President Kgalema
Motlanthe, the Leader of Government Business and Tony Yengeni, chairperson
of the ANC NEC’s subcommittee on peace and stability.

In the end, the ANC NEC’s subcommittee pronounced ominously that: “We take
a dim view of ANC deployees who make premature public announcements on the
Defence Force Commission’s interim report before all due processes are
concluded.”
Mr M S BOOI: Hon Chairperson, order!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): What is your point of order, hon
member?

Mr M S BOOI: I thought that we were debating the Defence Amendment Bill,
not these issues. This debate has nothing to do with the issues he is
raising. If I were chairing, I would have reflected totally differently on
the issue. [Interjections.] This has nothing to do with the Defence
Amendment Bill that has been presented. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, I can’t hear now. You
are making a noise.

Mr M S BOOI: What I’m saying, Chairperson, is that the issues the member is
dealing with have nothing to do with the Defence Amendment Bill.
[Interjections.] They have never been debated anywhere, and the things that
he is reflecting on are misleading the House. They have nothing to do with
anything. He is talking more about press statements than about what
happened within the committee itself.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on point of order, sir. The hon Booi cannot
stand up and say that the member is misleading the House. The hon member is
making a speech. Under what circumstances does the hon Booi say that this
member is misleading the House? That is unparliamentary. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, I do not want to go into
issues of misleading of the House, because there is still an outstanding
ruling that is going to come to the House. So, we will then come before
that issue later, combining it with the other one. But for now, the member
should continue with his speech. I think that he was just describing the
processes that led to the Bill itself being concluded. [Applause.]

Mr D J MAYNIER: Thank you, Chairperson. As the hon member often likes to
advise me: Be patient; I will get round to it. In the end, the ANC NEC’s
subcommittee pronounced ominously that, “We take a dim view of ANC
deployees who make premature public announcements on the Defence Force
Commission’s interim report before all due processes are concluded. We
caution that such acts border on ill discipline.”

The implication for ruling party members on the portfolio committee was
clear: back down or you may be disciplined. With that the portfolio
committee, with the exception of me, then furiously waved their white
handkerchiefs and effectively surrendered to the Minister. [Interjections.]

In the end, democratic centralism of the ruling party made sure that
Parliament was subordinate to the party, and in so doing undermined our
constitutional democracy.

Ruling party members of the portfolio committee had effectively been
brought back into line by what amounted to a political sjambokking by the
Minister. So it was not long before the portfolio committee snapped to
legislative attention and began deliberations on the Defence Amendment
Bill. But after their political sjambokking, ruling party members of the
portfolio committee appeared to get such a big “skrik” [fright] that they
would not contemplate suggestions for any amendments to the Defence
Amendment Bill. In the end, the Defence Amendment Bill was rammed through
the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans.

We support the establishment of the Defence Force Service Commission,
because it will go some way towards improving conditions in the Defence
Force. But we have reservations.

The fact is that in terms of this legislation the Minister has wide powers
to appoint members of the commission, to intervene in the work of the
commission and to terminate the employment of members of the commission.
The commission will also be accountable to the Minister and not to the
Minister and Parliament. Annual reports should not ominously contain:
“Confidential information that may be detrimental to national security.”
Taken together, this means that there is a danger that the commission will
end up beyond the scrutiny of Parliament. Moreover, the fact is that the
portfolio committee was advised that the section 55 amendment may possibly
be unconstitutional.

Let me conclude with a cautionary note. We must not raise expectations of
the National Defence Force Service Commission to unreasonable levels. The
National Defence Force Service Commission will not and cannot solve the
service condition crisis in the Defence Force on its own. We have to ensure
that the chain of command functions effectively and deals with service
condition problems before they explode on the streets, as in the protest
march in front of the Union Buildings.

But in the end, we support the establishment of the Defence Force Service
Commission, because it will go some way towards improving service
conditions. This is a step in the right direction, and for that reason we
support the Defence Amendment Bill with reservations. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mna L J TOLO: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, pele ke tšwela pele ka
Molaokakanywa wa rena, ke rata go phošolla temana ye nngwe. Ke gopola gore
Tona ya tša Tšhireletšo le Bagale ba Seš ole o imelwa ke kgoro ye ya gagwe.
Ke a dumela gore ba swanetše ba mo fetole. Ke a ikwa ge ke bolela ka tsela
ye. Ke bolela se ka lebaka la gore ke ile ka mmotšiša potšišo re le
kopanong gore na ke kae moo mašole a nago le mokgatlo lefaseng –
kontinenteng le ditšhabatšhabeng. Tona o ile a palelwa ke go araba potšišo
ye gomme a re ke ye go botšiša mopresidente wa Cope, Khomoreiti Terror
Lekota. Le lehono o sa dutše a bolela ka tsela ye. Se se bontšha gabotse
gore o a imelwa. Ke gopola gore ba mo humanele se sengwe se bonolo. Le ga
bjale ga se nke a nkarabe. Ke sa letetše karabo.

Tona, re le ba Cope re thekga Molaokakanywa wo. Eupša ke rata go laetša
gore karolo 62(c) go Molaokakanywa e bolela ka ga go hlongwa ga komiti yeo
e swanetšego go bopša ke banna le basadi. Se se bohlokwa. Eupša re swanetše
go hlokomela gore go se šome taba ya go kgetha ka boleloko gomme go kgethwe
batho bao ba nago le bokgoni bjalo ka seo se diragetšego dikgethong tša
khomišene ya lebakanyana yeo e lego gona. E na le banna le basadi bao ba
nago le maikarabelo.

Ge re ka šoma ka boleloko, re bea naga ya gaborena tseleng yeo e sego yona.
O tla humana motho a se na tsebo eupša a fiwa mošomo wo itšego ka gore e le
leloko la ANC. Ka mantšu a mangwe, gore motho yo a gole ke phošo.

Ge re thekga Molaokakanywa wo re thekga naga ya gaborena gore e sepele
gabotse. Mohlomphegi Booi o boletše ka mekgatlo. Setšweletšwa sa Cosatu se
ile sa nkgakantšha. Ga se se gakantš he nna ke le noši. Cosatu e gapeletša
gore mokgatlo wa mašole o akaretšwe go Cosatu. Se se ra gore mokgatlo wo o
ka gare ga mokgatlo wa dipolotiki gomme o tla ba le kgwerano le ANC. Taba
ye ga e gabotse. Mašole a swanetše gore a ikemele ka bowona. Ke a rena ka
moka. Re le ba komiti, ga se re dumelelane le taba ya mohuta wo. Ba
laeditše gore ge re sa dumelelane le taba ye ba tla tšea kgang le rena pele
ga Kgorotsheko ya Molaotheo. Re le setšhaba sa Afrika-Borwa, re duma gore
re be ngatana e tee tabeng ye.

Tona, komiti ya khomišene ye e tlogo kgethwa e bohlokwa. Mašole a rena a na
le mohola, gomme megolo ya bona e swanetše go hlokomelwa. Go bolela nnete,
seo re se bonego se diragala kua Union Building ga se botse. Re dira
boipiletšo bja gore mašole e be mohlala wo mobotse bathong. Re le ba Cope
re rata mašole a rena. Eupša go a baba ge mašole a rena a emelela a šwahla
Union Building mola e le bona ba swerego dibetša tša rena. Bjale, re dira
boipiletšo bja gore ba be le maitshwaro a mabotse.

Eupša re swanetše go kgonthišiša gore mašole a rena a a kgotsofala. Re
swanetše go leka go hlokomela megolo ya bona le moo ba šomelago gona gore
tše ka moka di sepele ka tshwanelo. Le ge karolo 62(c), temaneng ya pele go
fihla go ya boraro, e laetša gore go be le banna le basadi tabeng ya go
kgetha komiti, re swanetše re lebelele le taba ya go akaretša merafe ye
mengwe komiting ye. [Tšhwahlelo.] Ke a leboga. [Legofsi.] (Translation of
Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr L J TOLO: Hon Chairperson, I would first like to correct something,
before I continue with the Bill. I think the Minister of Defence and
Military Veterans is unable to manage this department and should therefore
be replaced. [Interjections.] I hear what I am saying. I asked the Minister
one day in a meeting to tell me of any place in the world where members of
the Defence Force are affiliated to a union. The Minister did not give me
an answer, but instead told me to go and ask the Cope president, Comrade
Terror Lekota. She is still repeating the same thing today and this shows
that she is unable to manage the department. I think they should find her
something easier to manage. Even now she has not yet answered me; I am
still waiting for an answer.

Cope supports the Defence Amendment Bill. According to section 62 (c) of
the Bill, we have to establish a committee and in that committee both males
and females have to be represented. We have to nominate people according to
their competency, but not according to their political affiliations. We
nominated competent people in the current interim commission. The members
of the current interim commission are responsible men and women. Cadre
deployment is unacceptable because it will mislead the country. People
should be employed based on their competency and not on the fact that they
are ANC members.

By supporting this Bill we are also supporting the smooth running of things
in our country. Hon Booi talked about trade unions and we are confused by
the fact that Cosatu is forcing the SA National Defence Union to join the
alliance, meaning it will have political alliance with the ANC. We are
against this as the committee members because the SA National Defence Force
represents the whole nation. They even threatened to take us to the
Constitutional Court if we do not agree on this matter. We would love to
see the South African nation working together on this matter.

The committee that is to be nominated is very important. The members of the
SA National Defence Force are playing an important role and therefore their
needs have to be taken care of. We were not impressed by what happened at
the Union Building and we therefore call upon the members of the SA
National Defence Force to behave themselves well and be a good example to
the public. We as Cope members do love the members of the Defence Force and
we do not want to see again what happened at the Union Building.

We have to ensure that the members of the SA National Defence Force are
satisfied with their salaries and the conditions of their work environment.
Even if the first three paragraphs of section 62 (c) indicate that both
males and females have to be represented in the committee to be nominated,
we should also nominate across the diverse racial groups. [Interjections.]
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Hon House Chair, the Defence Amendment Bill seeks to
ensure the contingent availability of all Reserve Force personnel at all
times, inclusive of peacetime, as well as establish a permanent Defence
Force Service Commission. Whilst the IFP strongly supports both of these
initiatives, we also wish to raise the following reservations associated
therewith.

One, the appointment of the commissioners by the Minister to the Defence
Force Service Commission is most irregular, and will not lend itself to an
accountable executive. Our country is already faced with enough
incongruities regarding accountability in government. Surely, we should be
looking at drafting legislation that enhances rather than detracts from an
accountable executive.

Two, in terms of the current appalling service conditions faced by our
servicemen and - women in the Defence Force, we note that the Defence Force
Service Commission has been set up to address exactly these issues, but we
urge the Minister to prioritise this aspect of her portfolio and implement
immediate corrective actions herein.

Three, the IFP is still waiting, with bated breath, for the opportunity to
revisit the issue of military veterans. We need to revisit the issue of the
integration process, which left out a number of combatants who had
sacrificed their future to join the liberation struggle. In addition, the
IFP also believes that we need to relook at the definition of what
constitutes a military veteran, so that we ensure that not a single person
who contributed to the liberation and democracy of our country is left out.

In conclusion, this Bill is in a sense a natural evolution of our Defence
Bill, the amendments seeking to address certain gaps and deficiencies
therein. And we, as the IFP, although subject to our reservations as stated
before, support the Bill. I thank you.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member. The hon N R
Mabedla, I understand, is making her maiden speech, so if you could note
that please. [Applause.]

Ms N R MABEDLA: Hon Chairperson, as an elected representative of the people
in an open and democratic society based on human dignity, equality and
freedom, the National Assembly should, according to section 42(3) of the
Constitution, ensure government by the people under the Constitution.
Government by the people is the essence of constitutional democracy, which
in principle is underpinned by the maxim: “The voice of the majority shall
prevail, and the voice of the minority shall be heard.” In this regard,
while the majority enjoys prominence, the minority views should however be
neither diminished nor disregarded.

In her 2009 budget speech, delivered to the National Assembly on 3 July,
the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans said: “I stand very proud
that there is not a single South African that needs medical assistance at
affected public hospitals that is not provided such assistance, as the
Defence Force has stepped in to fill the gap left by the striking medical
practitioners.” This is but one of innumerous testimonies to the commitment
of the Defence Force in not only securing South Africa, but also ensuring
that the right to health and other rights in the Bill of Rights are
protected, promoted and fulfilled.

As Parliament, we take our hat off in saluting the women and men of the
SANDF for their display of gallantry and patriotism, particularly during
the recent public-sector strikes, and at a time when the nation needed
their help the most. Our commitment to building a national democratic
society characterised by, inter alia, nonracialism and nonsexism is
entrenched in section 9(3) of the Constitution, which states that: “The
state may not unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone
on one or more grounds including race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital
status, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age,
disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth.”

In this regard, the ANC is committed to ensuring that women are allowed to
take their rightful place in every area of South African life without
impediment or discrimination. It is in recognition that patriarchal
oppression was also embedded in economic relations that its manifestations
and consequences, such as open or hidden exclusion from positions of
authority and power, need to be eliminated.

In that light we want to acknowledge the gender transformation that
continues to take place in the department. We, however, want to urge the
department to fast-track the process of gender transformation. All
programmes of the Defence Force must begin to reflect the demographics of
our population, and thus we need to have more women, especially black
women, trained and employed as fighter-jet pilots, navy captains,
engineers, etc. It is in our government departments, such as the Department
of Defence and Military Veterans, that we can and should be able to reverse
and defeat the twin legacy of apartheid and patriarchy.

Coherence and focus are essential to maximum output and successful
achievement of outcomes. A Defence Force management should in this regard
be empowered to exercise full authority over all members of the Defence
Force at all material times. However, this is currently not the case with
our Defence Force, as it currently has limited powers when it comes to
Reserve Force members.

The Reserve Force currently serves on a voluntary basis and renders
services in terms of a contracted period. Furthermore, members of this
force have no statutory obligation to report for training, exercises or any
deployment for border-line control or peacekeeping purposes. The Reserve
Force can only be compelled to serve in times of war, states of emergency
or states of national defence.

However, if the Reserve Force is to serve as a force multiplier, it is
critical that the Reserve Force members are compelled to serve once they
have volunteered and when required by the SANDF both for training and
operations. Enforcing of individual contracts through courts consumes a lot
of time. Certainty demands that a matter of service in the Defence Force
should not be left to the whims of an individual but to legislation. This
approach will have the effect of eliminating contractual disputes at a
later stage. In light of this background, as the ANC we support this
amending Bill. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, from reading
the daily newspapers and the department’s annual report we are deeply
concerned about whether our Defence Force is in a state of readiness.
Whilst we welcome this Bill, it should be noted, however, that it will not
produce the desired results if government does not view military security
as one of its priorities.

It would be prudent for the Department of Defence and Military Veterans to
immediately produce a new Defence Force review, which would enable
government to determine where Defence fits in in terms of national
priorities. This is necessary since the previous review is 12 years old and
does not take into account the Defence Force’s mandate to participate in
peacekeeping missions, nor its renewed border patrol duties.

It should be clear to everybody that by approving this Bill, we are
endorsing a general practice all over the world, namely, that a Defence
Force is a unique service, requiring a special human resources legal
framework. The provisions in this Bill for the appointment of a permanent
Defence Force Service Commission is intended to ensure that this special
legal framework is properly managed.

The success of this Bill will largely depend on the readiness and
willingness of the Defence Force leadership. There also needs to be closer
co-ordination between the Department of Defence and Military Veterans and
the Department of International Affairs, to ensure that the Defence Force
is not committed to duties for which it has no budget, training or
equipment.

Finally, one of the long-term human resource factors that needs
consideration is the career prospects of soldiers. What is being done to
provide soldiers with the skills that will help them find employment once
they retire from the Defence Force? We hope that this Bill will make it
easier and quicker to address the grievances of soldiers as well. The UDM
supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, daar is nie twyfel dat die instelling
van ’n permanente militêre dienstekommissie die korrekte ding, op die regte
tyd en op die regte plek is nie. Inderdaad ja, ek wonder wat dink die agb
Mosiuoa Lekota, die voormalige Minister van Verdediging, as hy hier sit en
na al hierdie kritiek luister. Ek wil vir die vorige Minister sê dat hy die
Weermag laat verrot het. Dit is nie ’n goeie ding om teen u naam te hê in
die geskiedenis nie. Dit is dus nodig dat ons hierdie kommissie het.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, there is no doubt that the
introduction of a permanent military service commission is the right thing,
at the right time and in the right place. In fact, I wonder what the hon
Mosiuoa Lekota, the former Minister of Defence, is thinking as he sits here
and listens to all this criticism. I want to tell the former Minister that
he let the Defence Force rot away. That’s not a good thing to have against
your name in history. So it is necessary for us to have this commission.]

The FF Plus, however, differs on clause 2: the definition of the military
command. That was thumb-sucking. There are no direct criteria to say that
it is lieutenant generals and upwards. That is not acceptable. What
happened is that the Military Command Council was taken with the exclusion
of the commander of the reserve forces. That is, in effect, what it is.

As lid van die kommissie wil ek vandag vir die agb Minister sê dat ’n Lid
van die Parlement – en dis my persoonlike ervaring – nie die tyd het om ook
’n lid van die kommissie te wees nie. Daardie lid gaan óf sy parlementêre
pligte óf die werk van die kommissie laat skade ly. Dink daaraan.

Minister, dit is ongelukkig ook so dat ons vir mekaar moet sê dat die
verslae van die bestaande kommissie wel ’n bepaalde leemte gelaat het. Die
agb Maynier is reg rakende sekere goed wat hy sê, alhoewel ek verskil oor
ander aspekte.

Wat ons wel vasgestel het is dat dit ’n werklikheid is dat ’n
portefeuljekomitee nie die mag het om ’n Minister te dwing om ’n verslag
daar te stel voor dit nie by die Kabinet was nie. Dis ’n leemte in die
parlementêre Reëls waarna gekyk moet word. As die Minister dit gebruik, dan
is sy reg oor wat dit is. Hierdie wetsontwerp bewys nou egter dat daar ’n
jaarlikse verslag van die kommissie aan hierdie Parlement voorgelê moet
word. Dan sal ek sê dis beter om voort te gaan om hierdie wetsontwerp goed
te keur en die VF Plus sal dit ondersteun. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[As a member of the commission I can tell the Minister today that a Member
of Parliament – and this is my personal experience – does not have the time
to be a member of this commission as well. That member will harm to either
his parliamentary duties or the work of the commission. Keep that in mind.

Minister, unfortunately it is also true that we must admit to each other
that all the reports of the current commission have left a certain gap. The
hon Maynier is correct regarding some of the things he has said, although I
differ on other aspects.

But we have determined that it is a reality that a portfolio committee does
not have the power to force a Minister to make a report available before it
has gone to Cabinet. This is a deficiency in the parliamentary Rules that
should be investigated. If the Minister should use it, she will be correct
in that regard. This Bill now proves, however, that an annual report by the
commission must be submitted to this Parliament. I would therefore say it
is better to proceed and agree to this Bill and the FF Plus will therefore
support it.]

Mr A M MAZIYA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, Members of Parliament, I want
to start my speech by quoting from the summary of the minority judgment in
the Dikoko case on ubuntu by Judge Albie Sachs. I quote:

   Ubuntu is more than just a phrase to be invoked from time to time to add
   a gracious and affirmative gloss to a legal finding already arrived at.
   It is intrinsic to and constitutive of our constitutional culture.
   Historically, it was foundational to the spirit of reconciliation and
   bridge-building that enabled our deeply traumatised society to overcome
   and transcend the divisions of the past. In present-day terms, it has an
   enduring and creative character, representing the element of human
   solidarity that binds together liberty and equality to create an
   affirmative and mutually supportive triad of central constitutional
   values.

Ubuntu is indeed South Africa’s gift to the world which transcends race,
class, culture and gender barriers. Ubuntu is the glue that keeps humanity
together because by affirming “I am because you are,” imposes an obligation
on everyone to not only be his brother’s keeper, but to be ready to lay
down his life for the sake of his brother or sister.

I venture to say that no greater form of humanity and no greater form of
patriotism than the willingness to lay down his life for the sake of others
can be demonstrated by anyone. It takes an exceptional character to
demonstrate hatred for a system that thrives on oppressing and segregating
the indigenous and the majority, not by rhetoric and well-sounding words,
but by taking up arms against all odds to fight against the system.

Indeed, no amount of love and ubuntu can surpass the action and words of
the young guerrilla, Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu, when he faced the gallows of
apartheid executioners and when he said with a daring voice, and I quote:

   Mama, tell my people I love them. My blood will water the tree of
   freedom. We shall overcome, we shall overcome someday. Deep in my heart,
   I do believe we shall overcome.

[Applause.]

In her 2009 budget speech, with reference to plans then afoot to establish
the Department of Military Veterans and directing herself to the veterans,
the Minister said, and I quote:

   It is indeed a poignant and significant moment for all of us who sit in
   these Chambers and craft laws, secure in democracy which we owe to our
   veterans. It has taken us as a government a long time to get to this
   point. We recognise that without you, we would not be who we are, where
   we are. Finally, you are in your rightful place and that is cause for
   celebration.

I stole from your words, Minister.

The formation of uMkhonto weSizwe, MK, on 16 December 1961 was a response
to the brutality of the apartheid regime towards peacefully demonstrating
civilians, as evidenced by the merciless shooting of the Sharpeville and
Langa peaceful demonstrators. From thenceforth, MK continually attacked
centres of apartheid symbolism, and the South African Defence Force, SADF,
and its agents were at pains - running helter-skelter – to try to
neutralise the elusive and agile MK guerillas.

Arguably, the turning point was the memorable humiliation and defeat in the
1980s of South African Defence Force, SADF, by MK and Cuban soldiers at
Cuito Cuanavale in Angola. The battle of Cuito drove the regime to the
negotiation table, whose outcomes were, among other things, the integration
of the armed forces under one wing ... [Interjections.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, on a point order: I just want to ask to
which clause the hon member is referring in his speech because there were
complaints from the hon Booi that there was no reference to the Bill just
now. I did not see uMkhonto weSizwe in there. I did not see Cuito Cuanavale
in there. Which clause is he referring to?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, that is not a point of
order. It is the nature of the debate. Could we allow the member to
continue?

Mr A M MAZIYA: Hon Groenewald, just listen. I know you were a soldier at
the time. It should be appreciated that the integration of former blood
enemies under one flag and command and control had and still continues to
have its challenges and casualties. It is common cause that former MK and
Apla - Azanian People’s Liberation Army - members were not receiving
treatment equal to that of former SADF and TBVC states’ soldiers.

This kind of discrimination has demonstrated itself in disparities and
opaqueness in ranking of soldiers, remuneration and other service benefits.
It was indeed as if the liberated had turned their backs against their
liberators. What a painful sight it was to behold those who sacrificed
their future and put their lives on the line to liberate their people,
being relegated to the peripheries and margins of the very society they
fought to liberate.

This Bill offers an opportunity to us as members of this august House of
Parliament to demonstrate ubuntu to sons and daughters of South Africa who
have dedicated their lives to and have vowed to even put down their lives
in order to secure this hard-won democracy. It is now our turn as
legislation crafters to demonstrate our heartfelt gratitude and
acknowledgment for the sacrifices of the gallant men and women of the SA
National Defence Force, SANDF. We would not be who we are and where we are.

The Bill establishes a Defence Service Commission whose functions, inter
alia, will be to make recommendations to the Minister on improvements in
salaries and service benefits; make recommendations to the Minister on
policies in respect of conditions of service; consider, among other things,
the rank structure of the Defence Force; and also consider, among other
things, affordability of different levels of remuneration.

The commission is but one step towards fair and equitable treatment of the
members of the Defence Force, not only verbally, but materially. The effect
of the commission will be to improve the employment conditions of all
Defence Force members. It is the commission that, through its
investigations and consultations with members of the Defence Force and any
other interested person or body as provided for in section 62(b) of the
bill, will recommend to the Minister a workable plan to improve service
conditions ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! While the Minister comes to
the podium, I want to say that the hon member was quoting Solomon Kalushi
Mahlangu, and I saw some members remonstrating with this. I hope it is
parliamentary, and will not be regarded as unparliamentary. Thank you. Hon
Minister ...

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: So, do I understand you to
say this is parliamentary? Thank you, Chairperson.

Chairperson, I wanted to start off with the question asked by the hon
Groenewald as to what relevance the input of the hon Maziya has on this
Bill.

I was actually touched by the passion that the hon Maziya has for the
Defence Force. I’m touched by the passion that he brings to his work; and I
want you to compare it to the egotistic, vacuous rantings of some other
member that we have in the committee.

Who could I be referring to? I wonder if Parliament allows me to be
general. Just take any other, and if you feel worried about people who are
vacuous then perhaps you have a guilty streak in you. However, I want to
thank the hon Maziya for what he has said. I want to thank him for
constantly reminding us that we are here because people sacrificed their
lives for us to be here, at all times. [Applause.] This is what governance
is about. We’ve promised our people a better life. In this particular case,
we promised the Defence Force a better life. Thank you very much, hon
Maziya.

I also want to thank the hon Mabedla on her maiden speech, putting a
feminine touch on the fact that we have women in the Defence Force. I think
it was a very good maiden speech. Hon Mabedla, keep it up; you make me very
proud. [Applause.]

Hon Holomisa, we are seized with the matter of the review of the White
Paper to ensure that we are in line with the concerns that you have raised.
We are also very concerned about it and want to make sure that our policies
are in line with the issues that we have already taken on, especially the
issues of a peacekeeping force. We worked very closely with the Defence
Export Control Office, Deco, and we are attending to the matters that you
raised as concerns.

Hon Groenewald, the definition we have for military command is not a thumb-
suck. As I indicated to you, we came into a very sticky situation where the
Constitution says the President shall appoint the military command. The
Defence Act of 2002 is silent on this. In the absence of this, it means
therefore that we fall back of what is provided by the Public Service.

What is provided by the Public Service is that we have to submit ourselves
to putting up advertisements for people to fill those posts, something
that, in fact, traditionally we do not do in the Defence Force. We had to
come up with a definition that covered the problem and the lacuna that we
faced. It was thoroughly discussed in the portfolio committee and this is
what the portfolio committee agreed to. It is not a thumb-suck. You might
not agree with it, but it is a three-star general who is commissioned by
the President ultimately.

I wanted also to thank the chairperson and everybody else who has taken
part in this debate. Finally, I was intrigued that here was an hon member
from the DA, given the opportunity to express the position of the DA on an
important matter such as this one. Instead, what he did was go off on
something that sounded very much like a battle plan he had planned in his
head when he couldn’t sleep - he was lying half-awake because he always has
these schemes - going on about: “This is what we did; then they did that
...” That to him, is more important than what we sit here to do: to
legislate and ensure that the Defence Force in this particular case has a
better life. [Applause.] This is what the ANC is here for.

We found a situation where it was necessary to move the Defence Force from
where it is and put it in a situation where we can better attend to the
uniqueness of this. What does he do? He goes on, on this egotistical trip:
“This is what we did ...” In fact, it becomes quite clear that the battle
scheme came from him. Feeding the media, he became dial-a-mania a day. Any
media which wants any quote, David will give a quote. Dial-a-quote from
David and he will give you a quote. It did not work, because the
institutions of governance are very clear. They are very clear, and this is
what we followed.

The matter will not serve until it has served before the Cabinet. Right
now, when dealing with the situation where the report is being completed,
the report will be given to me. It will be tabled in Cabinet. It will be
brought to you, and you will see and the country will see that that report
had nothing to do – nothing to do - with this legislation; and you know
that. But it offered you a tangent; it offered you a platform to sell
yourself at the expense of what you should be doing. I think this is the
most extreme form of unpatriotism you could ever come across. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 16:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Merchant Shipping (Safe Containers Convention) Bill [B 31 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 33390 of 16 July 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of
        Correctional   Services for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 18 for 2009-2010 [RP 119-2010].

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
        Authority (TCTA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
        Commission for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2008-2009 [RP 188-2010].

National Assembly

1.    Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development -
    legislative proposal

    On 16 September 2010, the National Assembly gave permission for the
    Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development to
    initiate legislation that will amend the Repeal of the Black
    Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Act, 2005. The
    National Assembly also instructed the Portfolio Committee to publish
    the full particulars of its legislative proposal in the Announcements,
    Tablings and Committee Reports forthwith.


    The Committee hereby tables the particulars of the proposed
    legislation:

    Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
Bill

    To amend the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
    Certain Laws Act, 2005, so as to substitute a date; and to provide for
    matters connected therewith.


    Parliament of the Republic of South Africa enacts as follows:-


    Amendment of section 1 of Act 28 of 2005, as amended by section 1 of
    Act 8 of 2006, section 1 of Act 13 of 2007, section 1 of Act 7 of 2008
    and section 1 of Act 20 of 2009

     1. Section 1 (3) of the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and
        Amendment of Certain Laws Act. No 28 of 2005, is hereby amended by
        the substitution in subsection (3) for paragraph (a) of the
        following paragraph:


        “(a) [30 December 2010] 30 December 2012; or”.

    Short title and commencement
     2. This Act is called the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and
        Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Act, 2010, and comes into
        operation on 29 December 2010.


    MEMORANDUM ON THE OBJECTS OF THE REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT
    AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS AMENDMENT BILL, 2010


   1. PURPOSE OF BILL


    The purpose of the Bill is to amend the Repeal of the Black
    Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws Act, 2005 (Act No. 28
    of 2005) in order to substitute a date.


   2. OBJECTS OF BILL


    Section 1(3) of the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and
    Amendment of Certain Laws Act, 2005 (Act No. 28 of 2005) (the Act),
    provides that the remaining provisions of sections 12 and 20 and the
    Third Schedule of the Black Administration Act, 1927 (Act No. 38 of
    1927), will be repealed on 30 December 2010 or on such date as national
    legislation to further regulate the matters dealt with in these
    provisions has been implemented, whichever occurs first. These sections
    deal with the judicial functions of traditional leaders.

     The Traditional Courts Bill, which regulates the matters dealt with in
    sections 12 and 20 and the Third Schedule of the Black Administration
    Act, 1927, (Act 38 of 1927) is currently before the Portfolio Committee
    on Justice and Constitutional Development. It is foreseen that the
    Traditional Courts Bill will not be signed into law by the deadline of
    30 December 2010. The Bill, consequently, intends extending the date of
    the application of the provisions of sections 12 and 20 and the Third
    Schedule of the Black Administration Act, 1927 to 30 December 2012.


    The same deadline has been determined in section 1(2), (4), (5) and (6)
    of the Act in respect of legislation which is administered by other
    Departments, namely the Departments of Rural Development and Land
    Reform and Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. These
    deadlines are, likewise, being extended from 30 December 2010 to 30
    December 2012.

   3. FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS FOR STATE

    None.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the Report
of the Auditor General on the 2008/09 Financial Statements of the
Compensation Fund, dated 25 August 2010

1. Introduction

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the Committee), heard evidence
on and considered the contents of the Annual Report and the Report of the
Auditor-General on the 2008/2009 financial statements of the Compensation
Fund (the Fund). The Committee noted the disclaimed audit opinion,
highlighted areas which required urgent attention of the Accounting
Authority, and reports as follows:
2. Governance Issues

The Auditor-General reported the following:
        a) “The Audit Committee met ten times during the year, as required
        by Section 77 of the   Public Finance Management Act (No. 1 of
        1999).
        b) The Audit Committee noted internal control deficiencies and that
        a number of   these matters had been reported in previous years.
        c)  The entity utilised the Internal Audit Unit of the Department
        of Labours. However, due to vacancy constraints, the Internal Audit
        Unit could only execute 10% of the operational plans.
        d)  A vacancy rate of 41.6% was reported at senior management
        level, including the leadership in the Finance Unit.
        e)  In addition, personnel within the Finance Unit did not have
        adequate skills.
        A permanent Chief Financial Officer was only appointed in September
        2009”.


The Committee noted that significant unresolved issues led to a disclaimer
which could have been resolved had an effective internal audit function
been in place. The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority
ensures that:
      a) The internal audit function is adequately staffed as a matter of
         urgency,
      b) The Fund establishes an effective Audit Committee that acts upon
         control deficiencies and takes corrective action where necessary;
      c) The Audit Committee takes into consideration work done by internal
         audit;
      d)  Disciplinary action is taken against officials who persist in
         under performing;
      e) The Fund employs personnel with adequate skills; and
      f) The management is urged to rectify staff shortages as a matter of
         urgency.
3. Basis for accounting opinion
The Auditor-General noted various instances where it was not possible to
express an opinion and which led to a disclaimer.

With regard to “revenue contributions and assessment debtors,
      a)  “Materially incorrect assessments recorded by the Fund;
      b) Inadequate monitoring of controls over overdue assessment debtors
         resulted in the accumulation of incorrect provisional assessments
         and materially incorrect debtors with credit balances; and
      c) Lack of a proper management framework for the continuous review of
         the ageing of assessment debtors which resulted in an unreliable
         ageing of assessment debtors being applied for purposes of
         determining the provision for credit losses”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
      a) Management understands and exercises oversight responsibility
         related to financial reporting and related internal controls;
      b) Management designs and implements internal controls to ensure that
         revenue contributions and assessment of debtors are performed
         timeously;
      c) Professionally skilled personnel are used to perform duties and
         senior staff evaluate  work of subordinates; and
      d) Proper evaluation of managerial abilities is undertaken prior to
         the appointment of any staff to a managerial position, and that
         managers who do not possess the required management skills to
         perform oversight be relieved of their management duties.

With regard to “bank reconciliations, the Fund transferred the un-
reconciled differences from its compensation and pensions bank
reconciliations to a suspense account. At the end of the year, a balance
amounting to R 86, 4 million remained in the suspense account. The large
volume of transactions did not allow management to reconcile the bank
balances with the general ledger and clear the suspense account prior to
the finalization of the financial statements”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
      a) Ongoing monitoring and supervision are undertaken to enable
         management to ensure internal control over financial reporting;
      b) Internal control deficiencies are identified and communicated  to
         those responsible for taking corrective action; and
      c) The suspense account is cleared within three months and thereafter
         monthly, and that proper follow-ups are made by the relevant
         senior officials.

With regard to claims incurred, the Auditor-General reflected that a
backlog in the scanning of documentation onto the the Fund’s electronic
document management system and inadequate management of supporting
documentation for claims incurred have resulted in the Fund being unable to
retrieve appropriate documentation in support of claims incurred. In
addition, an unexplained difference of R81,6 million remained at year end
between the total claims approved per the claims system and the general
ledger”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
      a) Adequate steps are taken, with due regard to the costs thereof and
         the potential effectiveness in mitigating risks to the achievement
         of financial reporting objectives;
      b) Significant information is identified, captured and used at all
         levels of the entity and distributed in a form and within a
         timeframe that supports the achievement of financial reporting
         objectives; and
      c) Steps are taken to recover losses incurred due to a backlog and
         inadequate management of supporting documentation for claims.

With regard to accounts payable, the Auditor-General indicated that “the
Fund was unable to submit creditor reconciliations and analysis or
appropriate detailed listings of creditors at the end of the year,
amounting to R89.6 million. In addition, the Fund did not accrue interest
on unclaimed monies due to beneficiaries”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
      a) Adequate controls are implemented to ensure efficient and
         effective resource usage as measured by the extent to which
         specific control objectives are achieved;
      b) Internal control deficiencies are identified and communicated
         timeously;
      c) Monthly creditors’ statements are obtained from the procurement
         creditors and reconciliation is performed; and
      d) Disciplinary action is taken against staff responsible
         transgression.

4. Property, Plant and Equipment

The Auditor-General indicated that “the Fund revalued its Compensation
House Property as at 31 March 2009. However, the value of the property
disclosed in the financial statements differs by R55.9 million from the
valuation amount. According to accounting standards property, plant and
equipment require that if a category of assets is revalued all assets in
the category need to be revalued, as the Fund in Bisho did not obtain a
valuation of its property”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
      a) Management and employees are assigned appropriate levels of
         authority and responsibility in ensuring that they understand
         accountability to facilitate effective internal control over
         financial reporting;
      b) Officials are provided with in-service training; and
      c) All records are updated in order to keep staff updated on the
         relevant information.

5. Disclosure of Information

  The Auditor-General reported that “the Fund did not disclose the following
  in respect of its financial instruments as required by Statement of
  Generally Accepted Accounting Practice, IFRS7 (AC 144):

      a) The classification of financial assets and liabilities into the
         required categories;
      b) The maximum exposure to credit risk on trade and other
         receivables;
      c) A reconciliation of movements in the provisions for credit losses;
      d) A comparison of the carrying amount and fair value for each class
         of financial asset  and liability;
      e) The methods and assumptions applied for valuing financial assets
         and liabilities;
      f) For each type of risk arising from financial instruments,
         quantitative data about its exposure to that risk; and
      g) A sensitivity analysis for each type of market risk to which the
         Fund is exposed”.

       The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
       Disciplinary action is taken against  staff who fail to perform their
duties satisfactorily.

6. Non-compliance with Laws and Regulations

  The Auditor-General reported the following:
   a) “Ineffective, inefficient and lack of transparent functioning of
      financial and risk management and internal control systems as required
      by section 53(1)(a)(ii) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
      (Act No 1 of 1999) (PFMA);
   b) Lack of adequate system for bank and cash reconciliations as required
      by paragraph 31.1.1 of the National Treasury Regulations; and
   c) Internal control deficiencies”.

  The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
      a) The fund has a clear understanding of the risks assessed, self
         assessment processes, reviews by the internal audit function and
         an effective audit committee;
      b) Vacant posts in the internal  audit unit are filled to ensure
         compliance with PFMA;
      c) Improves its organisational structure by addressing areas of
         responsibility and establishing lines of reporting in order to
         support effective internal control over financial reporting; and
      d) Steps are taken to ensure that written procedures, record keeping,
         management reviews and asset safeguards are not segregated to
         prevent fraudulent financial data and asset misappropriation.


7. Conclusion
The Committee further recommends that the Executive Authority submit a
progress report on the implementation of the above recommendations to the
National Assembly within 60 days of the adoption of this report by the
House.

Report to be considered

2.    Tenth Report of the Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts  on  the
   Report of the Auditor General on the 2008/09 financial statements of  the
   Department of Public Works and its Property  Management  Trading  Entity,
   dated 25 August 2010

1. Introduction

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the Committee) heard evidence  on
and considered the contents of the Annual Report and  Report of the Auditor-
General on the 2008/09 financial statements  of  the  Department  of  Public
Works. The Committee noted the qualified audit  opinion,  highlighted  areas
which required urgent attention by the Accounting Authority and  reports  as
follows:

2. Movable tangible capital assets and minor assets

The  Auditor-General  noted   various   instances   where   the   existence,
completeness, rights and obligations as well as accuracy of  assets  in  the
asset register could not be verified.

The following were reported:
   a) “Moveable tangible assets could not be supported by a  complete  asset
      register and minor assets could not be confirmed due to the incomplete
      asset register;
   b) Not all immovable assets were accounted for  in  the  asset  register;
      title deeds and  stand  numbers  for  some  of  the  assets  were  not
      indicated on the asset register;
   c) The Departments of Public Works,  Rural  Development,  and  Provincial
      Departments as custodians were tasked with leading  a  government-wide
      initiative to complete the vesting of ownership of state  owned  land;
      and
   d) The adjustment of intangible assets consisted  of  software  purchased
      during the 2005/06 financial year  to an amount of R40,3  million.  At
      the time of reporting the software had not been utilised”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
      ▪ Management understands and exercises  oversight  responsibility  in
        relation to financial reporting and  internal control;
      ▪ Management undertakes a needs’ assessment  before  any  assets  are
        purchased; and
      ▪ Progress with regard to the government-wide initiative  in  respect
        of the vesting of ownership of  state  owned  land  is  continually
        monitored and reported on annually.


3. Non-compliance with applicable legislation

The Auditor-General reported the following:
“The Department did not comply with applicable legislation and  regulations,
inter alia:
   a) PFMA - the management and safeguarding of assets;
   b) Treasury Regulations - persons in charge at pay points did not  verify
      on the date of payment that all persons listed on the  payroll  report
      were entitled to payment;
   c) Treasury Regulations - immovable state property was  not always let at
      market-related tarriffs;
   d) Treasury Regulations - evidence was not provided  that  transfers  and
      subsidies to entities were applied for the intended purposes;
   e) Public service regulations - cases were noted where senior  management
      positions were advertised and filled before  the  job  evaluation  was
      approved; and
   f) Division of  Revenue  Act  -  the  Department  did  not  evaluate  the
      performance of programmes funded  by  conditional  grants  and  report
      thereon to Treasury within four months after the end of the  financial
      year as prescribed by the Division of Revenue Act (No. 12 of 2009)”.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:

   a) Ongoing monitoring and supervision are undertaken and that controls
   are present and functioning;

    b) Officials are held accountable and that disciplinary steps are taken
   against those who contravene prescripts; and

   c)    Management implements a performance management system in terms of
   which staff performance is evaluated against key performance  indicators
   to enable management to take appropriate steps based on agreed
   deliverables.





4. Investigations

The Auditor- General reported on the following:
     a) “The process followed  with  the  procuring  of  the  SAS  Business
     Intelligence     Solution;
     b) Allegations of irregular appointments and management practices;
     c) The process followed with the appointment of service  providers  for
     the asset verification and condition assesment project; and
     d) Allegations of  unauthorised  changes  in  service  providers’  bank
     details”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
     a) The Department finalises all  pending  investigations  by  ensuring
     that the necessary resources are made available;

     b)  Management  understands  and exercises  oversight  in  respect  of
     financial    reporting and internal controls; and

      c) Investigation reports are submitted to SCOPA when finalised.

5. Staff Establishment

The Auditor-General reported that “The  marginal  decrease  in  the  vacancy
rate (from 22 percent to 16 percent,) is insufficient  and  impedes  service
delivery”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that  vacancies
are filled urgently, so as  to  strengthen  internal  controls  and  improve
service delivery.

6. Governance Issues


The Auditor-General reported that “the Audit Committee saw  the  resignation
of some members during the year, and new members were appointed  on  31  May
2009”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that the  Audit
Committee becomes effective and oversees controls in order to eliminate non-
compliance.

7. Property Management Trading Entity

The Committee heard evidence on and considered the contents  of  the  Annual
Report  and  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the   2008/09   financial
statements of the Property Management Trading Entity.  The  Committee  noted
an adverse audit  opinion,  highlighted  areas  which  required  the  urgent
attention of the Accounting Officer and reports as follows:

7.1 Inter-departmental receivables

The Auditor-General reported that “inter-departmental receivables owed by  a
number of national departments and  national  public  entities  amounted  to
R419 million (31 March 2008: R48 million). This  has  been  outstanding  for
more than two years. Management  did  not  implement  appropriate  steps  to
collect money owed and further did not  assess  the  recoverability  of  the
long-outstanding debts. The receivables amount disclosed is thus  overstated
by an unknown amount and the provision is understated due to the  assessment
not being performed”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer must ensure that:
   a) Disciplinary action is taken against staff who fail to  perform  their
      duties as required;
   b) Reasonable steps are taken to recover debts before  they  are  written
      off; and
   c) Management understands and exercises oversight in respect of  finances
      and related internal controls.


8. Further Recommendation


The Committee is concerned with various government Departments’  failure  to
honour their debts to the Department of Public Works for  services  rendered
on their behalf and has ordered the Property Management  Trading  Entity  to
forward the list of such defaulters. The Committee has  already  written  to
some of the defaulting Departments and entities  seeking  clarity  on  their
non-payments.

9. Conclusion

The Committee further recommends that  the  Executive  Authority  submits  a
progress report on the implementation of all the  above  recommendations  to
the National Assembly within 60 days of the adoption of this report  by  the
House.

Report to be considered

3. Eleventh Report of the Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts  on  the
Report of the Auditor General on the 2008/09  financial  statements  of  the
Government Printing Works, dated 25 August 2010

1. Introduction

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the Committee) heard evidence  on
and considered evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the  Auditor-
General on the 2008/09  financial  statements  of  the  Government  Printing
Works (GPW). The Committee noted the qualified  audit  opinion,  highlighted
areas which required the urgent attention of  the  Accounting  Officer,  and
reports as follows:

2. Inventory
The Auditor General reported the following:
        a) “Inventories state that the cost of inventories  shall  comprise
           all costs of purchase, conversion and other  costs  incurred  in
           bringing the inventory to their present location and condition.
        b) A status report generated on  the  non-integrated  stock  system
           includes job tickets amounting to R2.784 million  (2008:  R4.278
           million) which had not been properly allocated and  included  in
           the financial system. The GPW could not provide  sufficient  and
           appropriate audit  evidence  to  confirm  the  accuracy  of  the
           applicable balances and accounts”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
        a) Control activities are regularly evaluated  to  guarantee   that
           they are appropriate and working as intended;
        b) Reports are updated timeously  when  the  job  is  completed  to
           avoid delayed invoicing; and
        c) Explanations are provided by management for all  the  jobs  that
           are still showing their status as work-in-progress.

3. Accounts payable

The Auditor-General reported the following:
    a) “The Accounting Officer did not ensure that amounts included in  the
       suspense accounts relating to payments received from  debtors,  were
       cleared and correctly allocated to the relevant debtor accounts on a
       monthly basis as required by Section  17.1.2  (b)  of  the  Treasury
       Regulations. The balances for these  accounts  amounted  to  R22.383
       million (2008: R16.620 million) at year-end.
    b) The goods received control account included long-outstanding amounts
       totalling R4.080 million (2008: R8.991  million).These  amounts  had
       accumulated  as  from  2005/06.  Had  these  amounts  been  properly
       accounted for, payables  would  have  decreased  by  R4.080  million
       (2008: R8.991 million), expenses decreased  by  R3.723  million  and
       accumulated reserves increased by R357 million”.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
    a) The implementation of  policies  and  procedures  to  guarantee  the
    clearance of suspense accounts to their  relevant  cost  centres  on  a
    monthly basis takes place; and
    b) GPW improves its capacity in the creditors  section  by  permanently
    designating employees who must perform monthly reconciliations  of  the
    suspense accounts in line with  Section  17.1.2  (b)  of  the  Treasury
    Regulations.

4. Governance Issues

The Auditor-General reported the following:
    a) “The Internal audit unit of GPW did not  have  sufficient  resources
    during the year  and  therefore  the  internal  audit  scope  was  very
    limited.
    b) This limitation also resulted in the Audit Committee not being  able
    to fully comply with the Audit Committee’s requirements,  such  as  the
    approval of an annual internal audit plan and the oversight of  matters
    reported by the internal audit unit”.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
      The functioning of the internal audit unit is strengthened, amongst
      other things, by providing appropriately high level reports to the
      relevant Executive Authority on a regular basis. Such reports must, as
      a minimum requirement, express a view on all internal control risks.

5. Further Recommendations

The Committee recommends that the GPW Audit  Committee  develops  an  annual
audit plan to address matters raised by the internal audit unit.

6. Conclusion

The Committee further recommends that the Executive Authority should  submit
a progress report on the  implementation  all  the  recommendations  to  the
National Assembly within 60 days after the adoption of this  report  by  the
House.

Report to be considered.

4.    Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts  on  the
  Report of the Auditor General on the 2008/09 Financial Statements  of  the
  Companies Intellectual Property Office in South Africa,  dated  25  August
  2010
1. Introduction

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (the Committee) heard evidence  on
and considered the contents of the Annual Report and  Report of the Auditor-
General on the 2008/09 financial statements of  the  Companies  Intellectual
Property Registration Office in South Africa (CIPRO).  The  Committee  noted
the qualified audit opinion, highlighted areas  which  required  the  urgent
attention of the Accounting Authority and reports as follows:

2. Revenue

The Auditor-General reported the following:
   a) “CIPRO’s accounting policy of recognising revenue from annual  returns
      on a  cash  basis  was  not  consistent  with  the  substance  of  the
      transactions and the accrual principle.
   b) CIPRO only recognised revenue for companies that had  submitted  their
      annual returns during the financial year and  not  for  all  companies
      that were liable to lodge a return.
   c) Consequently, revenue, accounts receivable,  the  accumulated  surplus
      and the corresponding figures were understated.

The corresponding figures for 31 March 2008 have been restated as  a  result
of an error discovered during the year ended 31 March 2009”.



The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
   a) Policies and procedures related to financial reporting are established
      and implemented;
   b) Regular follow-ups are done on companies and close  corporations  that
      have not submitted their annual returns;
   c) Companies and close corporations that persist in  not  complying  with
      the provisions of the Companies Act should are de-registered;
   d) An effective debtor’s management  system  is  implemented  for  annual
      returns; and
   e) Ongoing  monitoring  and  supervision  are  undertaken  to  enable  an
      assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over finances.

3. Fruitless and Irregular Expenditure

The Auditor-General reported that  “the  annual  report  reflected  that  an
amount of R86 778 was identified as irregular as a result of the  prescribed
approval process not having being followed”.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
   a) Strict rules and regulations are implemented to prevent irregularities
      and that   disciplinary steps are taken against transgressors; and

   b) No expenditure is incurred that is in conflict with the provisions  of
      any law or prescripts.




4. Investigations

The Auditor-General reported on the following:

With regard to “deficiencies in procurement  process  followed  by  SITA  in
accrediting suppliers on the list for  contract  398  to  supply  Enterprise
Content Management Solutions to CIPRO;
   a) Inaccuracies were noted in the  calculations  on  the  scoring  sheets
      completed by SITA’s bid evaluation committee during the evaluation  of
      tenders for contract 398.  The sheets  were  not  signed  and  it  was
      impossible to determine whether these were combined scores  or  scores
      of individual members of the evaluation committee;
   b) No evidence could be submitted that the financial  position/status  of
      bidders had been evaluated before they were placed on SITA’s  approved
      suppliers list; and

   c) No business case had been approved for the tender by the Department of
      Public  Service  and  Administration  after  consultation   with   the
      Government Information  Technology  Officers  Council.  SITA  and  the
      Department of Public Service and Administration did  not  comply  with
      SITA’s regulations”.

 The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Minister  of  Public  Service   and
 Administration and the SITA Board of Directors must improve processes  and
 regulations in the following areas:


      a) SITA must improve contract administration by ensuring  that  score
         sheets are processed accurately and are properly  safeguarded  and
         that those responsible be held accountable  in  cases  where  this
         standard practice is not adhered to;

      b) Regulations must be improved to clearly state the responsibilities
         of SITA and that of its  clients  with  regard  to  a  transversal
         framing  term  contract  and  the  evaluation  of  the   financial
         sustainability of suppliers; and

      c) SITA must comply with procurement regulations in order to mitigate
         a potential risk to government departments.


With regard to “deficiencies in process followed by  CIPRO  to  procure  the
Enterprise Content Management (ECM) system
      a) The estimated vendor cost according to the business case  for  the
         tender was R141 million. The  Auditor-General  reported  that  the
         business case had been furnished only to the successful bidder for
         the ECM system and that some information in the  proposal  of  the
         successful bidder was almost exactly the same the  information  in
         CIPRO’s business case. The tender prices of  the  various  bidders
         ranged from R52 million to R181 million;
      b) The evaluation of the functional specifications was  conducted  by
         two evaluation teams. However, the bid evaluation committees  were
         not  appointed  according  to  prescripts.  Scoring  by  the   two
         evaluation teams on certain functional criteria varied as much  as
         67% per criteria in instances where the scores  were  expected  to
         vary very little;
      c) CIPRO did not evaluate the financial position of bidders  as  part
         of the process. According to CIPRO they accepted that, as part  of
         SITA’s transversal framing term contract  process,  the  financial
         stability of the various bidders would have been verified by  SITA
         to ensure continuity and sustainability of project implementation;
         and
      d) According to the bid  proposal,  the  design  phase  included  the
         design of a blueprint, and once approved, the  software  could  be
         procured. However, in  the  contract  signed  in  March  2009  the
         stipulations  of  the  proposal  were  changed  and  the  software
         licences amounting  to  R56  million  were  paid  in  April  2009,
         although the blueprint was only approved in June 2009”.


 The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority assesses  the  risk
 of the supplier not being financially  sustainable  and  should  implement
 measures to address the related risks.


5. Conclusion

The Committee noted that the Department of  Trade  and  Industry  has  since
cancelled the contract with the chosen bidder. The  Committee  commends  the
Minister for Trade  and  Industry  for  acting  promptly  in  resolving  the
matter,

The Committee further recommends that  the  Executive  Authority  submits  a
progress report on the implementation of all the  above  recommendations  to
the National Assembly within 60 days of the adoption of this report  by  the
House.

Report to be considered


                          MONDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)     Final Acts of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
        Plenipotentiary Conference, Antalya, 2006, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Final Acts of the International
        Telecommunications Union (ITU) Plenipotentiary Conference, Antalya,
        2006.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for 2009-
        2010,    including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


2.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – National Treasury
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 7 for 2009-
        2010.

    (b)     Financial Statements of the Project Development Facility for
        Auditors for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010.


    (c)     Financial Statements of the Office of the Technical Assistance
        Unit  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


3.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Justice and
        Constitutional Development on the Criminal Assets Recovery Account
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        224-2010].

4.    The Minister of Police

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Department of
        Police for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 22
        for 2009-2010 [RP 163-2010].


                         TUESDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Resignation from SABC Board and request for filling of vacancy

       a) A letter dated 8 September 2010 has been received from the
          Minister of Communications –


             i) informing the National Assembly of the resignation of Ms B J
                Masekela, in terms of section 15(2) of the Broadcasting Act
                (No 4 of 1999), from the South African Broadcasting
                Corporation Board with effect from 31 October 2010; and


            ii) requesting the National Assembly to recommend a candidate
                for appointment, in terms of section 13 of the Broadcasting
                Act, for the unexpired portion of the period for which Ms
                Masekela was appointed, ie until 9 January 2015.

          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
          consideration and report.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

          a) Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on Privacy
             and Data Protection – February 2009.


          b) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the
             Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), on the provisional
             suspension from office of Magistrate M T Masinga, an additional
             magistrate at Umlazi.


          c) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the
             Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), on the provisional
             suspension from office of Magistrate L B Maruwa, an additional
             magistrate at Daveyton.


          d) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the
             Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), on the provisional
             suspension from office of Magistrate D Jacobs, a magistrate at
             Clocolan.


          e) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the
             Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), on the provisional
             suspension from office of Magistrate C M Dumani, a magistrate
             at Graaff Reinet.


          f) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the
             Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), on the provisional
             suspension from office of Magistrate M K Chauke, an additional
             magistrate at Pretoria.
          g) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the
             Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), on the provisional
             suspension from office of Magistrate W J M Prinsloo, an
             additional magistrate at Ermelo.

     2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Human Settlements for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General and Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing
             Finance Corporation Ltd for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Housing Development
             Agency for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Home
             Builders Registration Council for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2009-10.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan
             Fund for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
             Foundation for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
             Reconstruction and Housing Agency for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2009-10.


     3) The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Defence
        and Military Veterans:

        (a)      Letter from the President of the Republic, dated 27 August
             2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
             National Defence Force for service in cooperation with the
             South African Police Service and to assist other government
             departments during the countrywide Public Service strike.

     4) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The reports of
        the Independent Auditors and the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Academy of Science of
             South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
             Foundation for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.


     5) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Independent Auditors and the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Empowerment Fund for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP175-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
             Development Agency for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Export Credit Insurance
             Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Accreditation System for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP82-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
             Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2009-10.


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling
             Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2009-10 [RP196-2010].

        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency
             Affairs Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit
             Regulator for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP154-2007].


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Bureau of
             Standards for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP226-2010].


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Regulator
             for Compulsory Specifications for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP80-2010].


        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer
             Tribunal for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.


        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
             Institute of South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP214-2010].


        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and
             Human Resources for Industry Programme for 2009-10, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2009-10.

          n) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
             for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for
             2009-10.


          o) Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (Cafcom) for 2009-10
             [RP234-2010].


     6) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
        and Industry for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
        Committee on Science and Technology. The report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme
             for Industrial Innovation for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-2010.
     7) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry:

          a) Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the State of Kuwait, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the State of Kuwait.


          c) Agreement on Economic, Commercial and Technical Cooperation
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the State of Qatar, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Economic, Commercial
             and Technical Cooperation between the Government of the
             Republic of South Africa and the Government of the State of
             Qatar.


          e) Bilateral Agreement on Economic, Trade and Technical
             Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the United Arab Emirates, tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Bilateral Agreement on Economic,
             Trade and Technical Co-operation between the Government of the
             Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Arab
             Emirates.


          g) Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Yemen, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          h) Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Republic of Yemen.


          i) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme –
             Performance Review 2009.

     8) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance:

        (a)      Government Notice No R381, published in Government Gazette
             No 33171, dated 14 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/660) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (b)      Government Notice No R437, published in Government Gazette
             No 33211, dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No
             1 (No 1/1/1405) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (c)      Government Notice No R438, published in Government Gazette
             No 33211, dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No
             1 (No 1/1/1406) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (d)      Government Notice No R439, published in Government Gazette
             No 33211, dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule No
             1 (No 1/1/1407) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (e)      Government Notice No R440, published in Government Gazette
             No 33211, dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/325) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No R441, published in Government Gazette
             No 33211, dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/662) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No R454, published in Government Gazette
             No 33211, dated 28 May 2010: Exemption in terms of section 74
             of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
             2001).


        (h)      Government Notice No 471, published in Government Gazette
             No 33241, dated 4 June 2010: Exemption in terms of section 74
             of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
             2001).


        (i)      Government Notice No R622, published in Government Gazette
             No 33382, dated 14 July 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/72) under
             sections 49A and 120 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).

        (j)      Government Notice No R623, published in Government Gazette
             No 33382, dated 14 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/326) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (k)      Government Notice No R624, published in Government Gazette
             No 33383, dated 15 July 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1410) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (l)      Government Notice No R604, published in Government Gazette
             No 33370, dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1409) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (m)      Government Notice No R606, published in Government Gazette
             No 33370, dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/662) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (n)      Government Notice No R616, published in Government Gazette
             No 33370, dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/327) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (o)      Government Notice No R630, published in Government Gazette
             No 33385, dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/332) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (p)      Government Notice No R639, published in Government Gazette
             No 33385, dated 23 July 2010: Regulations made under section
             121 of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

        (q)      Government Notice No R637, published in Government Gazette
             No 33394, dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of General Notes in
             Part 1 of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1411) in terms of section 48 of
             the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (r)      Government Notice No R638, published in Government Gazette
             No 33394, dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/328) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
             1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (s)      Government Notice No R653, published in Government Gazette
             No 33400, dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1408) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (t)      Government Notice No R655, published in Government Gazette
             No 33400, dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 2 (No 2/329) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

        (u)      Government Notice No R656, published in Government Gazette
             No 33400, dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Part 2 of Schedule
             No 2 (No 2/330) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (v)      Government Notice No R672, published in Government Gazette
             No 33423, dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/73) under
             sections 38A and 120 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (w)      Government Notice No 710, published in Government Gazette
             No 33457, dated 13 August 2010: Amendment of regulations in
             terms of section 36 of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1964
             (Act No 90 of 1989).


        (x)      Government Notice No R738, published in Government Gazette
             No 33481, dated 20 August 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1412) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (y)      Government Notice No R739, published in Government Gazette
             No 33481, dated 20 August 2010: Amendment of Part 1 of Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1413) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


     9) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Basic
        Education for consideration and report. The report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Council for Educators for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.


    10) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 21—Department
             of Communications for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP126-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
             Communications Authority of South Africa for 2009-10, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP210-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
             Media Institute of South Africa for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.


    11) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General and Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company
             South Africa (Ltd) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
             Aviation Authority for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Roads Agency Limited for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP81-2010].


    12) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport:

        (a)      Report of the Executive Officer of the Financial Services
             Board on the Road Accident Fund for the period 1 April 2006 to
             31 March 2009, tabled in terms of section 4 of the Financial
             Supervision of the Road Accident Fund Act, 1993 (No 8 of 1993).

    13) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Prosecuting Authority for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP87-2010].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Legal Aid South Africa for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP44-2010].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the President’s Fund for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP223-2010].

    14) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

          a) Proclamation No R35, published in Government Gazette No 33425,
             dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of proclamation under section
             2(4) of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals
             Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


          b) Proclamation No R36, published in Government Gazette No 33425,
             dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal under section 2(1) of
             the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).

        (c)      Proclamation No R37, published in Government Gazette No
             33425, dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing
             Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal under section
             2(1) of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals
             Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


        (d)      Proclamation No R38, published in Government Gazette No
             33425, dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing
             Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal under section
             2(1) of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals
             Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


          e) Proclamation No R41, published in Government Gazette No 33448,
             dated 6 August 2010: Commencement of the Jurisdiction of
             Regional Courts Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 31 of 2008), in
             terms of section 11 of the Act.


          f) Proclamation No R42, published in Government Gazette No 33451,
             dated 10 August 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
             Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal under section 2(1) of
             the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).

    15) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 32 – Department of
             Trade and Industry for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote No 32 for 2009-10.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2009-10,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP174-
             2010].


    16) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report of the Regulating Committee to the Airports Company
             of South Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company
             for 2009-10.


    17) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
        Development and Land Reform and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities:

        (a)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality on A Gendered
             Analysis of Land Reform Policy and Implementation Outcome in
             South Africa, (2006 – 2008/09) – 5 May 2010 (Final
             Comprehensive Version).


    18) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development, the Portfolio Committee on Economic Development
        and the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People
        with Disabilities:
          a) Report of the Commission for Gender Equality on A Gendered
             Review of South Africa’s Implementation of the Millennium
             Development Goals.
TABLINGS

National Assembly

1      The Speaker


   (a)      Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 14
       September 2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining
       the delay in the submission of the Annual Report of the South
       African Social Security Agency (SASSA’s) for 2009-2010.

       Tabling the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA’s) Annual
       Report for 2009/2010


       This letter serves to apprise you that the effect that SASSA will
       not be able to comply with Section 65 of the Public Finance
       Management Act, 1999 with respect to the tabling of its 2009/10
       Annual Report.


       The PFMA requires the submission of the Annual Financial Statements
       (AFS) to the Auditor General (AG) by 31 May each year. The Auditor
       General takes two months to complete the audit and issue an audit
       report. However, the Annual Financial Statements could not be
       submitted by 31 May 2010. This was attributable to the challenges
       relating to the migration from Modified Cash Basis of accounting to
       accrual basis of accounting.
       In order to successfully implement an accrual basis of accounting,
       the SASSA had to migrate from the government transversal systems
       (BAS, PERSAL and LOGIS) to the Enterprise Resource Planning system
       (ERP), in particular Oracle.
       The implementation of this major project subsequently led to the
       late submission of the Annual Financial Statements to the Auditor-
       General which was finally done on 16 July 2010.


       Further challenges were experienced in providing system reports
       required by Auditor General. The finalization of these reports took
       an additional two weeks after which the Auditor General requested
       that the submission date be revised to 10 August 2010. The final
       Audit report is expected by the 10 October 2010, given that the
       Auditor General requires two months to provide the final audit
       opinion after submission thereof. Consequently the due date of 30
       September 2010 for the tabling of the annual report will not be met.


       I hope that the Honourable Speaker finds the above explanation in
       order.




       signed
       MS B E E MOLEWA, MP
       MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT


                        WEDNESDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Request for filling of vacancies in Media Development and Diversity
    Agency Board

     a) A letter has been received from the Minister in the Presidency:
        Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well as Administration –


             i) informing the National Assembly that the term of office of
                the following board members of the Media Development and
                Diversity Agency (MDDA) will expire on 31 December 2010: Mr
                S Minyi, Ms S Gongxeka and Prof G Berger; and


            ii) requesting the National Assembly to recommend three
                candidates in terms of section 4(1)(b) of the Media
                Development and Diversity Agency Act, 2002 (Act No 14 of
                2002) to fill the vacancies that will arise.

          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
          consideration and report.

 2. Appointment of caucus leader

    (a)     Mr J J McGluwa has been appointed as leader of the ID Caucus in
        the National Assembly with effect from 14 September 2010.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
    as well as Administration

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South Africa
        International Marketing Council Trust (IMC) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 134-2009].


2.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
        Council (ARC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 201-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
        Export Control Board (PPECB)for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
        Marketing Council for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 199-2009].


3.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Sport and
        Recreation South Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 17 for 2009-2010 [RP 205-2010].


4.    The Minister of Transport


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
        Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (b)     Reports and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
        Transport  Agency (C-BRTA) for 2009-2010, including the Reports of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 and 2008-2009.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Financial
        Misconduct for 2008-2009 Financial Year [RP 76-2010].


    (b)     he President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 15 September 2010 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the employment of the South
        African National Defence Force for a service in co-operation with
        the South African Police Service in the prevention and combating of
        crime and maintenance and preservation of law and order within the
        Republic of South, in order to curb the possible outbreak of
        attacks against foreign nationals


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A
        SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE IN
        THE PREVENTION AND COMBATING OF CRIME AND MAINTENANCE AND
        PRESERVATION OF LAW AND ORDER WITHIN THE REPUBLIC OF  SOUTH AFRICA,
        IN ORDER TO CURB THE POSSIBLE OUTBREAK OF ATTACKS AGAINST FOREIGN
        NATIONALS


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have employed
        495 members of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel for service in co-operation with the South African Police
        Service in the prevention and combating of crime and maintenance
        and preservation of law and order within the Republic of  South
        Africa, in order to curb the possible outbreak of attacks against
        foreign nationals in the Gauteng, Western Cape and KwaZulu Natal
        Provinces.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 19 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF were employed from 15 July 2010 until 31 July
        2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof
        to the attention of the National Assembly.
        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the Report
   of the Auditor-General on the 2008/09 Financial Statements of The
   Presidency, dated 25 August 2010:



   1. Introduction
      The Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts  (the  Committee)  heard
      evidence on and considered the contents of the Annual Report  and  the
      Report of the Auditor-General on the 2008/09 financial  statements  of
      the  Presidency. The Committee  noted  the  qualified  audit  opinion,
      highlighted  areas  which  required  the  urgent  attention   of   the
      Accounting Officer, and reports as follows:


   2. Capital Assets


      The Auditor-General reported the following:
      a)    “Insufficient appropriate audit evidence as to the current  year
          adjustments to prior year balances with a combined net  amount  of
          R9,463 million for computer equipment, furniture, office equipment
          and other machinery.

      b)    Due to  inadequate  document  administration,  the  department’s
          prior year records did not permit the application  of  alternative
          procedures.
      c)    The completeness of the asset register due to the identification
          of assets not been recorded on the asset register and the  absence
          of documentation neither support the disposal of assets nor verify
          the completeness of major and minor assets”.


      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:



      a)    Regular  asset  counts  and  reconciliations  are  performed  to
          maintain the integrity of the asset register and figures disclosed
          in the financial statements;

      b)    All discrepancies identified are investigated and corrected;


      c)    Identified assets are properly recorded on the asset register;


      d)     Effective  internal  control  mechanisms  are  implemented   to
          properly  monitor  critical  information  and  asset  verification
          process for the completeness of the asset register.


   3. Irregular Expenditure


      The Auditor General reported the following:



      a)    “The Presidency continued to transfer funds  amounting  to  R24,
          520 million to the National Youth Commission (NYC) without  having
          obtaining written assurance from the entity as required by Section
          38(1) (j) of the PFMA.

      b)    The Presidency had referred the matter to National Treasury  for
          condonation and Treasury was of the opinion that this  matter  was
          not irregular but rather was an instance  of  non-compliance  with
          the PFMA”.


      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:



      a)     Disciplinary  action  is  taken  against  officials  who   were
          responsible for the transfer of funds without assurance  in  order
          to avoid such occurrences in the future; and

      b)    Monitoring controls are put in place to make certain that  funds
          are  transferred  to  entities  by  compliance  with   legislative
          requirements.


   4. Unauthorised Expenditure


      The Auditor General reported that “an unauthorised expenditure to  the
      value of R14,511 million occurred”.
      The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer  ensures  that  a
      follow-up is made with National Treasury regarding the progress on the
      motivation for unauthorised expenditure as was submitted in  September
      2009 so that Parliament could take a decision with respect to it.



   5. Conclusion

      The Committee notes that the National Youth Commission (NYC)  has  not
      submitted its 2008/09 annual reports to Parliament.  At  the  hearing,
      the Minister in the Presidency  for  the  Performance  Monitoring  and
      Evaluation promised  to  investigate  this  and  report  back  to  the
      Committee. The Committee is awaiting  feedback  on  this  matter,  and
      would like to see those responsible held accountable.
      The Committee further requests the Executive  Authority  to  submit  a
      progress report on all the recommendations to  the  National  Assembly
      within 60 days after the adoption of this report by the House.


   Report to be considered.

                         THURSDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Rural Development and Land Reform General Amendment Bill, 2010,
         submitted by the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land
        Reform and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
        Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 218-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Onderstepoort Biological
        Products (Ltd) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
        Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Blind SA for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
        Museum and Language Monument for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 239-2010].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Artscape for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 200-2010].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
        Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010 [RP 70-2010].


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ditsong Museums of South
        Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010.


    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        213-2010].


    (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
        Town for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 166-2010].


    (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 187-2010].


    (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
        Foundation for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 54-2010].


    (k)     Report and Financial Statements of the Msunduzi/Voortrekker
        Museum for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010.


    (l)     Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 203-2010].


    (m)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        245-2010].


    (n)     Report and Financial Statements of the National English
        Literary Museum for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.


    (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
        Foundation for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 186-2010].


    (p)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
        Council for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 221-2010].


    (q)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
        South Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010 [RP 209-2010].


    (r)     Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela Museum
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        225-2010].


    (s)     Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
        Language Board for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.


    (t)     Report and Financial Statements of the Kwazulu-Natal Performing
        Arts Company (Trading as the Playhouse Company) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (u)     Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island Museum for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        180-2010].


    (v)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
        for the Blind for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 159-2010].


    (w)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
        Theatre for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 161-2010].


    (x)     Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
        Republics for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.


    (y)     Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
        Gallery for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010.


    (z)     Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
        Arts for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.

3.    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
        Rural Development and Land Reform for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 27 for 2009-2010 [RP 241-2010].

4.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
        Social Development for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 16 for 2009-2010 [RP 127-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
        Agency for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 19-2010].

                          MONDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Human Settlements

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 –  National
        Department of Human Settlements for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 26 for 2009-2010 [RP 185-2010].
National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 –  Public Service
        Commission (PSC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 10 for 2009-2010 [RP 172-2010].

                         TUESDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        195-2010].

2.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Accession to the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
        Governance, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.
    (b)     Explanatory memorandum to the Accession to the African Charter
        on Democracy, Elections and Governance.


3.    The Minister in The Presidency for National Planning

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 - Statistics South
        Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 11
        for 2009-2010 [RP 91-2010].


4.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
        Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd (SITA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 248-2010].

5.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
       Science and Technology for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
       Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
       Information of Vote 31 for 2009-2010 [RP 244-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust for
       2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
       Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2009-2010, including the
       Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
       Performance Information for 2009-2010.

                        WEDNESDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
        Board for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 227-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
        Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
        Linguistic Communities for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 235-2010].

2.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
        Office (Ltd) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
        Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and
        Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
        Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) and
        the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF) for 2009-2010 [RP 202-
        2010].


3.    The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
        Regulator for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 78-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
        Minerals and Energy  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 28 for 2009-2010 [RP 69-2010].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
        Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 236-2010].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
        Group of Companies (CEF) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy Fund
        Group of Companies for 2009-2010 [RP 168-2010].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
        Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 197-2010].


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
        Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 192-2010].


4.    The Minister of Home Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
        Affairs for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 4
        for 2009-2010 [RP 190-2010].


5.    The Minister of Mineral Resources

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
        Minerals and Energy  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 28 for 2009-2010 [RP 69-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Mineral
        Technology (Mintek)  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 31-2010].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond Trader for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        79-2010].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
        Council (MHSC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 09-2010].


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond
        and Precious Metals Regulator for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 83-2010].


6.    The Minister of Public Enterprises
     a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Express Airways
        (Proprietary) Limited for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Airways
        (Pty) (Ltd) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Alexkor Limited for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


7.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        45-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        67-2010].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Driving License Card
        Account for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 199-2010].
                         THURSDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Revenue Service (Sars) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP173-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial
             Intelligence Centre for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP240-2010].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting
             Standards Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP206-2010].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
             Regulatory Board for Auditors for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP207-2010].

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 7 – National
             Treasury for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (f)      Financial Statements of the Project Development Facility
             for Auditors for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.


        (g)      Financial Statements of the Office of the Technical
             Assistance Unit for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

     2. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The reports of
        the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences
             Research Council (HSRC) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP164-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
             South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Council for Natural Scientific Professions for 2009-10,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory
             Council on Innovation for 2009-10.


     3. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health for consideration and report. The report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

     4. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Justice and Constitutional Development for 2009-10, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP219-2010].

        (b)      Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies
             in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2009-10 [RP237-2010].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Justice and Constitutional Development on the Criminal Assets
             Recovery Account for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP224-2010].

     5. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration and report. The report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 18 –
             Correctional Services for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP119-2010].

     6. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
        reports of the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
        the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon
             Tunnel Authority (TCTA) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
             Commission for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2008-09 [RP188-2010].

     7. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Police for consideration and report. The report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 22 – Police for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote No 22
             for 2009-10 [RP163-2010].

     8. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for consideration and report.
        The reports of the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
        the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural
             Research Council for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP201-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
             Export Control Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Agricultural Marketing Council for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP199-2009].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP218-2010].
        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Onderstepoort
             Biological Products (Ltd) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

     9. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport
        and Recreation for consideration and report. The report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 17 – Sport and
             Recreation South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP205-2010].

    10. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General and Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2009- 10.

        (b)      Reports and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
             Transport Agency for 2009-10, including the Reports of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 and 2008-09.
    11. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General and Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Heritage Resources Agency for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Blind SA for 2009-
             10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum and Language Monument for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP239-2010].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Artscape for 2009-
             10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP200-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP70-2010].

        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Ditsong Museums of
             South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust
             for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP213-2010].

        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of
             Cape Town for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP166-2010].

        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP187-2010].

        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
             Foundation for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP54-2010].

        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the
             Msunduzi/Voortrekker Museum for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP203-2010].


        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts
             Council for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP245-2010].

        (n)      Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

        (o)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and
             Video Foundation for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP186-2010].

        (p)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP221-2010].

        (q)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP209-2010].

        (r)      Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela
             Museum for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2009-10 [RP225-2010].

        (s)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (t)      Report and Financial Statements of the KwaZulu-Natal
             Performing Arts Company (Trading as the Playhouse Company) for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (u)      Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island
             Museum for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2009-10 [RP180-2010].

        (v)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Library for the Blind for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP159-2010].

        (w)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP161-2010].

        (x)      Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the
             Boer Republics for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (y)      Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys
             Art Gallery for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.


        (z)      Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre
             for the Arts for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

    12. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
        Development and Land Reform for consideration and report. The
        report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 27 – Department
             of Rural Development and Land Reform for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP241-2010].

    13. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 16 – Department
             of Social Development for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP127-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Development Agency for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP19-2010].

    14. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Tourism:

        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Kenya on
             Cooperation in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Republic of Kenya on Cooperation in the Field of
             Tourism.

        (c)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt on
             Cooperation in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Arab Republic of Egypt on Cooperation in the Field of
             Tourism.
    15. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

        (a)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Implementation of the Performance Management and Development
             System for Senior Managers in the Limpopo Province – April 2010
             [RP85-2010].


        (b)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Financial
             Misconduct for 2008-09 Financial Year [RP76-2010].


    16. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Final Acts of the International Telecommunications Union
             (ITU) Plenipotentiary Conference, Antalya, 2006, tabled in
             terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Final Acts of the
             International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Plenipotentiary
             Conference, Antalya, 2006.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
             10.
    17. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Social Development for consideration:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Social Development, dated 14
             September 2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
             explaining the delay in the submission of the annual report of
             the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) for 2009-10.


    18. The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Defence
        and Military Veterans:

        (a)      Letter from the President of the Republic, dated 15
             September 2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
             informing members of the Assembly of the employment of the
             South African National Defence Force for service in cooperation
             with the South African Police Service in the prevention and
             combating of crime and maintenance and preservation of law and
             order within the Republic of South Africa, in order to curb the
             possible outbreak of attacks against foreign nationals.

    19. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Human
        Settlements for consideration and report. The report of the Auditor-
        General is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 16 – Human
             Settlements for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP185-2010].

    20. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
        report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 10 – Public
             Service Commission (PSC) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP172-2010].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for
          2009-  2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        52-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements  of the Commission for Gender
        Equality (CGE) for 2009-  2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.


2.    The President of the Republic

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for 2009-
         2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information of Vote 1 for 2009-2010 [RP
         86-2010].

3.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
        Financial Services Providers for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
        Corporation Limited for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010 [RP 92-
        2010].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sasria (Limited) for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2009-2010.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Pension
        Funds Adjudicator  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010[RP 251-2010].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
        Bank for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010.


    (f)     Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
        2010.


4.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
        Transport for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 33 for 2009-2010 [RP 198-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Passenger Rail Agency of
        South Africa (PRASA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 169-2010].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
        Safety Authority (including the Maritime Fund) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 216-2010].






    (d)     Reports and Financial Statements of the Ports Regulator of
        South Africa  for  2009-2010, including the Reports of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2009-2010.




    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
        Rescue Organisation for 2009-2010.




    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the State of Railway Safety
        in South Africa of the Railway Safety Regulator for 2008-2009 [RP
        256-2010].




5.    The Minister of Higher Education and Training



    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
        Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-
        Seta) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 99-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries and
        Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 98-2010].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Construction Education
        Training   Authority (CETA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 100-2010].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
        Authority   (MQA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 115-2010].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education
        and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 97-2010].
    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of The Insurance Sector
        Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 108-2010].


    (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Sector
        Education and Training Authority (TETA) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 116-2010].


    (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
        Educationand and Training Authority (AgriSeta) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 96-2010].


    (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries Sector
        Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 93-2010].


    (j)     Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
        Manufacturing  Sector Education and Training Authority for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 144-2010].


    (k)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
        Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
        Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 150-2010].
    (l)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service, Sector
        Education and Training Authority (PSETA) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 112-2010].


    (m)     Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
        Sector Education and Training Authority (SASSETA) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (n)     Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
        Education and Training Authority (LGSETA) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 109-2010].


    (o)     Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
        Sector Education and Training Authority (HWSETA) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 106-2010].


    (p)     Report and Financial Statements of Education Training and
        Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority (ETDP
        SETA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 101-2010].


    (q)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information System,
        Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education
        and Training Authority (Isett-Seta) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 107-2010].
    (r)     Report and Financial Statements of the Finance, Accounting,
        Management Consulting and other Financial Services Sector Education
        and Training Authority for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 103-2010].


    (s)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
        Engineering and Related Services Education and Training Authority
        (MER-Seta) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 111-2010].


    (t)     Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
        Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance information for 2009-2010 [RP 118-2010].


    (u)     Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail
        Sector Education and Training Authority (W&RSETA) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 117-2010].


    (v)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
        Education (CHE) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.


    (w)     Report and Financial Statements of  the South African
        Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 94-2010].


    (x)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
        Financial Aid Scheme for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


6.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of
        Water Affairs for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 34 for 2009-2010 [RP 247-2010].


7.    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information of Vote 29 for 2009-2010 [RP
        252-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
        Government    Association (SALGA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.

8.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of
        Public Service and Administration for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 9 for 2009-2010 [RP 211-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Public Administration
        Leadership and Management Academy (Palama) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information  for 2009-2010 [RP 191-2010].


9.    The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty)Ltd for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


10.   The Minister of Arts and Culture

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
        Bloemfontein for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre
        of the Free State for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


11.   The Minister of Police

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Independent
         Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of Vote 20 for 2009-2010 [RP 243-2010].


12.   The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
        South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Group Financial Statements and
        Performance Information  for 2009-2010 [RP 215-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Castle Control Board of
        Good Hope for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 165-2010].


13.   The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of Public
        Works for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 5 for
        2009-2010.
    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa (ASA)
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.




    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
        Environment (CBE) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
        Trust for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 184-2010].


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
        Development Board (CIDB) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 257-2010].


14.   The Minister of Public Enterprises


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Pebble Bed Modular Reactor
        (Pty) Limited (PBMR) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010 [RP
        258-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
        Company (Ltd) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.
15.   The Minister of Home Affairs


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication
        Board for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 250-2010].


16.   The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
        International Relations and Cooperation  for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 3 for 2009-2010.

17.   The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2009-2010.

18.   The Minister of Economic Development


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of - the Department of Economic
          Development for 2009-2010.



      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
          finance Apex Fund for 2009-2009, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2009-2010 [RP 128-2010].
      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
          Limited for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010 [RP 160-2010].


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for
          2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance information for 2009-2010 [RP
          50-2010].


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
          Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2009-2010, including
          the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
          for 2009-2010.


      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
          Administration Commission of South Africa for 2009-2010, including
          the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2009-2010.


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
          for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
          217-2010].


19.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.
    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Institute
        for Drug-Free Sport for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010.

20.   The Minister of Health

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 –  National
        Department of Health for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 14 for 2009-2010 [RP 177-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
        Commissioner for Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
        Research Council (MRC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
        Schemes for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 67-2010].

National Assembly

    1. The Speaker
    (a)     Petition objecting to the Protection of Information Bill
        [B6–2010], submitted in terms of Rule 312 (Mr L W Greyling).


        Referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Protection of Information
        Legislation  for consideration and report.


    (b)     Letter from the Minister in The Presidency undated, to the
        Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in the
        submission of the Annual Report of the National Development Agency
        (NYDA) for 2009-2010.

        DELAY IN THE TABLING OF THE NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
        (NYDA) ANNUAL REPORT: 2009/2010


        In line with the Parliamentary procedures, it is incumbent on me as
        the Executive Authority of the NYDA to table the Annual Report of
        this institution once the Auditor General has completed his audit
        of the financial statements.


        There has been delay in receiving the audit opinion from the
        Auditor General on one aspect of the NYDA audit, which is the part
        on the National Youth Commission (NYC). Following the merger of
        Umsobomvu Youth Fund and National Youth Commission to establish the
        NYDA, the audit of this institution comprised the former two
        entities and this resulted in the audit process being a complex
        one, hence the delay.


        The Auditor General indicates that he will provide his opinion in
        the next few days, I therefore request to submit the NYDA Annual
        Report for 2009/10 by the 15th of October 2010.




        Yours sincerely




        (signed)
        O.C. CHABANE: MP
        MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY
        PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION

                           FRIDAY, 1 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Home Affairs


     (a)   Immigration Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2010] (National Assembly –
         proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of
         its introduction published in Government Gazette No 33478 of 20
         August 2010.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
         Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform


          a) Rural Development and Land Reform General Amendment Bill [B 33
             – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 33500 of 3 September 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
             Development and Land Reform of the National Assembly, as well
             as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

                           FRIDAY, 8 OCTOBBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

          1. Submission of Private Member’s Legislative Proposal

    (1)     The following private member’s legislative proposal was
        submitted to the Speaker on 5 October 2010 in accordance with Rule
        234:


        (a)      Legislative proposal to amend the Labour Relations Act,
             1995 (Act No 66 of 1995) (Mr I M Ollis)


      Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
      and          Special Petitions for consideration and report.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Proclamation No R. 46 published in Government Gazette No 33551
        dated 13 September 2010:  Commencement of the South African Reserve
        Bank, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank  Amendment Act,
        2010 (Act No 4 of 2010).


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 758 published in Government Gazette No
         33507 dated 27 Aug 2010 : Amendment of Schedule No.1 (No.
        1/1/1414)), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 770 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Rules, (DAR/74), in terms
        of  the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R. 771 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.1 (No.
        1/1/1415), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 772 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.1 (No. 1/3/9),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R. 773 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.1 (No.1/3/10),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R. 774 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.3 (No.3/663),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R. 775 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.4 (No. 4/334),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (i)     Government Notice No R. 776 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.5 (No. 5/91),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (j)     Government Notice No R. 777 published in Government Gazette No
        33514 dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.6 (No. 6/17),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (k)     Government Notice No R. 762 published in Government Gazette No
        33501 dated 3 September  2010: Amendment of Schedule No.2 (No.
        2/331), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (l)     Government Notice No R. 763 published in Government Gazette No
        33501 dated 3 September  2010: Amendment of Schedule No.4 (No.
        4/333), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (m)     Government Notice No R. 808 published in Government Gazette No
        33552 dated 13 September  2010:Regulations relating to the South
        African Reserve Bank, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank
        Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     General Notice No 704 published in Government Gazette No 33374
        dated 12 July 2010:  Prohibition of the use of the Moses Mabhida
        Stadium and other stadiums intellectual property rights, in terms
        of the Merchandise Marks Act, 1941 (Act No 17 of 1941).


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 644 published in Government Gazette No
        33398 dated 20 July 2010: Direction and Procedure for the
        Distribution Agencies in relation to the distribution of funds from
        the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund , in terms of the
        Lotteries  Act, 1997 (Act No 57 of 1997).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 645 published in Government Gazette No
        33398 dated 20 July 2010: Application for Grant of the Act, in
        terms of the Lotteries  Act, 1997 (Act No 57 of 1997).


    (d)     Government Notice No 634 published in Government Gazette No
        33384 dated 23 July 2010:  Accounting officer-Profession whose
        members qualify in terms of section 60: Southern African Institute
        of Government Auditors, in terms of the Close Corporations Act,
        1984 (Act No 69 of 1984).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 685 published in Government Gazette No
        33427 dated 6 August  2010:  Regulations: Payment of levy and fees
        with regard to compulsory specifications: Amendments, in terms of
        the National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act
        No 5 of 2008).


3.    The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
         Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2009-2010 [RP 267-2010].

4.    The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
        Defence for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 19
        for 2009-2010. [RP 179-2010].


National Assembly

               1. The Speaker

    (a)     Letter from the Acting Minister of Defence and Military
        Veterans dated 30 September 2010, to the Speaker of the National
        Assembly explaining the delay in the submission of the Annual
        Report of the Department of Defence for 2009-2010.

       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE ANNUAL REPORT – FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/10
        I regret to inform you that, due to unforeseen technical
        circumstances, the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans is
        unable to table the Department of Defence’ s annual Report for the
        2009/2010 financial year before the deadline of  30 September 2010.


        It is envisaged that the tabling of said Annual Report will
        possibly be delayed by one day.


        The inconvenience caused is sincerely regretted.


        Yours sincerely



        (signed)
        J Radebe, MP
        Acting Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

                           MONDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills
      1) Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill [B 2B – 2009] –
         Act No 6 of 2010 (assented to and signed by President on 1 October
         2010).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Basic Education.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education and the
        Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

    (2)    Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development.

3.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 30 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

          b) Merchant Shipping (Safe Containers Convention) Bill [B 31 -
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)     Directives (Plea and Sentence Agreements), issued in terms of
        section 105A (11) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of
        1977).


2.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
    as well as Administration


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth
        Development Agency  (NYDA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.

                          TUESDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

 1. Recommendations on tools of trade for public office-bearers
    (1)     A letter has been received from the chairperson of the
        Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office-
        Bearers, Judge L W Seriti, requesting comment and input from
        members of Parliament on the commission’s Concept Paper on Tools of
        Trade and its Annexure “A” by 11 November 2010.


        Referred to the Joint Rules Committee for consideration.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Reports and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
        Transport  Agency (C-BRTA) for 2009-2010, including the Reports of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for  2009-2010.

        Correction:    The above entry replaces item 4(b) under Tablings in
                    the name of the Minister of Transport in the
                    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 22
                    September 2010, on p 2867.

                         WEDNESDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Higher Education and Training

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education and
        Training Authority (ESETA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 102-2010].

2. The Minister of Economic Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
        finance Apex Fund for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 128-2010].

        Correction:    The above entry replaces item 18(b) under Tablings
                    in the name of the Minister of Economic Development in
                    the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 30
                    September 2010, on p 2901.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

   (a)      Petition from Mr Amichand Munasur, praying for a pension —
       (presented by Mr L T Landers).

       Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
       and Special Petitions for consideration and report.


   (b)      Letter from the Minister of Higher Education and Training dated
       13 October 2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining
       the delay in the submission of the Annual Report of the Energy
       Sector Education and Training Authority (ESETA) for 2009-2010.

       SUBMISSION OF ENERGY SETA ANNUAL REPORT 2009/10


       I hereby wish to inform the Speaker to Parliament, as the Minister
       of Higher Education and Training that it has come to my attention
       that the Energy SETA (ESETA) was unable to submit its Annual Report
       2009/10 on time as per the deadline stipulated from the PFMA, for
       tabling in Parliament.


       However, I am aware that the ESETA has recently been subject to
       internal capacity constraints, which necessitated the placing of the
       ESETA under administration. These capacity constraints also impacted
       on the effective appointment of a service provider, which caused
       undue delay in the process.


       Further delays were caused by the change in signatories,
       necessitated by the dismissal of the CEO and the suspension of the
       Accounting Authority, which delayed payment to the service provider
       and caused an additional delay in production, until accounts had
       been settled.
       Hence, the ESETA could not meet the requirement of submitting the
       Annual Report to the Department of Higher Education for submission
       to Parliament.


       The constraints as set out above have been addressed and the Annual
       Report will be submitted to my Office by no later than Tuesday, 12
       October 2010 for tabling to Parliament.


       I therefore, apologise for any inconvenience that this might cause.


       Yours sincerely


       signed
       Dr Blade Nzimande, MP
       Minister of Higher Education and Training

                          THURSDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on An Assessment
        of the State of Professional Ethics in the Western Cape Provincial
        Government – May 2010 [RP 77-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans on
    the Defence Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 13 October 2010:

    The Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans, having
    considered the subject of the Defence Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2010]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by the
    Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
    amendments [B 11A – 2010].

                           MONDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

        a) Immigration Amendment Bill [B 32 - 2010] (National Assembly –
           sec 75).

        b) Rural Development and Land Reform General Amendment Bill [B 33 -
           2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

The Acting Speaker

1.    Appointment of Ad Hoc Committee

    After consultation with the Chief Whip of the Majority Party and senior
    whips of the other parties, I have decided to appoint an Ad Hoc
    Committee on the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) Forensic
    Investigation. The Committee will consider and report on the Forensic
    Investigation Report of the Auditor-General of South Africa and the
    Office of the Public Protector, and will -


    1.      consist of 14 members, in the following proportions: ANC 8; DA
       2; COPE 1; IFP 1; and other parties 2;


    2.      exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in
       carrying out its task; and


    3.      report to the House by no later than 26 November 2010.


    This decision will be tabled in the Assembly for ratification in terms
    of Rule 214(2).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Proclamation No R. 55 published in Government Gazette No 33596
        dated 1 October 2010:  Commencement of section 28 and section 51,
        in terms of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38
        of 2001).


    (b)     Proclamation No R. 56 published in Government Gazette No 33598
        dated 1 October 2010:  The reappointment of members of the Tax
        Courts, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 867 published in Government Gazette No
         33596 dated 1 October 2010 : Amendment of Money Laundering and
        Terrorist Financing Control Regulations, in terms of the Financial
        Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


    (d)     Government Notice No R. 869 published in Government Gazette No
        33596 dated 1 October 2010: Exemption, in terms of the Financial
        Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


    (e)     Government Notice No R. 846 published in Government Gazette No
        33585 dated 1 October 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.1 (No.
        1/1/416), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R. 847 published in Government Gazette No
        33585 dated 1 October 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.3 (No. 3/664),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).
    (g)     Government Notice No 866 published in Government Gazette No
        33597 dated 1 October 2010:  Determination of interest rate for
        purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate of
        interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Act, in
        terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


     h) Government Notice No R. 871 published in Government Gazette No
        33601 dated 8 October 2010: Amendment of Schedule No.3 (No. 3/665),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

                         WEDNESDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Vacancies on SABC board

     a) A letter dated 19 October 2010 has been received from the President
        of the Republic –


          i) informing the National Assembly of the resignation of Ms B
             Masekela, Mr M A Mello, Mr D Niddrie and Ms F Sekha from the
             board of the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC); and


         ii) requesting the Assembly to recommend, in accordance with the
             provisions of the Broadcasting Act, 1999 (Act No 4 of 1999),
             four suitable candidates to fill the above-mentioned vacancies
             for the unexpired portion of the period for which the vacating
             members had been appointed.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
        consideration and report.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency: National Planning Commission

     a) Millennium Development Goals Country Report 2010.

2.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Code of Judicial Conduct, submitted on 30 September 2010 in terms
        of section 12(2) of the Judicial Service Commission Act, 1994 (No 9
        of 1994).

     b) Regulations on Judges’ Disclosure of Registrable Interests,
        submitted on 30 September 2010 in terms of section 13(7) of the
        Judicial Service Commission Act, 1994 (No 9 of 1994).

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

 1. Report of the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
    Special Petitions on the legislative proposal regarding the President’s
    power to pardon (Honourable J Selfe, Democratic Alliance), dated 15
    September 2010:




      The Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special
      Petitions, having considered the legislative proposal regarding the
      President’s power to pardon, and having consulted with the Portfolio
      Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, the Ministry of
      Justice and Constitutional Development and the Presidency and listened
      to the presentation and briefing by Honourable J Selfe, recommends
      that permission not be granted to the member to proceed with the
      proposed legislation. Two members of the committee, Honourable J
      Kilian (Congress of the People) and Honourable PJC Pretorius
      (Democratic Alliance), noted their objections to the recommendation of
      the majority of the committee.




      The committee wishes to make the following observations with regards
      to its recommendation:




       1. The legislative proposal of Honourable J Selfe, if allowed to
          proceed, would result in the implementation of an administrative
          system to regulate the exercise of the President’s
          constitutionally endorsed power to pardon.




       2. The President’s power to pardon flows from the Constitution and is
          not based on the historical influence of the prerogative of the
          Crown to pardon as found in the United Kingdom. This was confirmed
          by the Constitutional Court in the Certification of the
          Constitution of the RSA (1996 (10) BCLR 1253 (CC)).



       3. The President’s power and functions as the head of state (as found
          in section 84 of the Constitution) are in nature exercised at his
          discretion.



       4. The Constitutional Court has confirmed that it has no substantive
          issue with the power to pardon as found in the Constitution.
          Although it may appear to be an unfettered power, it is subject to
          the Constitution and subject to review by the Constitutional Court
          as the guardian of the Constitution if it is not rationally
          exercised.



       5. The judiciary does not have the power to pardon; accordingly there
          is no overlap between the power exercised by the President as head
          of state and that exercised by the judiciary. The principle of
          separation of powers is unaffected.




      In light of the above, the committee is of the view that the
      legislative proposal of Honourable J Selfe is not feasible and should
      not be proceeded with.




   Report to be considered.


                          THURSDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 21 October
         2010:


          a) South African Postbank Bill [B 14B – 2009] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).


          b) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).


          c) Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second
             Amendment Bill [B 29 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Breede-Overberg
        Catchment    Management Agency  for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 221-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Inkomati Catchment
        Management Agency  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 162-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
    Special Petitions on the legislative proposal regarding the President’s
    power to pardon (Honourable P De Lille, Independent Democrats), dated
    15 September 2010:




    The Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special
    Petitions, having considered the legislative proposal regarding the
    President’s power to pardon, and having consulted with the Portfolio
    Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, the Ministry of
    Justice and Constitutional Development and the Presidency and listened
    to the presentation and briefing by Honourable P De Lille, recommends
    that permission not be granted to proceed with the proposed
    legislation, as Ms De Lille is no longer a Member of Parliament. In
    terms of Rule 234(1) of the Rules of the National Assembly, only “[a]n
    Assembly member” can submit a legislative proposal “in an individual
    capacity”.

    The committee wishes to make the following observations with regard to
    the legislative proposal:

     1. The legislative proposal of Honourable De Lille, if allowed to
        proceed, would have resulted in an amendment of the Constitution as
        it was argued that section 84(2)(j) should be removed from the
        Constitution.

     2. The President’s power to pardon flows from the Constitution and is
        not based on the historical influence of the prerogative of the
        Crown to pardon as found in the United Kingdom. This was confirmed
        by the Constitutional Court in the Certification of the
        Constitution of the RSA (1996 (10) BCLR 1253 (CC)).

     3. The President’s power and functions as the head of state (found in
        section 84 of the Constitution) is in nature a power exercised at
        his discretion.

     4. The Constitutional Court has confirmed that it has no substantive
        issue with the power to pardon as found in the Constitution.
        Although it may appear to be an unfettered power, it is subject to
        the Constitution and subject to review by the Constitutional Court
        as the guardian of the Constitution if it is not rationally
        exercised.

     5. The judiciary does not have the power to pardon; accordingly there
        is no overlap between the power exercised by the President as head
        of state and that exercised by the judiciary. The principle of
        separation of powers is unaffected.




    In light of the above, the committee is of the view that the
    legislative proposal of Honourable P De Lille is not feasible and
    should not be proceeded with.




    Report to be considered.



2.    The Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  of  the  Portfolio
    Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs on the performance  of  the
    Department of Environmental Affairs  for  the  2009/10  financial  year,
    dated 21 October 2010.

    The Portfolio Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs,  having
    assessed  the  service  delivery  performance  of  the   Department   of
    Environmental Affairs, reports as follows:

    1. Introduction


    In May 2009, the President of the Republic of South Africa announced the
    restructuring of Cabinet and national departments to align the structure
    and  the  electoral  mandate  of  government  with   the   developmental
    challenges confronting our country.  Proclamation No. 32367, gazetted in
    2009,  determined  the  re-alignment  of  the   following   departments:
    Department of Water Affairs and Forestry;  Department  of  Environmental
    Affairs and Tourism and Department of Agriculture.  This resulted in the
    establishment of the following:  Departments  of  Tourism;  Agriculture,
    Forestry and Fisheries; the  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and
    Department  of  Water  Affairs  (under  the  Ministry   of   Water   and
    Environmental Affairs).


    Within the fisheries component, the Department of Environmental  Affairs
    retained its activities in regard to conserving and sustaining  the  use
    of marine and coastal resources. This is reflected in the  work  of  the
    department  within  Programme  3:  Marine  and  Coastal  Management.   A
    government-wide task team was established  under  the  auspices  of  the
    Department of Public Services and Administration (DPSA) to  oversee  the
    transition.


    The committee, in undertaking the process of compiling this report,  has
    interacted  and  engaged  with  the  following  source  documents,   and
    engagements with the department and other stakeholders:


      • A strategic planning workshop was held with the department  and  all
        the public entities reporting to it, which included the Ministry and
        all senior managers.
  •  Departmental  quarterly  expenditure  trends  briefings,  to  ascertain
    expenditure patterns.
      •  Through  correspondence  and  briefings,  the  committee   received
        progress reports on the departmental programmes and projects on  the
        ground  such  as  pollution  and  waste  treatment  management   and
        infrastructure,   Expanded   Public    Works    Programme,    public
        awareness campaigns and climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation
        programmes/projects.
      • Annual report briefings, in  terms  of  Section  65  of  the  Public
        Finance  Management  Act  of  No.1  of  1999,  which  requires  that
        Ministers table the annual reports and financial statements for  the
        department and public entities to parliament.

 1. The mandate and role of the committee


    The mandate of the committee is underpinned by  the  provisions  of  the
    Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, Parliament’s  vision
    and mission, and the rules of Parliament.


    The mandate and role of the committee is therefore to:


      • Conduct oversight on behalf of the public, over the  Department  of
        Environmental  Affairs   to   ensure   executive   enforcement   of
        environmental rights  as  enshrined  in  the  Constitution  of  the
        Republic of South Africa, 1996.  Section 24  guarantees  all  South
        Africans a right to an environment that is  nor  harmful  to  their
        health or well-being of its citizens.
      • Oversee and review all matters of public interest  relating  to  the
        environmental sector and  economic  development  to  ensure  service
        delivery.
      • Ensure compliance by the department and  its  entities  to  relevant
        legislation (financial and other).
      • Monitor the expenditure of  the  department  and  its  entities  and
        ensure regular reporting to  the  committee,  within  the  scope  of
        accountability and transparency.


     2. The mandate of the Department


    The mandate and core business of the department is  underpinned  by  the
    Constitution and all other relevant legislation and policies  applicable
    to the government, including the Batho Pele White Paper.


    The vision and mission of the department embodies  the  mandate  of  the
    department, as follows:


  • A prosperous and equitable society living in harmony  with  our  natural
    resources.
  • To lead sustainable development of our environment  and  tourism  for  a
    better life for all.


    2. Department’s Strategic Priorities and Measurable Objectives


    2.1 Strategic Priorities of the Department


    The key strategic priorities, in line with the vision and mission of the
    department, over the medium-term, comprise the following:


  • Promoting  the  conservation  and  sustainable  utilisation  of  natural
    resources.
  • Protecting and improving the quality and safety of the environment.
  • Facilitating an effective national mitigation and adaptation response to
    climate change.
  • Promoting a global sustainable development agenda.
  • Facilitating transformation and job creation within the sectors  towards
    poverty       eradication.


    2.2 Measurable Objectives of the Department


    Five (5) critical programmes  determine  the  work  of  the  department.
    Within each of the programmes, the department  identified  a  number  of
    measurable objectives, which relate specifically to the purpose:


    In Programme 1:  Administration and Support, the purpose is  to  provide
    strategic leadership, administration, executive  support  and  corporate
    services.  Within this programme, and for the  2009/10  financial  year,
    the department achieved the following:


  • 80% employee cases were processed within timeframes.
  • Human resource development strategy was implemented.
  •  Implementation  of  Master  Systems  Plan  (knowledge  and  information
    management system).
      • Effective frontline services with 95% of call centre requests  being
        processed as per service level standards – within 48 hours.
  • Optimized 55% of media sources.
  • There was a 95% website uptime, despite the 10% increase in traffic.
  • Unqualified audit report.


    One of the concerns expressed in this programme is the continued lack of
    meeting of employment targets due to high staff  turnover.   Ironically,
    it was stated  in  the  departmental  2008/09  annual  report  that  the
    department had succeeded in reducing  the  rate  at  which  departmental
    staff had been leaving the  department  for  other  opportunities.   For
    example, it was stated in the 2008/09 annual report that  the  effective
    implementation of an economically efficient retention  strategy  by  the
    department resulted in lowering the annual rate of  departure  of  staff
    from 22.1% in the 2007/08  financial  year  to  11.96%  in  the  2008/09
    financial year.  However, the 2009/10 annual report indicates that 17.9%
    of various positions in the establishment were  vacant.   Of  particular
    concern to the committee  is  that  the  departmental  documentation  is
    silent on time-frames in which they hope to achieve the full  complement
    of skilled personnel.


    Other gains reported during the  2008/09  financial  year  included  the
    progress made in the tendering process for the construction of  the  new
    building.  Interestingly, the same matter is reported as a gain  in  the
    2009/10 annual report.


    In Programme 2: Environmental Quality and Protection, the purpose is  to
    improve the quality and safety of  the  environment  in  order  to  give
    effect to the right of all South Africans to an environment that is  not
    harmful to health and well-being, the achievements for  2000/10  reflect
    the following:


      • 75% of 560 Environmental Impact Applications (EIAs)  were  processed
        within    prescribed timeframes.
  • 100 appeals inputs were made within prescribed timeframes.
  • 286 officials were trained in EIA administration.
  • 42 ambient air  quality  monitoring  stations  provided  information  to
    SAAQIS.
  • Waste management activities were published.
  • 95 waste treatment sites were licensed.
    It is reported that for this programme, the department continues to  see
    an increase in compliance with environmental  legislation  by  industry.
    The department trained 286 officials  in  EIAs  administration,  thereby
    contributing to increasing the rate of processing of  EIA  applications.
    It is stated that 75% of 560 EIA applications were  processed.  However,
    there is no clarity about the duration of the timeframe within which the
    EIA applications should be considered.  In fact, several  attempts  were
    made during committee  meetings  to  determine  the  duration  of  these
    timeframes.  The committee therefore requires, as a matter  of  urgency,
    this information from the department as soon as possible.


    The department should  work  toward  attaining  100%  in  assessing  EIA
    applications on time, rather than any percentage below 100%, as  delayed
    consideration of EIA applications may discourage potential investors and
    developers.  Some of the developments for  which  EIA  applications  are
    being delayed might have very significant implications for job  creation
    and hence poverty eradication.  Furthermore, the department stated  that
    it received and reviewed only a limited number of  Environmental  Impact
    Management (EIM) applications during the  2009/10  financial  year.   It
    would be appropriate  to  state  why  only  four  EIM  allocations  were
    received and the conditions under which these applications are made.


    The committee is concerned that despite the year-on-year growth  in  the
    number   of   qualified   Environmental   Management   Inspectors,   the
    overwhelming number  of  these  EMIs  work  on  ‘green  issues’  with  a
    comparatively small number of EMIs, less than 20% of the total, focusing
    on the so-called ‘brown issues’ of compliance  and  enforcement  in  the
    fields of waste management and air quality management.  There  needs  to
    be a concerted effort by the department not only to grow the  number  of
    EMIs, but to ensure that more are trained in ‘brown issues’.


    In Programme 3:  Marine  and  Coastal  Management,  the  purpose  is  to
    promote the conservation and  sustainable  use  of  marine  and  coastal
    resources to contribute to  economic  growth  and  poverty  alleviation.
    This is also aimed  at  facilitating  transformation  and  job  creation
    within  the  sector  towards  poverty  alleviation  in  achieving   this
    department.   The  department  in  this  financial  year  achieved   the
    following:


      • All planned relief voyages to Antarctica, Marion and  Gough  Islands
        were  successfully  carried  out  (oceanographic  and   biodiversity
        research, as well as meteorological observations).
  • Population estimates  of  top  marine  predators  (seals  and  seabirds)
    conducted.
      • Research towards the establishment  of  the  first  offshore  Marine
        Protected  Area  in  the  immediate  exclusive  economic  zone   was
        published.
  • Prince Edward Island Marine Protected Area was gazetted for comment.
      • Physical marine coastal environment  was  assessed  to  produce  bi-
        annual state of the ocean environment reports.
      • Integrated Coastal Management Act, No. 24 of 2008 was promulgated in
        December 2009. Supporting measures are in  place  to  implement  the
        Act.
  • Water quality guidelines for recreational use  of  coastal  waters  have
    been revised.


    The Marine Living Resources Fund (MLRF) finances the operations  of  the
    Marine and Coastal Management  (MCM)  Programme,  which  served  as  the
    branch of the national Department of Environmental Affairs and  Tourism.
    The Marine and Coastal Management Programme is responsible for  managing
    the development and sustainable use of South Africa’s marine and coastal
    resources, as well as for protecting the integrity and  quality  of  its
    marine and coastal ecosystems.
    This mandate is a complex and often  controversial  one,  that  is,  the
    achievement of a healthy  balance  between  sustainable  utilization  of
    marine and coastal resources, and the  protection  and  conservation  of
    these same resources, is an ongoing  challenge  that  requires  a  well-
    planned strategy and regular time-framed monitoring  and  evaluation  of
    implementation  processes.    However,   growing   and   enhancing   the
    sustainability of the marine  fisheries  sector,  as  indicated  in  the
    2009/10 annual report of the department is indeed a strategic objective,
    particularly in the quest for poverty eradication among the impoverished
    communities in the proximity of these marine and coastal resources.


    Marine aquaculture is poised to play a significant role in this  regard.
    Thus, it would be appropriate for the department to clarify the progress
    made in the establishment  of  marine  aquaculture  in  the  context  of
    integrated coastal management per the relevant  legislation  (Integrated
    Coastal  Management  Act,  No.  24  of  2008).   Similarly,  instead  of
    reporting on the population estimates of top marine predators,  such  as
    seals and sea birds, it would  be  appropriate  for  the  department  to
    report generally on the ecological status of the  South  African  marine
    fisheries resources, taking into account the  pollution  status  of  the
    marine environment in the country’s exclusive economic zone,  number  of
    effluent pipes discharging directly into the sea, conservation status of
    commercial fisheries  species  and  the  number  of  commercial  fishing
    vessels and their profiles in terms of BEEE.


    In Programme 5:   Biodiversity  and  Conservation,  the  purpose  is  to
    ppromote the conservation and sustainable use of  natural  resources  to
    contribute to economic growth and poverty alleviation.  The  department,
    for the 2009/10 financial year achieved the following:


  • CITES Regulations were published for implementation.
  • Draft Norms and Standards for the Management of damage  causing  animals
    were developed.
  • National Regulations for Alien Invasive Species were finalized.
  • 25% of the National Biodiversity Framework was implemented.
  • All relief voyages were successfully executed (Marion and Gough  Islands
    and SANAE base)


    This  programme  saw  the  reviewing  of  42  permit  applications   for
    conducting bioprospecting  activities  involving  indigenous  biological
    resources.  It is stated that considerable benefits would  flow  to  the
    communities  who  own  the  concerned  biological  resources   and   the
    associated indigenous knowledge.  In fact, it  is  pointed  out  that  a
    permit had been issued for one such application and  that  benefits  had
    already accrued to the relevant beneficiaries.  It would be  appropriate
    to clarify those kinds of  benefits  and  also  identify  the  recipient
    communities, as well as the inception time of the bioprospecting project
    to gain an understanding of its sustainability.  It was  further  stated
    that all of the 34 bioprospecting permit applications, which  were  from
    the 2008 backlogs, were assessed in  the  period  under  review.   There
    needs to be clarity on whether the 34 permit applications were  part  of
    the 44 permit  applications  that  were  evaluated  during  the  2009/10
    financial year and if so, what merits  the  double  entry  of  the  same
    activity?  There also needs to be clarity on whether there are  existing
    backlogs, for example, from 2009, considering  the  fact  that  backlogs
    from 2008 were only assessed in the 2009/10 financial year.


    Similarly, the Draft Norms and Standards for the Management  of  Damage-
    causing Animals, which were supposed to  be  completed  in  the  2009/10
    financial year, are deferred for submission for approval in the  2010/11
    financial year.  The department should clarify the current management of
    human-and-wildlife  conflicts  in  the  absence  of  these   norms   and
    standards.


    There is also a low submission rate of elephant management plans to  the
    department by the relevant conservation agencies.  More clarity is  also
    required on how the elephants in the country’s protected areas are being
    managed.  The department also indicated that processes are  underway  to
    establish elephant research programmes and desertification and dry-lands
    research programmes, although it is conventional wisdom that  there  are
    South African scientists who have long been involved in these  types  of
    research.  It would be appropriate for the  department  to  explain  the
    context in which ongoing  elephant  and  desertification  and  dry-lands
    research is being done.


    In  Programme  6:   Sector   Services,   Environmental   Awareness   and
    International Relations, the purpose is to promote a global  sustainable
    developmental agenda, and the department, achieved the following:


  • 218 persons trained over 365 days, which created 79  733  training  days
    within the EPWP.
  • 186 permanent jobs were created.
  • 21 138 temporary jobs created.
  • 369 SMME’s were used.
  • 995 youth benefited from the department’s National Youth Programme.


    This programme, along with the  Department  of  International  Relations
    continued to play a leading role in international negotiations centering
    on sustainable development, chemicals management, fisheries  management,
    climate change and biodiversity.  South  Africa  is  indeed  visible  in
    relevant bi-and multi-lateral forums, as well as playing a crucial  role
    in South-South  relations.   At  the  local  level,  the  department  is
    implementing the strategic  goal  of  ‘empowerment  through  information
    sharing and sound stakeholder relation’.  This is being achieved through
    the  improvement  of  intergovernmental  cooperation  and  coordination,
    optimizing  access  to  information  and  through  improved  quality  of
    stakeholder engagements.


    3.  Analysis of the  Department’s  Current  Strategic,  Operational  and
    Financial Framework


    For the 2010/11 financial year, the department stressed  the  importance
    of attaining the following:


    Climate Change is a new programme,  with  the  aim  of  facilitating  an
    effective national mitigation and adaptation response to climate change.
    This is  indeed  necessary,  considering  the  ongoing  and  anticipated
    negative consequences of climate change for South Africa, in the absence
    of  appropriate  mitigation  and   adaptation   interventions   by   the
    Government. The other key areas that will be  focused  on  in  the  next
    financial year are:


      •  The  protection,  conservation  and  enhancement  of  environmental
        assets, natural and heritage resources.
  • Ensuring a sustainable and healthy environment.
  • Contributing to sustainable  economic  growth,  livelihoods  and  social
    cohesion.
  • Providing leadership on climate change action.
      • Promoting skills development and employment creation by facilitating
        green and inclusive economic growth.
      • Creating a better Africa and a better world  by  advancing  national
        environmental interests through  a  global  sustainable  development
        agenda.


    3.1 Current expenditure trends


    A cursory overview of the appropriations in Vote  29  and  the  spending
    trends for the first quarter of 2010/11 is as follows:


      • In the 2010/11  financial  year,  the  Department  of  Environmental
        Affairs was allocated a total budget  of  R2.6  million  before  the
        adjustment period.   In  the  first  quarter  of  the  2010/11,  the
        department spent R444.5 million of its budget.


    The breakdown for each of the programmes is as follows:


    Programme 1: Administration was allocated a  total  amount  of  R255.037
    million for 2010/11 financial year before  adjustment.   The  department
    spent R40.349 million or  16%.   This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the
    department had not as yet received its first  quarter  claims  from  the
    Department of Public Works for office accommodation.


    Programme  2:   Environmental  Quality  and  Protection  was   allocated
    R321.311 million for the 2010/11 financial year.  The  department  spent
    R73.806 million or 23% of the  allocation.   The  largest  part  of  the
    expense was attributed to  employee  compensation,  amounting  to  R17.8
    million. A breakdown shows that R3.2 million was  spent  on  performance
    bonuses; R2.1 million on domestic travel; R1.7 million on foreign travel
    and R3.7 million on other  operational  expenses  –  a  total  of  R28.5
    million.


    Buyisa-e-Bag did not receive a transfer in  the  first  quarter,  as  no
    business plans were provided.


    Programme 3:  Oceans and Coastal Management was allocated an  amount  of
    R229.356 million for the 2010/11 financial year before adjustment.   The
    department spent approximately R53.019 million or 23% of the allocation.
     A breakdown reflects the following:  Integrated Coastal Management used
    R27.8 million and Coastal and Oceans Assessment and  Research  used  R25
    million.


    A number  of  personnel  had  been  transferred  to  the  Department  of
    Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, whose personnel  database  had  not
    been ready at the time of the transfer, and therefore the department had
    paid R16.2 million in salaries and performance bonuses of R4 million  in
    the interim.


    Programme 4:  Climate Change was  allocated  R573.865  million  for  the
    2010/11 financial year.  The department spent R19.1 million or 3% in the
    first quarter on relief vessels, of  which  308  million  of  the  total
    allocation was utilised  for  the  replacement  of  the  Polar  Research
    Vessel, which reduced the amount of money available for the rest of  the
    programme.  Installments for this would be paid in  September  2010  and
    January 2011 and the vessel would be delivered in early 2013.


    Programme 5:   Biodiversity  and  Conservation  was  allocated  R399.588
    million for the 2010/11 financial  year.   In  the  first  quarter,  the
    department spent R91.362 million or 23% mainly towards transfers to  the
    public entities, whilst the bulk of  the  expenditure,  after  transfers
    went towards compensation of employees  and  performance  bonuses.   The
    transfers to entities for the first quarter of 2010/11 are as follows:


  • iSimangaliso Wetland Park Authority:  R5.3 million.
  • South African National Parks:  R38 million.
  • South African National Biodiversity Institute: R35 million.
    Programme 6:  Sector Services, Environmental Awareness and International
    Relations received an allocation of R828.637  million  or  20%  for  the
    2010/11 financial year.  Of this amount, R166 million was spent  in  the
    first quarter on social responsibility, policy and  projects,  including
    the Expanded Public Works Programme.


    3.2 Committee’s concerns in relation to attaining current objectives


    Programme  1:  With  regards  to  the  high  turnover  rate  within  the
    department, the Recruitment and Retention strategy needs to be evaluated
    and not just reported on as a tool that is in place. If the tool is  not
    achieving the objectives, then other strategies and mechanisms  need  to
    be explored to remedy the constraint. The committee  is  cognizant  that
    the environmental management sector is a lucrative one and the  movement
    of staff into the private sector is a key contributing factor and cannot
    be  controlled.  The  constraints  experienced  with  regards   to   the
    construction of the  new  green  building  should  be  clearer  and  the
    feasibility in achieving the objective needs to be explored further.


    Programme 2: The indicators  selected  for  measuring  performance  with
    regards to levels of  Environmental  Quality  and  Protection  does  not
    actually address the issue of sustainability of the environment  or  the
    extension of ecosystem services. The department needs  to  provide  more
    clarification  on  how  the  selected  performance  indicators  actually
    measure the long term protection of a sustainable  environment  for  all
    South Africans.


    The legislative timeframes for processing of EIA  applications  are  set
    and instead of actually  measuring  progress  made  in  achieving  these
    targets, the indicator fails  to  illustrate  how  a  safe  and  healthy
    environment can be assured for present and future generations.
    The environmental impacts and cost of the 100 appeal  applications  need
    to be quantified and loss of environmental goods and services need to be
    further correlated with the  goal  of  achieving  a  safe,  healthy  and
    sustainable environment for all South Africans.


    The department is applauded for  the  extensive  training  and  capacity
    building that is associated with the EIA process, but how  this  relates
    to achieving the goals set for the programme is still unclear.


    The committee therefore recommends that the  indicators  should  include
    the actual impact the EIA process and related  legislation  has  had  on
    achieving a sustainable and quality environment for all South  Africans.
    Furthermore, the representation of all the spatial products developed by
    the  department  for  decision  making  (viz.  Environmental  Management
    Frameworks, EMF and EMPs) and the extent to  which  these  products  are
    actually utilized would be a more  accurate  performance  indicator  for
    this programme. Just  ensuring  that  environmental  authorizations  are
    processed according to legislative timeframes does not actually  address
    the level of environmental protection or quality of environment provided
    for present and future generations.


    Another weakness  within  the  programme  is  the  lack  of  information
    (performance  and  financial)  related  to  the  progress  made  in  the
    implementation of the various policies and  legislation  (e.g.  National
    Strategy for Sustainable Development and NEM: Waste Management Act) that
    was promulgated in the financial year.  The  challenges  experienced  by
    respective  provinces  in  achieving  the  indicators  are  also  poorly
    reflected. Of particular  interest  is  the  processesing  of  95  waste
    management sites,  are  all  these  sites  approved  with  Environmental
    Management Plans and are they monitored annually? Is the data  from  the
    ambient air quality monitoring stations, being  processed  and  utilized
    for  decision  making  in  the  Climate  Change  Strategy?  How  is  the
    department actually tackling disincentives  for  ’dirty’  industries  in
    implementing the National Strategy  for  Sustainable  Development,  e.g.
    granite mining industries should be charged an ecological surcharge  for
    extracting natural resources for private use.


    Programme 3: Marine and Coastal Management


    The mandate of the programme was modified last year, and  as  a  result,
    the programme’s focus of ensuring the sustainable utilization of  marine
    fisheries,  especially  for   marginalized   coastal   communities   was
    recalibrated.  Removing  the  marine  aquaculture   component   to   the
    Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries is severely inhibiting
    the department’s ability to engage  effectively  with  all  stakeholders
    within the marine fisheries sector. The increase in poaching  activities
    of lucrative marine  species  (like  abalone),  the  severe  decline  in
    population numbers of the African penguin, coupled with the collapse  of
    some marine fish  species  are  indicators  of  a  marine  ecosystem  in
    trouble. The programme is ineffective in meeting its objectives  and  is
    in dire need of serious interventions if the marine ecosystem is  to  be
    used sustainably for present and future generations. The committee  also
    notes that although the Integrated Coastal Management  Act,  No.  24  of
    2008 was promulgated, the department has not reported  on  the  progress
    made and the challenges experienced during implementation.


    Programme 5: Biodiversity and Conservation


    On the whole, the indicators that are selected to illustrate the mandate
    of the programme are inappropriate. The  department  is  more  concerned
    with providing quantitative information as opposed  to  the  qualitative
    information regarding the conservation and  sustainable  utilization  of
    biodiversity  within  the  country.  The  department   reports   as   an
    achievement that 25% of the National Biodiversity  Framework  (NBF)  was
    implemented, but the percentage is not related to any actual products or
    progress made within the implementation  plan.  Is  there  a  clear  and
    directed implementation plan  for  the  NBF?  How  is  this  plan  being
    implemented at a  provincial  level?  Furthermore,  the  rate  that  the
    department  is  producing  Biodiversity   Management   Plans   is   very
    concerning; currently we have a list of Threatened or Protected  Species
    (TOP’s), which all require Biodiversity Management  Plans,  within  what
    timeframes will these be completed and will they still be applicable  if
    the rate of species decline is factored into the timeframes.


    The department has been reporting for the last few years on the need for
    securing a  grassland  national  park,  yet  this  biome  is  constantly
    threatened  by  other  land-uses  (e.g.  development,  agriculture   and
    mining), especially in Gauteng, Free State and Mpumalanga. The committee
    is concerned that no real progress can be reported on this objective due
    to the lack of suitable land to conserve. The high rate of urbanization,
    increased agricultural production and the reliance on coal as an  energy
    source are all contributing to the  dramatic  destruction  of  important
    grassland and wetlands  which  provide  ecosystem  services  like  flood
    attenuation and water purification.


    The latest WWF Living Planet Index indicates that South Africa, together
    with other developing countries is experiencing the  highest  levels  of
    species extinctions. The Red List of South African Plants,  launched  by
    the South African Biodiversity Institute (SANBI), within  the  financial
    year under  review  also  quotes  alarming  statistics.  The  department
    though, is not providing the interventions and strategies to curb  these
    trends  but  rather  concerned  with  achieving  targets  that  have  no
    relevance to ensuring that natural resources are used  sustainably.  The
    challenges and constraints in  drafting  and  implementing  Biodiversity
    Management Plans, Bioregional Plans and  Conservation  Plans  to  ensure
    effective decision making on the conservation of South  Africa’s  unique
    and important biodiversity is severely lacking. Impoverished communities
    rely on natural resources for the basic food requirements and  medicinal
    needs and these are not addressed in this programme. As a  signatory  to
    the Convention on  Biological  Diversity  (CBD),  South  Africa  has  an
    obligation to conduct a biodiversity inventory and  have  mechanisms  in
    place to address impacts  associated  with  over  harvesting  and  other
    unsustainable practices. The current trends indicate that as a nation we
    are increasing our ecological footprint so drastically that many of  our
    endemic (occurring no where else in the world)  species  are  listed  as
    threatened due to poor land-use management decisions  and  unsustainable
    practices.


    Other: Millennium Development Goals


    MDG7:  Ensure environmental sustainability


    The recent Millennium Development Goals Country Report  2010,  presented
    to parliament on 20 October 2010 notes that current  indicators  suggest
    that the timetable for implementing the indicators of MDG 7 will not  be
    met.  The reports suggest that to reverse the situation  calls  for  the
    following:


      • The need for South Africa to integrate the principles of sustainable
        development into its national policies and programmes.
      •  The  international  community  should  encourage   action   towards
        sustainable biodiversity management as  a  vehicle  for  sustainable
        development.  In this regard,  the  commitments  made  by  developed
        countries in the Copenhagen Accord of December 18, 2009  to  provide
        resources amounting to USD 30 billion for the  period  2010  –  2012
        with balanced allocation between adaptation and mitigation should be
        concretized.
      • The additional commitment by developed countries  which  relates  to
        the mobilization of USD 100 billion a year by 2020  to  address  the
        need of developing countries is an opportunity for South  Africa  to
        speed up the transformation of MDG 7.


    The committee stresses the importance of the department taking  note  of
    the  weaknesses  in  the  country  report  and  urgently  addresses  the
    highlighted issues.


    4.  Analysis of Section 32 Expenditure Reports


    The Department of Environment and Tourism was  allocated  an  amount  of
    R3.51 billion in the 2009/10 financial year, which is 0.8  per  cent  of
    the main budget. This takes into account  the  adjustment  made  by  the
    department during  adjustment  period  in  the  same  year.  During  the
    adjustment the department received about  R29.8  million  as  additional
    budget in the 2009/10 financial  year,  this  has  increased  the  final
    appropriation of the department from R3.48  billion  to  R3.510  billion
    respectively. The department has spent R3.50 billion or 99.8 per cent at
    the end of 2009/10 which is R7.3 million or 0.2 per cent under-spending.
    This under- spending has emanated from the following programmes.


    A breakdown of the spending trends for each of the  programmes  reflects
    the following:


     • Programme 1:  Administration was allocated a total budget  of  R273.1
       million for the 2009/10 financial year after the  adjustment  budget.
       The programme spent exactly R273.1 million or 100 per  cent  of  this
       budget.  The department spent according to its  projections  in  this
       programme. Although the budget is well spent in this programme, there
       was an amount of R50 million, which was shifted from other programmes
       to this programme.  This  was,  as  a  result  of,  increased  office
       accommodation space, which includes municipal costs and leases of the
       building. This increased the balance of the budget in this programme.
       The movement of funds was done during the adjustment  period,  within
       the scope of Section 43 of the Public Finance Management Act.
     • Programme 2: Environmental Quality and  Protection  was  allocated  a
       total amount of R624.6 million for the 2009/10 financial  year  after
       the adjustments period. The department had spent  R285.8  million  or
       99.8 per cent of this budget. The reasons  for  lower  than  expected
       expenditure was due to the  under  expenditure  on  Buyisa-e-Bag  sub
       programme, which did not spend the entire budget of R30  million  but
       only about      R28 million or 98 per cent  of  its  allocation.   Of
       note is that an amount of R9.1 million was still  shifted  from  this
       programme to other programmes in the same period.
     • Programme 3: Marine and Coastal  Management  was  allocated  a  total
       amount  of  R624.6  million  for  the  2009/10  financial  year.  The
       programme spent R621.6 million or 99.5 per cent at  the  end  of  the
       financial year. The  reasons  for  the  unspent  funds  were  due  to
       compensation of employee costs related to  overtime  and  filling  of
       vacancies.  An  amount  of  R34.8  million  was  shifted  form  other
       programmes to this programme during the adjustment period.
     • Programme 5: Biodiversity and  Conservation  was  allocated  a  total
       amount of R387.6 million for the  2009/10  financial  year.  Of  this
       amount, the department spent up to R386.8 million or 99.8 per cent of
       the entire budget of this programme. An amount of R13.4  million  was
       moved from this programme to other programmes during  the  adjustment
       period in the same year.
     •  Programme  6:  Sector  Services  and  International  Relations   was
       allocated a total amount of R1.126 billion for the 2009/10  financial
       year. Of this amount, the department spent up to  R1.123  billion  or
       99.7 per cent of the entire budget of this programmme. An  amount  of
       R88.6 million, R81.6 million and R14.1million were  moved  away  from
       this programme to other programmes during the  adjustment  period  in
       the same year.


    According to some analysts, this movement of funds could result  in  un-
    intended consequences.  When a department moves funds from one programme
    to the other, the funds do not  move  with  the  programme.  This  could
    defeat the intended goal of a particular programme.   Personnel  in  the
    department often move funds precisely because of poor financial planning
    for a particular year.  This may also indicates that  personnel  do  not
    make use of the  medium  term  expenditure  framework  correctly,  which
    provides clear three year projections.


    5.  Analysis of the Department’s Annual Report and Financial Statements


    The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism remained focused  on
    ensuring that they jointly  deliver  on  the  commitments  made  in  the
    Strategic Plan during  the  period  under  consideration,  although  the
    Department of Tourism had been established as a stand-alone  department.
    Vote 25 of 2009/10 had combined environmental affairs and  tourism.   As
    of April 2010, Vote  29  had  come  into  effect  and  encompassed  only
    environmental affairs.


    The department had managed to spend 98% of its budget and  much  of  the
    remainder was related to capital expenditure that would  take  place  in
    2010/11.


    Financial management


    The department’s audit committee indicated that internal  controls  have
    been operating as intended in some areas, while others needed attention.
      In  instances  where  control  weaknesses  were  detected,  the  Audit
    Committee has considered and evaluated management responses  and  action
    plans to facilitate corrective measures.   The  implementation  of  such
    corrective measures is monitored  through  issue  tracking  reports  and
    follow-up review reports submitted regularly to the committee.
    Report of the Auditor-General


    The  Auditor-General  expressed  unmodified   audit   opinion   on   the
    performance of the department, with emphasis of matter on the following:


      • The financial statements and performance information were  subjected
        to material amendments.
      • The financial statements and other information,  which  were  to  be
        included  in  the  2009/10  annual  report  were  not  checked   for
        completeness and accuracy before      submission for audit.
      • The management of the department took long  to  provide  appropriate
        information needed for auditing the performance  of  the  department
        against its predetermined objectives.
      • Much effort  was  required  to  obtain  adequate  appropriate  audit
        evidence to verify the  departmental  performance  against  its  own
        predetermined objectives.


    It may be appropriate for the department to address the concerns  raised
    by the Auditor-General and state  how  it  aims  to  ensure  that  these
    problems do not recur.


    Consideration of reports of Committee on Public Accounts


    The department appeared twice before the Standing  Committee  on  Public
    Accounts  in  the  2009/10  financial  year.   These  related   to   the
    department’s  plan  of  dealing  with  confiscated   abalone   and   the
    department’s  involvement  in  dealing  with   abandoned   mines.    The
    department has no outstanding resolutions from this process.


    6.  Committee’s Observations


    The committee noted that the department, at a strategic level, is  doing
    satisfactory  work,  but  this  does  not  necessarily  translate   into
    effective service delivery in rural areas.  For example, there needs  to
    be climate change mitigation and  adaptation  projects  in  impoverished
    rural parts of South  Africa.   Similarly,  the  focus  on  biodiversity
    conservation should not only be on protected areas projects, but also on
    utilizable landscape, such as areas owned by communities to improve  the
    living standards of poor communities.


    It is also worth noting that three pieces of legislation have been fully
    commenced over the period of the current and  previous  financial  year:
    The Waste Act; The Air Quality Act and The Integrated Coastal Management
    Act.  These  Acts  place  considerable  new  financial  burden  on   the
    department, provincial government and  local  government.  Despite  full
    commencement, full actual realization of these statutes is going to take
    several years to implement, primarily  because  of  considerable  skills
    shortages and budgetary constraints at the local government level. It is
    imperative that an  increased  budgetary  allocation  towards  the  full
    realization of these Acts over an accelerated  time-frame  is  provided.
    The department needs to  be  able  to  increase  its  capacity  building
    initiatives at a local government level, and provide  strategic  support
    and interventions, in terms of the co-operative governance framework, to
    other spheres of government.


    7.  Conclusion and Recommendations


    The Department of Environmental Affairs is well governed, compliant with
    relevant Treasury regulations and achieves satisfactory outcomes against
    the annual business plan. The department is however not nearly realizing
    its full potential and is, by admission of  its  own  senior  officials,
    hampered by the inadequate allocation that is appropriated  to  it  each
    year, in addition to  the  lack  of  skilled  human  resources  in  some
    projects/programmes.


    Environmental Quality and Protection is a programme of  this  department
    that needs an increased budgetary allocation. The committee  would  like
    to point out that a healthy environment contributes  to  a  healthy  and
    productive citizenry. A degraded environment increased the burden on the
    public health sector and the economy. Further, it must be noted that the
    health risks encountered from degraded environments acutely  affect  the
    poor and marginalized in our country.


    With this in mind, this committee would like to strongly recommends that
    efforts to fully implement and enforce the Air Quality  Management  Act,
    No. 39 of 2004; the National Environmental Management Act,  No.  107  of
    1998 (as amended in 2009) and the Waste Act, No 59 of 2008 are  urgently
    required. South Africa  urgently  needs  more  Environmental  Management
    Inspectors that work on ‘brown issues’ and it needs further capacitation
    of other spheres of government, but particularly  local  government,  to
    design plans for the implementation of this legislation, and to  enforce
    it.


    This  committee  is  of  the  strong  opinion  that  the  Department  of
    Environmental  Affairs  requires  a  higher  budgetary  allocation   for
    Environmental Quality and Protection.


Report to be considered.


                           FRIDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
            Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
            on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
            10 [RP195-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 11 - Statistics
            South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
            for 2009-10 [RP91-2010].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud
            for Financial Services Providers for 2009-10, including the
            Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
            Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
            Corporation Ltd for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
            General on the Financial Statements for 2009-10 [RP92-2010].

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Sasria (Ltd) for 2009-
            10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
            Financial Statements for 2009-10.

        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the
            Pension Funds Adjudicator for 2009-10, including the Report of
            the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
            Information for 2009-10 [RP251-2010].

        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
            Reserve Bank for 2009-10, including the Report of the
            Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-10.


    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        International Relations and Cooperation for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Accession to the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
           and Governance, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory memorandum to the Accession to the African
           Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance.


    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
        reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
           Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd (Sita) for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP248-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 9 – Department
           of Public Service and Administration for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP211-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Public
           Administration Leadership and Management Academy (Palama) for
           2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP
           191-2010].


        (d)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an
           Assessment of the State of Professional Ethics in the Western
           Cape Provincial Government – May 2010 [RP77-2010].

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The reports of
        the Auditor-General and Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 31 – Department
           of Science and Technology for 2009-10, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP244-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust
           for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
           10.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           National Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.


    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration
        and report. The reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal
           Demarcation Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP227-2010].
        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
           Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious
           and Linguistic Communities for 2009-10, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP235-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
           Traditional Leaders (NHTL) for 2009-2010 [RP267-2010].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 29 – Department
           of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP252-2010].



        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
           Government Association (Salga) for 2009-10, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10.

    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
           Office (Ltd) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.
        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
           Statements for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service
           and Access Agency of South Africa (Usaasa) for 2009-10,
           including the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements of Universal Service and Access Agency of South
           Africa (Usaasa) and the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF)
           for 2009-10 [RP202-2010].

    (7)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Energy for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
           Regulator for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP78-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 28 – Department
           of Minerals and Energy  for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP69-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity
           Distribution Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP 236-
           2010].
        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
           Group of Companies (CEF) for 2009-10, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
           [RP168-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Nuclear Energy Corporation Limited (Necsa) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP 197-
           2010].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy
           Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP192-2010].


    (8)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 4 – Department
           of Home Affairs for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP190-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Film and
           Publication Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP250-2010].
    (9)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Mining for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 28 – Department
           of Minerals and Energy for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP69-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Mineral
           Technology (Mintek) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP31-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond
           Trader for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
           10.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
           Geoscience for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP79-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and
           Safety Council (MHSC) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP09-2010].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Diamond and Precious Metals Regulator for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP83-2010].


    (10)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Express
           Airways (Pty) (Ltd) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Airways (Pty) (Ltd) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for
           2009-10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Pebble-Bed Modular
           Reactor (Pty) Ltd (PBMR) for 2009-10, including the Report of
           the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-10
           [RP258-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Forestry Company (Ltd) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.

    (11)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund
           for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
           [RP45-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety
           Regulator for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP67-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Driving License
           Card Account for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP199-2010].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 33 – Department
           of Transport for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP198-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Passenger Rail
           Agency of South Africa (Prasa) for 2009-10, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP169-2010].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Maritime Safety Authority (including the Maritime Fund) for 2009-
           10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP216-2010].



        (g)      Reports and Financial Statements of the Ports Regulator of
           South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-2010.

        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Search and Rescue Organisation for 2009-10.

        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the State of Railway
           Safety in South Africa of the Railway Safety Regulator for 2008-
           09 [RP256-2010].

        (j)      Reports and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
           Transport  Agency (C-BRTA) for 2009-10, including the Reports of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.

    (12)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration and report. The report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral
           Commission for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP52-2010].


    (13)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities for
        consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-General and
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth
           Development Agency  (NYDA) for 2009-2010, including the Report
           of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-2010.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements  of the Commission for
           Gender Equality (CGE) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.


    (14)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Higher Education and Training for consideration and report. The
        reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
           Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
           (CTFL-Seta) for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP99-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
           and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP98-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Construction
           Education and Training Authority (CETA) for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP100-2010].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Mining
           Qualifications Authority (MQA) for 2009-10, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP115-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector
           Education and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP97-2010].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
           Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP108-2010].


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Transport Sector
           Education and Training Authority (TETA) for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP116-2010].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
           Education and Training Authority (AgriSeta) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP96-2010].


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
           Sector Education and Training Authority (Fieta) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP93-2010].


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
           Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority for 2009-
           10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP144-2010].


        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
           Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
           Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP150-2010].


        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the Public Service
           Sector Education and Training Authority (PSETA) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP112-2010].
        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
           Sector Education and Training Authority (SASSETA) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (n)      Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government
           Sector Education and Training Authority (LGSETA) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP109-2010].


        (o)      Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
           Sector Education and Training Authority (HWSETA) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP106-2010].


        (p)      Report and Financial Statements of the Education Training
           and Development Practices Sector Education and Training
           Authority (ETDP SETA) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP101-2010].


        (q)      Report and Financial Statements of the Information
           Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
           Education and Training Authority (Isett-Seta) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP107-2010].


        (r)      Report and Financial Statements of the Finance,
           Accounting, Management Consulting and other Financial Services
           Sector Education and Training Authority for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP103-2010].


        (s)      Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
           Engineering and Related Services Education and Training
           Authority (MER-Seta) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP111-2010].


        (t)      Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism,
           Hospitality and Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta)
           for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance information for 2009-10
           [RP118-2010].


        (u)      Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
           Retail Sector Education and Training Authority (W&RSETA) for
           2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
           [RP117-2010].


        (v)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
           Education (CHE) for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10.


        (w)      Report and Financial Statements of  the South African
           Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP94-2010].


        (x)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
           Financial Aid Scheme for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.


        (y)      Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector
           Education and Training Authority (ESETA) for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP102-2010].


    (15)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
        report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 34 – Department
           of Water Affairs for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP247-2010].


    (16)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for consideration and report.
        The report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        and Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms (Pty)Ltd
           for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
           10.


    (17)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
           Bloemfontein for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts
           Centre of the Free State for 2009-10, including the Report of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.


    (18)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Police for consideration and report. The report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 20 –
           Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP243-2010].


    (19)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and Military Veterans for consideration and report. The
        reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments
           Corporation of South Africa Limited (Armscor) for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Group
           Financial Statements and Performance Information  for 2009-10
           [RP215-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the the Castle of Good
           Hope Control Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP165-2010].
      .
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 19 – Department
           of Defence for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP179-2010].


    (20)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Works for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 5 – Department
           of Public Works for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10.
        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa
           (ASA) for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the
           Built Environment (CBE) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
           Development Trust for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP184-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Construction
           Industry Development Board (CIDB) for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP257-2010].


    (21)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        International Relations and Cooperation for consideration and
        report. The report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 3 – Department
           of International Relations and Cooperation for 2009-10,
           including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

    (22)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Rural Development and Land Reform for consideration and report. The
        report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust
           Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements for 2009-10.

    (23)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Economic Development for consideration and report. The reports of
        the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
           Economic Development for 2009-10.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
           finance Apex Fund for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP128-2010].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise
           Finance Ltd for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-10 [RP160-2010].


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
           Tribunal for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance information
           for 2009-10 [RP50-2010].
        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
           Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2009-
           10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2009-10.


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
           Administration Commission of South Africa for 2009-10, including
           the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
           and Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
           Commission for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2009-10 [RP217-2010].


    (24)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Sport and Recreation for consideration and report. The reports of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for
           2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Institute for Drug-Free Sport for 2009-10, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2009-10.

    (25)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 14 –  National
           Department of Health for 2009-10, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information for 2009-10 [RP177-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation
           Commissioner for Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works for
           2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
           Medical Research Council (MRC) for 2009-10, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
           Schemes for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
           10 [RP67-2010].

    (26)    The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Women,
        Youth, Children and People with Disabilities:

        (a)      Letter from the Minister in The Presidency, undated, to
           the Speaker of the National Assembly, explaining the delay in
           the submission of the Annual Report of the National Youth
           Development Agency (NYDA) for 2009-10.

    (27)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance:

        (a)      Proclamation No R46 published in Government Gazette No
           33551, dated 13 September 2010: Commencement of the South
           African Reserve Bank Amendment Act, 2010 on 13 September 2010 in
           terms of section 9 of the South African Reserve Bank Amendment
           Act, 2010 (Act No 4 of 2010).


        (b)      Government Notice No R758 published in Government Gazette
           No 33507, dated 27 Aug 2010 : Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/1/1414)) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (c)      Government Notice No R770 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of rules, (DAR/74) in
           terms of  chapter VA and section 120 of the Customs and Excise
           Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (d)      Government Notice No R771 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/1/1415) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No R772 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/3/9) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No R773 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/3/10) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No R774 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
           3/663) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (h)      Government Notice No R775 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
           4/334) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (i)      Government Notice No R776 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No
           5/91) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
           (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (j)      Government Notice No R777 published in Government Gazette
           No 33514, dated 31 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No
           6/17) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
           (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (k)      Government Notice No R762 published in Government Gazette
           No 33501, dated 3 September  2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2
           (No 2/331) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (l)      Government Notice No R763 published in Government Gazette
           No 33501, dated 3 September  2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4
           (No 4/333) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (m)      Government Notice No R808 published in Government Gazette
           No 33552, dated 13 September 2010:Regulations made in terms of
           section 36 of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No
           90 of 1989).


        (n)      Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank
for 2010.


    (28)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry:


        (a)      General Notice No 704 published in Government Gazette No
           33374, dated 12 July 2010:  Prohibition in terms of sections
           15(1) and 15(1)(a) of the Merchandise Marks Act, 1941 (Act No 17
           of 1941) on the use of the intellectual property rights of the
           Moses Mabhida stadium and other stadiums.


        (b)      Government Notice No R644 published in Government Gazette
           No 33398, dated 20 July 2010: Direction and procedure for
           distribution agencies in relation to the distribution of funds
           from the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund, issued in
           terms of section 32(3) of the Lotteries  Act, 1997 (Act No 57 of
           1997).
        (c)      Government Notice No R645 published in Government Gazette
           No 33398, dated 20 July 2010: Regulations and form for the
           application for a grant, issued in terms of section 60 of the
           Lotteries  Act, 1997 (Act No 57 of 1997).


        (d)      Government Notice No 634 published in Government Gazette
           No 33384, dated 23 July 2010: Declaration of Southern African
           Institute of Government Auditors as accounting officers in terms
           of section 60 of the Close Corporations Act, 1984 (Act No 69 of
           1984).


        (e)      Government Notice No R685 published in Government Gazette
           No 33427, dated 6 August  2010: Amendments to regulations on the
           payment of levy and fees on compulsory specifications in terms
           of section 14(3)(b) of the National Regulator for Compulsory
           Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of 2008).

    (29)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:


        (a)      Directives (Plea and Sentence Agreements) issued in terms
           of section 105A(11) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No
           51 of 1977).


    (30)    The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Higher
        Education and Training:


        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Higher Education and Training,
           dated 13 October 2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
           explaining the delay in the submission of the Annual Report of
           the Energy Sector Education and Training Authority (ESETA) for
           2009-10.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Local
      Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2010] (National
      Assembly – sec 75), dated 21 October 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the subject
      of the Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill [B 27 –
      2010] (National Assembly – section 75), referred to it and classified
      by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
      with amendments [B 27 A – 2010].


      Report to be considered.


CREDA INSERT T101022e-insert1 – PAGES 2970 - 2987

CREDA INSERT T101022e-insert2 – PAGES 2988 - 3026

CREDA INSERT T101022e-insert3 – pages 3027 - 3052

                           MONDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

                 1. Membership of Committees

The following changes to Committee membership have been made by the DA:

Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture

Discharged:    Van der Walt, Ms D

Appointed:  Smalle, Mr J

Portfolio Committee on Basic Education

Discharged:    Kloppers-Lourens, Dr JC and Lorimer, Mr JRB

Appointed:  James, Dr WG and Smiles, Mr D

Portfolio Committee on Communications
Discharged:    Mazibuko, Ms LD

Appointed:     Micheals, Mrs NWA

Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance

Discharged:    Doman, Mr WP

Appointed:     Lorimer, Mr JRB

Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services

Discharged:   Fritz, Mr AT

Appointed:     Max, Mr L

Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans

Discharged:    Smiles, Mr DC

Appointed:     Masango, Mr SJ

Portfolio Committee on Economic Development

Appointed:     Marais, Mr K
Standing Committee on Finance

Discharged:    Swart, Mr M

Appointed:     Marais, Mr K

Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training

Discharged:   James, Dr WG and Boinamo, Mr GG

Appointed:     Kloppers-Lourens, Dr J and Van der Westhuizen, Mr A

Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs

Discharged:   Terblanche, Mrs J

Appointed:     Lovemore, Mrs A

Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development

Discharged:   Micheal, Ms NWA

Appointed:     Schafer, Mrs DA

Portfolio Committee on Labour
Discharged:   Louw, Mr A

Appointed:     Boinamo, Mr G

Portfolio Committee on Police

Discharged:    Schafer, Mrs DA

Appointed:       Swathe, Mr M

Portfolio Committee on Public Works

Discharged:    Masango, Mr SJ

Appointed:      Doman, Mr W

Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform

Discharged:    Swathe, Mr MM

Appointed:      Mazibuko, Ms LD

Portfolio Committee on Tourism

Discharged:    Shinn, Ms MR
Appointed:      Terblanche, Mrs J

Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry

Discharged:    Marais, Mr SJF and Van der Westhuizen, Mr AP

Appointed:      Harris, Mr T and Smalle, Mr J

Portfolio Committee on Water and Enviromental Affairs

Discharged:    Lovemore, Ms AT

Appointed:      Kaylan, Ms S.

The following appointment to Committee membership has been made by the
ACDP:

Portfolio Committee on Water and Enviromental Affairs

Appointed:  Meshoe, Rev. K

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
   (a)      Letter from the Minister of Human Settlements dated 20 October
       2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay
       in the submission of the Annual Report of the Servcon Housing
       Solutions (Proprietary) Limited (SERVCON) for 2009-2010.

       EXTENSION OF SUBMISSION OF THE 2009 / 10 ANNUAL REPORT BY SERVCON


       In terms of Section 55 (3) of the PFMA, public entities must within
       five months of the end of the financial year, submit annual reports
       on the activities of that public entity during the financial year,
       to the relevant Executive Authority for tabling in Parliament
       through the Accounting Officer of a department designated by the
       Executive Authority. Submission of Annual Reports for 2009/10
       financial year was expected on or before 31 August 2010.


       However the National Department of Human Settlements received a
       letter from SERVCON’s Acting Manager Director indicating their
       inability to comply with the above prescript. The entity could not
       submit the report in time to meet the end of August 2010 deadline
       due to the outstanding written confirmation for the write off of
       interest and penalties by the South African Receiver of Revenue
       Services (SARS) which has effect on the Financial Statements of
       SERVCON  as it has implications on the reduction of the entity’s
       liabilities.


       The entity will only be able to submit once the confirmation from
       SARS has been received, then the entity would emend the Annual
       Financial Statements and present the Annual Report to Parliament.




       signed
       T MG SEXWALE
       MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



1. Report of the Portfolio Committee and Select Committee on Women, Youth,
   Children and People with Disabilities: Public hearings on the
   implementation of the Domestic Violence Act, 116 of 1998, dated 17
   February 2010

   The committee, having considered oral and written submissions, reports as
   follows:

1. Introduction

The Portfolio and Select Committees on Women, Youth, Children and People
with Disabilities conducted public hearings on the 11 year implementation
of the Domestic Violence Act (DVA), No 116 of 1998 on the 28 and 29 October
2009.

2. Objectives

The objectives of the public hearings were to:

    • Investigate the incidence of human rights violations with respect to
      violence and abuse.
    • Establish whether the Domestic Violence Act has been effectively
      implemented.
    • Identify key challenges with respect to the implementation of the
      Domestic Violence Act.
    • Understand shortcomings in government’s response to domestic violence.
    • Identify best practices models that can be scaled up to mitigate
      domestic violence.
    • Make findings and recommendations – identify short, medium and long
      term solutions and action required by Parliament and the Executive.
    • Ascertain the impact of the Domestic Violence Act on people,
      particularly women, youth, children and persons with disabilities.


3. Delegation


The delegation consisted of members of the Portfolio Committee on Women,
Youth, Children and People with Disabilities from the National Assembly and
the Select Committee on Women, Children and People with Disabilities from
the National Council of Provinces.


National Assembly


   African National Congress (ANC)


   Mr DC Kekana
   Ms NM Madlala
   Ms P Petersen – Maduna
   Ms HH Malgas
   Ms DM Ramodibe
   Mr GJ Selau
   Ms B Thompson
   Ms GK Tseke


   Democratic Alliance (DA)


   Ms PC Duncan
   Ms D Robinson


   Congress of the People (COPE)


   Ms SP Rwexana


   Inkatha Freedom Front (IFP)


   Ms SP Lebenya
   Ms HN Makhuba


   United Christian Democratic Party (UCDP)


   Ms IC Ditshetelo


National Council of Provinces


   Eastern Cape
   Ms AND Qikani


   Free State
   Mr DA Worth


   KwaZulu – Natal
   Prince MMM Zulu


   Mpumalanga
   Ms MP Temba


   Northern Cape
   Mr GG Mokgoro


   Limpopo
   Mr TA Mashamaite


   Gauteng
   Ms BP Mabe


Departments in attendance


    • Department of Police, Department of Social Development, Department of
      Health, Department of Women, Children and Persons with Disabilities,
      Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.
The following provinces were represented:


    • Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Gauteng

The committee received 39 submissions from the public including the
following organisations and individuals who requested to make oral
submissions.


   |NAME/ORGANISATION                                      |WRITTEN/ORAL    |
|1.  Molo Songololo                                     |Oral            |
|2.  MM                                                 |Written         |
|3.  Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference      |Oral            |
|(SACBC) -                                              |                |
|Parliamentary Liaison Officer                          |                |
|4.  DG (Lecturer: Criminology and Security Science)    |Written         |
|5.  Ms CW (NGO: Advice Desk for the Abused)            |Oral            |
|6.  SD                                                 |Oral            |
|7.  Restorative Justice Centre                         |Oral            |
|8.  Project Abroad Human Rights Office                 |Oral            |
|9.  Tshwaranang Legal Advocacy Centre                  |Oral            |
|10. National Institute for Crime Prevention and        |Oral            |
|Reintegration of                                       |                |
|Offender (NICRO)                                       |                |
|11. Resources Aimed at the Prevention of Child Abuse   |Oral            |
|and Neglect                                            |                |
|(RAPCAN)                                               |                |
|12. Rural Education Awareness and Community Health     |Oral            |
|(REACH)                                                |                |
|13. Cape Law Society                                   |Oral            |
|14. Commission for Gender Equality                     |Oral            |
|15. Red Cross Children’s Hospital                      |Oral            |
|16. SG                                                 |Written         |
|17. Child Welfare                                      |Oral            |
|18. Childline                                          |Oral            |
|19. Centre for the study of violence and reconciliation|Oral            |
|(CSVR)                                                 |                |
|20. Khulisa Crime Prevention Initiatives               |Written         |
|21. Thohoyandou Victim Empowerment Programme           |Oral            |
|22. Catholic Commission of Justice and Peace           |Written         |
|23. Mrs Msomi (Pietermaritzburg)                       |Oral            |
|                                                       |(individual)    |
|24. South African National Civic Organisation (SANCO)  |Oral            |
|25. Women of Farms Project                             |Oral            |
|26. AG (Research Office: UCT)                          |Oral            |
|                                                       |(individual)    |
|27. Ms UP                                              |Oral            |
|                                                       |(individual)    |
|28. Ms QS                                              |Oral            |
|                                                       |(individual)    |
|29. Western Cape Network on Disability and Women of    |Oral            |
|Action                                                 |                |
|30. Disabled People of South Africa                    |Oral            |
|31. Gender Advocacy Programme (GAP)                    |Oral            |
|32. Legal Resource Centre and People Opposing Women    |Oral            |
|Abuse                                                  |                |
|(POWA)                                                 |                |
|33. Mosaic                                             |Oral            |
|34. Ms JG                                              |Oral            |
|35. Gun Free Society                                   |Oral            |
|36. Western Cape Network against violence against women|Written         |
|37. Ms EP                                              |Oral            |
|38. South African Human Rights Commission              |Oral            |
|39. Women’s Legal Centre                               |Oral            |


4. FINDINGS


The committee made the following observations:


4.1   GENERAL

    • In the absence of a costing framework of the DVA, service delivery was
      severely impeded, hence resulting in the poor implementation of the
      Act.
    • Gender-based violence disproportionately affects women and children.
      Notwithstanding this, the committee acknowledges that based on the
      submissions received, persons with disabilities, women and children
      living on farms, in rural areas and impoverished environments were
      considerably less likely to have access to effective help. As a
      result, they may have to endure violent and abusive relationships for
      longer and thus experience more serious long-term, consequences than
      those with better access to help and resources.
    • Patriarchal attitudes and differential power dynamics were at the
      heart of domestic violence.
    • Many victims of domestic violence were unaware that their rights were
      violated and even when they knew, struggled to access the appropriate
      support services.

Lack of co-ordination

    • It was noted in several submissions that there was an over-emphasis on
      criminal justice measures to deal with domestic violence and an under-
      development of violence prevention measures.
    • There was no overarching framework and implementation strategy to deal
      with domestic violence holistically.
    • It was noted that collaboration and communication between the
      different departments involved in providing services to victims of
      domestic violence was severely lacking, which resulted in the absence
      of a holistic vision of service intervention.

Resourcing

    • A number of submissions highlighted the inadequate nature of the
      resources available to combat the scourge of domestic violence.
      Current departmental budgets were not gender responsive, nor did they
      take into consideration the needs of youth and persons with
      disabilities. This brings into question how women, children, youth and
      persons with disabilities were prioritised in departmental spending.

Lack of reliable data

    • It was highlighted that there was a lack of credible administrative
      data and related indicators to effectively monitor and evaluate
      whether government’s existing programmes were addressing the needs of
      victims and perpetrators of domestic violence.
    • In addition to a lack of data, available statistics to effectively
      monitor and evaluate domestic violence trends were not disaggregated
      or reported on timeously.
    • Existing information systems between various departments on domestic
      violence was not compatible.
    • There was no integrated information system to track trends in domestic
      violence and determine whether the targets set for reducing its
      incidence and rendering the required programmes in a holistic manner
      was achieved. It was also not clear what the targets were for reducing
      the incidents of domestic violence in the country.

Faith-based sector

    • The faith-based sector was identified as a key role player in
      providing support and assistance to victims of domestic violence as
      religious leaders were often contacted initially for advice. However,
      presenters at the public hearings were concerned that religious
      leaders did not always provide the help victims sought and, at times,
      subjected the victim to secondary abuse.

4.2   PEACE AND SECURITY CLUSTER

Department of Police

Numerous reports of non-compliance by members of the police with provisions
of the Domestic Violence Act were made by presenters. These included:

Non-compliance
    • It was noted that there appeared to be a disincentive by police
      officers to record incidents of domestic violence, abuse or rape, as
      this would negatively affect their target of reducing contact crimes
      between 7 - 10% annually. Hence, incidents of rape were often reported
      as a common assault or turned away, with the same practice being
      adopted in abuse cases.
    • Firearms were not always confiscated after being used to threaten
      victims and the license of the alleged perpetrator suspended.
    • The safety of persons who had obtained protection orders were being
      compromised by some police officials’ unwillingness to arrest
      perpetrators who violated the protection order.
    • The behaviour of police officials dealing with victims of domestic
      violence were reported as being demeaning and discriminatory. Police
      officials discouraged women from taking action. Police officers also
      often did not inform victims about accessing a protection order or
      laying a criminal charge. Submissions by individuals working on farms
      indicated that particularly in the case of farm workers, police
      responded by saying that they were 'drunk' farm women and did not
      attend to their cases. Numerous incidents were reported citing the
      appalling attitude of police officials who often subject victims to
      secondary abuse.
    • Numerous concerns arose regarding protection orders as it relates to
      ensuring the safety of persons requesting protection orders, the
      reluctance and often refusal of police officers to serve the order, or
      to arrest the perpetrator who has violated the protection order.
    • It was also highlighted that risk assessment needs to be prioritised,
      so as to make victim safety a priority. This becomes especially
      important when victims are told to return the next day, resulting in
      cases where women did not return to file charges.

Lack of resources
    • The lack of resources was noted as an impediment that compromised on
      the ability of the police to act in accordance with the provisions of
      the Act. There have, for example, been instances where the police have
      claimed that they had no vehicles available and situations where the
      areas from which victims call were not in their jurisdiction,
      particularly in rural areas. Hence the service was not rendered.

Servicing of protection orders
    • Protection orders often did not serve the purpose they are intended
      for in that they were not adequately enforced and the victim continued
      to suffer abuse despite the serving of the protection order.
    • The cost implications for serving a protection order were not applied
      uniformly across the country.
    • Some police officers were reluctant to serve protection orders and in
      some instances even refused to do so. The undue delay in serving a
      protection order on an assailant placed the victim in grave danger.


Training
    • There was insufficient training of SAPS officials to deal with victims
      of domestic violence. In addition, once-off training was inadequate to
      ensure officials were equipped to deal with matters related to
      domestic violence.
    • Some training of police officials has taken place. However, given the
      reports of negative attitudes by some police officials, there was a
      need to review existing training modules and monitor and evaluate
      their application. The monitoring and evaluation of whether officials
      require training, at what level, as well as if officials were
      implementing what they know required serious attention.
    • It was also highlighted that there was a need to debrief police
      officials who consistently deal with issues of domestic violence to
      enable them to cope with their exposure to trauma and remain sensitive
      to the issue.
Specialised units
    • Presenters at the public hearings welcomed the re-establishment of
      specialised units such as the Family Violence Child Protection Unit
      and Sexual Offences Units (FCS). More clarity was sought as to when
      and how these units would be introduced, including the provision of
      adequate resources to these structures. The mandate of these units in
      relation to domestic violence had been very limited in the past so it
      was also necessary to clarify their mandate around such cases in
      future.

Victim Empowerment Programme
    • Many police stations lack facilities for private consultation due to
      the absence of trauma rooms or Thuthuzela Centres. As a result, such
      victims often had to provide statements in environments that were not
      conducive to confidentiality or safety.
    • In some instances, lay counsellors assigned to trauma rooms were ill
      equipped to deal with the counselling needs of victims of domestic
      violence. The training of these volunteer counsellors was not
      monitored and/or evaluated. There was also often inadequate
      supervision of volunteers, as well as a high turnover of volunteers at
      police stations and trauma rooms.
    • It also appeared that there was a lack of interdepartmental
      collaboration between all role players responsible for victim
      empowerment.
    • Batho Pele principles were not being applied and the attitude of
      officials often deterred victims from laying a charge or seeking a
      protection order.

Record-keeping
    • Domestic violence should be recognised as a reportable category of
      crime. It was noted that there appeared to be a disincentive by police
      officers to record incidents of domestic violence, abuse and rape as
      this would negatively affect their overall performance rating.
    • In addition, it was also highlighted that domestic violence registers
      were not being maintained in the manner required.

Community Police Forums
    • Community Police Forums did not appear to be dealing with domestic
      violence. These forums were seen as often being politicised and their
      effectiveness varied across the country.


Department of Justice and Constitutional Development

Accessibility
    • For persons with disabilities, access to the criminal justice system
      remains a problem. An example cited was that localised sign language
      was not being used within courts, making communication and
      interpretation difficult.
    • Courts and police officials needed to become more available in terms
      of their operating hours. Court services in particular were not
      available after hours in many areas resulting in limited access, as
      well as loss of wages for farm women, shift workers and casual
      employees who have to take time off work to access court.
    • Victims of domestic violence were subjected to secondary victimisation
      within the judicial process.
    • Many court officials were ill-equipped to deal with matters related to
      domestic violence.
    • Availability of magistrates after hours was problematic.


Secondary victimisation
    • Victims of domestic violence were subject to secondary victimisation
      by court officials and undue delay in court processes.
    • In many instances, victims were not granted a protection order but
      requested to return with sufficient evidence or a notice to show cause
      for a protection order to be granted. This often resulted in women
      having to return home to the perpetrator without any protection.
      Victims, who have already suffered trauma, were therefore additionally
      victimised by the institution whose protection they sought. In
      addition, the court may also allow the alleged perpetrator to provide
      a notice to show cause for why a protection order should not be
      issued.
    • It was noted that there was a lack of privacy in court when dealing
      with domestic violence cases. Although sensitive, these proceedings
      were often open to the public.


Specialisation
    • There was a lack of a child-centred approach in matters related to
      court processes and children as victims of domestic violence e.g.
      postponement of cases and long waiting periods, as well as attitudes
      of court officials which impact negatively on the child.


Co-ordination
    • Domestic violence was often inter-related with divorce and maintenance
      matters. Thus, many cases were a combination of criminal and civil
      matters. However, according to the submissions, many victims of
      domestic violence report having to engage with the judicial system at
      multiple points which was costly, confusing and inefficient.
      Individual cases were not dealt with holistically, which leaves the
      victim to seek services from multiple points, rather than having all
      matters dealt with in one place.

4.3   SOCIAL SERVICES CLUSTER

Department of Social Development
Psycho-social support
    • The current provision of psycho-social services to victims of domestic
      violence by government was inadequate. Most victims received support
      from non-governmental organisations that were battling to survive
      financially and still render a service.
    • Government psycho-social interventions were rendered from a purely bio-
      medical perspective as opposed to a developmental and community-based
      approach that included psycho-social rehabilitation. Where medical
      intervention was provided, it was often provided initially with little
      or no follow-through for the victim after a J88 form had been
      completed.
    • Overall, there was insufficient attention to ensuring the safety of
      children, as well as addressing their specific needs which arose from
      either witnessing domestic violence or being victims of domestic
      violence.
    • It was also highlighted that services were not reaching children.
      Government social workers did not always visit children in their
      homes, and as such, children had to go to their offices which impeded
      access.
    • In many instances, psycho-social services were only offered to the
      domestic violence victim, thus ignoring the possible needs of other
      family members such as children, grandparents etc who had witnessed
      the violence.
    • The extent and range of psycho-social services offered was limited,
      for example, there were few support groups for victims of domestic
      violence.

Shelters
    • It was highlighted that there was a severe shortage of shelters for
      women, particularly in rural areas. It was not evident if any measures
      were in place to address the shortage.
    • In addition, the limited access to emergency shelters for victims of
      domestic violence required urgent attention.
Poor co-ordination
    • There was a lack of synergy between the different programmes within
      the Department of Social Development. As such, a victim of domestic
      violence was often not assessed for social security benefits.
Social security
    • It was noted that in many instances, persons with severe mental
      illness struggle to access disability grants, and that the South
      African Social Security Agency must ensure measures to make these
      services accessible.

Victim Empowerment Programme
    • The Victim Empowerment Programme had failed many victims of domestic
      violence, largely due to the inadequate allocation of resources to
      implement the programme, as well as the Minimum Standards for Service
      Delivery in Victim Empowerment.
    • The lack of guidelines for the Victim Empowerment Programme (VEP)
      severely impedes service delivery.

Lack of human resources
    • The high case load of social workers had a direct bearing on whether a
      victim will indeed access a service. There appeared to be an over-
      reliance on social workers and a lack of a multi-disciplinary team to
      address domestic violence.  Apart from social workers, it was not
      clear what other cadres of professionals, if any, were employed as
      part of a multi-disciplinary team to deal with domestic violence in
      terms of rendering psycho-social interventions.

Department of Health
    • Forensic specialists were a scarce resource, which directly impacts on
      the ability to provide medico-legal services to victims of domestic
      violence.
    • It was highlighted that there appeared to be little or no follow-up of
      victims of domestic violence after they initially visit a health
      facility.
    • Health care professionals had been reported to subject victims of
      domestic violence to secondary victimisation and were often not held
      accountable for this.
    • Many health care professionals did not know about the Domestic
      Violence Act.
    • There was a need for holistic care provisions to victims of domestic
      violence, particularly in relation to psycho-social trauma.


Department of Human Settlements

    • It was noted that the marital status of the domestic violence
      victim/survivor should not hinder access to government services, such
      as housing. It was reported that in many instances, women who had RDP
      houses were not eligible for additional or new houses as records
      indicated that they had already received housing, despite the fact
      that the perpetrator was occupying the house or that they had
      separated or divorced.
    • There was therefore an urgent need to respond to secondary housing for
      victims of domestic violence.
    • In addition to the need for more shelters, there was also no policy
      that made provision for women who exit shelters to access housing.

4.4   GOVERNANCE CLUSTER

Department of Women, Children and Persons with Disabilities
    • At present, there was no overarching National Strategic Policy
      Framework to combat domestic violence, resulting in a lack of synergy
      between departments. The new department which is responsible for the
      needs of socially vulnerable groups is well placed to take leadership
      in the development of a National Strategic Policy Framework.
    • In addition, the department must outline specific programmes to
      address high levels of violence against women, children and persons
      with disabilities, and to ensure that these programmes are adequately
      costed and resourced.
    • The department must work collaboratively with other departments to
      ensure implementation of the Domestic Violence Act. It must also
      ensure the inclusion of organisations addressing domestic violence in
      the planning of the National Strategic Policy Framework.

National Planning Commission & Monitoring and Evaluation

    • As the primary bodies responsible for planning, monitoring and
      evaluation, it was imperative that these two bodies are included in
      the development of a National Strategic Policy Framework for domestic
      violence
    • Monitoring and evaluation was important for oversight in terms of
      implementation of the DVA, as well as holding service providers to
      account for the effective implementation of the DVA.

Commission for Gender Equality

    • The role of the Commission of Gender Equality must be strengthened and
      closely monitored as an organ of the state and a key role player of
      the gender machinery established to address gender discrimination.


5. RECOMMENDATIONS


The committee made the following recommendations:


5.1   Legislative amendments

It was recommended that certain sections of the Domestic Violence Act
should be amended to effect changes that best speak to the needs of victims
of domestic violence.

Amendments to the Domestic Violence Act (DVA)

The discretionary powers of police officials in effecting arrests on
perpetrators of domestic violence is highly problematic and highlights the
gaps that exist in the combating of crimes of domestic violence. In certain
circumstances, police officials were not obligated to arrest suspected
perpetrators of domestic violence where suspicion existed of continued
abuse of a spouse or intimate partner.  It was therefore recommended that
the DVA should be amended in order to remove the discretionary powers of
police officials in matters relating to domestic violence.  In particular,
it was recommended that section 3 of the DVA should be amended by replacing
the phrase “may arrest” with the phrase “must arrest” in order to ensure
that victims of domestic violence were protected against retaliation from
or by the abuser.

One of the critical areas in terms of legislative amendments deals with the
issue of imminent harm as described in section 8(4)(b) of the DVA. The
section speaks to a situation where the police officer, on reasonable
grounds, suspects that the complainant may suffer imminent harm as a result
of an alleged breach of the protection order, that police officer must
arrest the respondent. The notion of imminent harm is not clearly enough
dealt with in the DVA. It therefore raises questions around whether a
police officer should arrest a respondent for having verbally abused his or
her partner.  In this regard, it was recommended that clarity should be
given to what exactly was meant by ‘imminent harm’ by either a legislative
amendment or through the establishment of guidelines through the inclusion
of further regulations.

The criminalisation of domestic violence was a proposal that emerged at the
public hearings and requires vigorous debate to determine the feasibility
of such an amendment to the Act.

The lack of a provision within the DVA in terms of the co-ordination of
services between various role players severely impedes service delivery. As
such an amendment should be considered in this regard.

Domestic Partnerships Legislation

In terms of domestic partnerships, the DVA is under-utilised by women who
cohabit with their partners. It is critical to ensure that legislation is
enacted that recognises domestic partnerships and in so doing, grants them
legitimacy and entitlements. Currently, women who cohabit, on the
dissolution of their relationship, are entitled to nothing but that which
they brought to the relationship.  They have no legal claim to property or
any other assets to whose purchase they have contributed. This group of
abused women thus lose substantially and materially when their
relationships end.

Costing of DVA

It would be imperative that the proposed new provisions of the Act were
costed along with the existing sections to ensure that adequate resources
were allocated for its implementation. Clear time frames need to be
established as to by when the costing will be completed.

General Recommendations
With the exercise of parliamentary authority and oversight over the
executive, the review of the implementation of legislation was
constitutionally mandated.  However, where an Act contains regulations for
the implementation of the legislation, the powers of the legislature were
considerably hampered as those regulatory powers were conferred on the
Minister in whose department that legislation falls. However, it was
critical to note that parliament still conducts oversight over the
performance of the Minister and as such can hold the Minister concerned
accountable. It was therefore necessary that where legislation deals with
domestic violence, that the development of regulations to such legislation
does not fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the executive authority
alone, but was also subject to legislative scrutiny.

Firearm Control

In terms of the Firearms Control Act, No 60 of 2000, it was recommended
that a review of the training received by police officials on the DVA and
Firearms Control Act (FCA) should be conducted. In this regard, it was
further recommended that such a review highlight the need for improved
training with disciplinary consequences for police officers not knowing of,
or complying with, the National Instruction on Domestic Violence.

In terms of the seizure of firearms and other weapons used in the
perpetration of acts of domestic violence, it was essential that police
question witnesses at the scene of a domestic violence incident, search for
a firearm and remove it, regardless of the state of the alleged abuser or
alleged threats with a firearm.

The safety of victims of domestic violence during the period between the
granting of an interim protection order, and the approval of a final
protection order in terms of the firearms control legislation had also been
brought into question. It remained critical that guidelines should be
drafted in order to strengthen the protections afforded to victims of
domestic violence by the interim order. These proposed guidelines should
focus on the protection of the victim and in particular seek to:

    • Introduce more rigorous questions relating to the presence of weapons
      in the communal home, whether these firearms are the property and or
      registered to the victim or the perpetrator.
    • The transferring of the onus for the request to remove firearms from
      the communal home from the applicant to the presiding officer.
    • Providing for clarity, making it clearer that the firearm must be
      removed immediately and not only on the return date when the
      protection order is made final.

The Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)

In terms of oversight over the conduct of the South African Police Service
(SAPS), the Independent Complaints Directorate was tasked with reviewing
allegations of abuse of police power, particularly where it pertains to
situations of domestic violence.  However, it has been reported that the
South African Police Service Act, No. 68 of 1995, did not afford the ICD
sufficient powers to compel the South African Police Service to comply with
recommendations that have been made by the ICD.  This was particularly
problematic as it did not provide victims of domestic violence with
sufficient recourse in instances of police misconduct.  It was recommended
that the South African Police Service Act should be amended in order to
widen the scope of the powers and compel the SAPS to comply with
recommendations made by the watchdog.

Furthermore, the ICD was currently in advanced discussions around assigning
their responsibilities in terms of the DVA to the SAPS Secretariat.  In
this regard, it would be critical for both the portfolio and select
committees to be actively involved in this process in order to ensure that
weakness in the ICD are not duplicated in the SAPS Secretariat.  Moreover,
the committees would need to ascertain what resources the SAPS Secretariat
have available to ensure effective oversight over the DVA.

Development of a Performance Monitoring Framework for Courts

As has already been noted, record-keeping at South African courts remains
poor. This was further complicated insofar as domestic violence was
concerned. Particular problems around the implementation and interpretation
of provisions of the DVA were experienced.  It was therefore necessary that
a performance monitoring framework was implemented to assess the courts’
effective implementation of the Act.  This would enable the authorities to:


    • Assess the quality and completeness of recordkeeping by the courts.
    • The standardisation of processes and procedures across courts
      including courts’ working hours and their interpretation and
      application of the DVA’s provisions.
    • Making it mandatory that all domestic violence applications be dealt
      with in private offices where applicants’ confidentiality may be
      maintained.


The committee should therefore request the Quality Assurance Division of
the Magistrates Commission to outline their current procedures for
monitoring court performance in relation to the DVA. It is critical that
such a report to Parliament contain specifics about the availability of
magistrates after hours to issue interim protection orders where they are
urgently required. However, the executive authority responsible for
monitoring the conduct of magistrates, the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development, should present recommendations to the committee
on how monitoring could be strengthened and its findings made enforceable
by courts.
Service of the Protection Orders

One of the major concerns in terms of the DVA was the servicing of
protection orders on respondents.  The public hearings demonstrated that
that process presented a real obstacle to women’s access to the protections
police officials in the service of protection orders was problematic as
police officials were unwilling to serve these documents in favour of more
pressing police matters.  In that regard, the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development should rework Regulation 15 of the regulations
to the DVA, entitled ‘Service of documents’, in order to ensure that court
officials increase their use of the sheriffs and substantially reduce their
use of police officials to serve orders.  It was further recommended that
the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development present these
proposed amendments to Parliament.

The costs involved in the serving of protection orders, in certain
circumstances, severely hampers the ability of victims of domestic violence
to obtain protection orders. This was more so the case in rural areas where
victims can ill afford the costs involved in the serving of protection
orders on the respondent. The financial threshold for assistance applied in
rural areas with respect to sheriff’s services should therefore be lower
than those applied in urban areas. The present regulatory framework gives
court officials too much discretion in the application of Regulation 15(4)
of the regulations to the DVA.   Regulation 15(4) states that:

“The complainant or respondent who requires a document to be served in
terms of the Act or these regulations, shall be responsible for the costs
of such service provided that the clerk of the court may, after
consideration of such proof as he or she may require, direct that the State
must be responsible for the costs of any service in terms of the Act or
these regulations if he or she is satisfied that the complainant or
respondent as the case may be, or both the complainant and respondent, do
not have the means to pay for such costs at the time when service is
required.”
The regulations must therefore also make explicit reference to the courts’
need to take payment of the sheriff’s fees into account when compiling
their annual budgets.

One particular concern around the issuing and service of protection orders
relates to the accessibility of protection orders to persons with
disabilities, especially persons with visual impairments.  It was
recommended, that in cases where the need arises, protection orders should
be accessible e.g. Braille.

Ensuring the Availability of Shelter and Counselling Services

The availability of shelters and counselling services to victims of
domestic violence was raised as a serious concern by those who made
submissions to the Portfolio and Select Committee on Women, Youth, Children
and People with Disabilities. It was noted that the DVA placed no
corresponding obligations on health or social service providers to make
such services available. This gap weakens referral systems and contributes
to fragmented responses to domestic violence by various service providers.
In terms of section 19(c) of the DVA, the Minister may make regulations on
“any other matter s/he deems necessary or expedient to be prescribed in
order to achieve the objects of this Act.”  It was therefore recommended
that certain regulations governing the availability of shelter and
counselling services might be necessary.

In this regard, the Department of Social Development should be consulted
around the guidelines for shelters and services to victims of domestic
violence. The documents must clearly articulate:

    • How counseling services and shelters will be funded.
    • The training norms and standards, as well as competencies required by
      those working in this field.
    • The management and recruitment of volunteers.
    • The nature of interventions required to address domestic violence.

Moreover, these documents should note and address the relationship between
child abuse and intimate partner violence and describe how both children’s
agencies, as well as those dealing with abused women, could address this
link.
The Department of Health has health care professionals suitably trained to
render counseling services, general emergency and medical care as well as a
range of psycho-social services for victims of domestic violence. The DVA
does not overtly state the need for health care services should be rendered
to victims of domestic violence nor specify the direct role of the
Department of Health hereto. Hence, a legislative amendment to this end was
proposed with specifications followed up in the regulations.

Once finalised, these guidelines (in relation to counseling, shelter
provision, health care) should be submitted to Parliament and gazetted as
regulations in terms of section 19(1)(c). This was a particularly critical
issue and needed to be ensured that it was appropriately resourced.

5.2   OVERSIGHT

General

    • Strategies should be developed to deal with marginalised groups most
      vulnerable to domestic violence that do not benefit from the Act’s
      protection such as children, persons with disabilities, pensioners,
      foreign nationals etc.
    • The National Youth Development Agency, the Commission for Gender
      Equality and the South African Human Rights Commission should report
      annually to Parliament on progress with respect to addressing domestic
      violence as per their given mandates.
    • A mechanism should be devised within Parliament to ensure that the
      implementation of the DVA was overseen by all committees concerned
      namely the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People
      with Disabilities, the Select Committee on Women, Children and People
      with Disabilities, the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, the
      Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, the
      Portfolio Committee on Health, the Portfolio Committee on Social
      Development, the Portfolio Committee on Human Settlement and the
      Select Committee on Social Services.
    • All relevant departments must report to the respective portfolio
      committees on an annual basis in terms of progress with respect to the
      DVA, as per the template in Appendix A. A scorecard related to the
      implementation of the DVA should be devised for monitoring and
      evaluation purposes.
    • The Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People with
      Disabilities must hold the Inter-departmental committee to account and
      include the National Treasury to reinforce the importance of
      adequately funding programmes that address domestic violence.
    • It was imperative that Parliament insists on reports from the
      Department of Police on its compliance with the DVA and the Firearms
      Control Act as it relates to domestic violence.
    • Parliament must request reports on the implementation of measures to
      ensure that all firearms are returned when staff go off duty because
      of the escalating domestic violence incidents resulting in family
      murders committed by officers (e.g. police, South African National
      Defence Force soldiers and private security guards) with access to
      legal firearms.
    • Parliament should oversee that the various government departments
      should raise awareness around the existence of the Act and its
      importance to be disseminated to all sectors of society in order to
      effectively use and implement the DVA.
    • In order for Members of the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth,
      Children and People with Disabilities and the Select Committee on
      Women, Children and People with Disabilities to conduct effective
      oversight with respect to the implementation of the DVA, members
      require training on the implications of the DVA.
    • The lack of an overarching policy framework to address domestic
      violence severely impedes the effectiveness of services rendered to
      victims of domestic violence. As such, establishing a framework for
      the DVA will ensure service norms and standards, training and
      monitoring requirements, reporting channels and the role of
      volunteers. The Ministry for Women, Children and Persons with
      Disabilities will be best suited to lead such a process for developing
      an overarching policy framework.


Policing
    • Norms and standards regarding training for police must be developed as
      a matter of priority. This training framework should be included in
      the South African Police Services National Instructions.
    • The Department of Police must amend its National Instructions to
      provide clear guidelines around when police officers should or should
      not arrest perpetrators of abuse.
    • A five year plan for the effective policing of domestic violence must
      be developed. This plan needs to set clear goals, timelines and
      targets for the effective implementation of the DVA. The role of the
      SAPS Evaluation Service in monitoring whether these targets are being
      met or not should be clearly stated.
    • The referral of victims of domestic violence to health care services
      and counselling by police officers must be closely monitored as the
      public hearings revealed that this was not being implemented.
    • It was imperative that domestic violence registers were maintained and
      monitored at all police stations. To this end, the officials
      responsible for monitoring and maintaining the registers must be held
      to account.
    • A mechanism should be developed to deal with withdrawals, or
      situations where women do not wish to lay charges but nonetheless
      still require help and protection.
    • It was imperative that sufficient resources such as specialised
      personnel, forensic specialists, forensic laboratories etc. should be
      allocated for evidence collection.

JUDICIARY

Develop a costed policy and/or legislation around the Family Courts (and
other specialised courts)
    • The status and future of the Family Courts was unclear. It was
      recommended that a clear policy should be issued in this regard and
      that the blueprint should be elevated to the status of regulations.
      Clear timeframes and goals for the proliferation of family courts
      should be developed.
    • Engagement with the Department of Justice and Constitutional
      Development with respect to strengthening revisions for specialised
      courts.

Develop norms and standards around training for court personnel
    • It is imperative that training standards and norms around the DVA
      should be clearly established by the Department of Justice and
      Constitutional Development. These should include stipulating the basic
      level of knowledge that magistrates, prosecutors and clerks should
      demonstrate before being permitted to deal with domestic violence.
      This training framework should also indicate the basic content of the
      training, as well as the minimum competence required of those who
      provide the training. Training should be ongoing, with follow-up
      courses building on previous training.
    • In the case of the Department of Justice and Constitutional
      Development, this training framework should be included in the revised
      regulations.
    • The department should assess the efficacy of training regularly and
      adapt the training programme where necessary.

Accessibility
    • It was imperative that a detailed plan should be developed that
      outlines how courts would be made accessible over the next five years,
      with specific reference to the needs of children, persons with
      disabilities and victims of domestic violence and sexual offences. In
      addition, the issue of after hour access to courts was another crucial
      issue requiring attention.

Sheriff’s Office
    • A means test must be developed that assesses on an equitable basis the
      cost incurred for having a protection order served by the Sheriff’s
      office.
SOCIAL SERVICES

Victim Empowerment Programme (VEP)
    • The VEP programme required review in terms of provisions and
      resourcing as the public hearings revealed that the programme did not
      serve the needs of victims it is intended for.
    • Neither the Victims’ Charter nor the Minimum Standards define
      secondary victimisation. This was problematic as many victims of
      domestic violence were subjected to secondary victimisation by
      government officials. It was imperative that this was done so that
      government departments had an understanding of secondary victimisation
      and in so doing, were in a position to prevent re-victimisation
      through appropriate institutional responses.
    • Re-assess funding criteria for VEP grants to civil society
      organisations. Grants should be made available to shelters given that
      they provide a critical service to victims of domestic violence.
    • Victim Empowerment Legislation: There was a need to expedite the
      promulgation of appropriate legislation which was developed in close
      consultation with civil society.
    • Greater public awareness was required in terms of the rights of
      victims of domestic violence and the Domestic Violence Act itself. To
      this end, government must allocate sufficient resources to undertake
      such an awareness campaign.
    • Greater synergy was required between the VEP, the Victims’ Charter,
      the Minimum Standards for Service Delivery and the Uniform Protocol on
      Victim Management to ensure services were better co-ordinated. This in
      turn will avoid the duplication of services and the more efficient use
      of resources.
    • The management of lay counsellors at Thuthuzela centres has not been
      working effectively across the country on account of the poor
      supervision, lack of accountability and often ill-equipped
      counsellors. A proposal for the establishment of Victim Advocates
      should be considered, whereby the role is merely to assist the victim
      throughout the administrative process within justice and police sector
      to health and social development. Hence, the counselling of victims
      should be left to appropriately trained professionals that are
      equipped to deal with domestic violence.

HEALTH SERVICES

Psycho-social support
    • A review of existing services and programmes must be done to determine
      where services are absent or need to be up-scaled.
    • An audit of government personnel rendering psycho-social support
      should be undertaken to determine where the skills shortages were and
      a plan should be devised to address the shortfall. Identify a
      recruitment strategy to increase the cadre of skilled personnel e.g.
      bursaries for psychologists, occupational therapists etc.
    • A review of existing programmes was required that was focused on the
      rehabilitation of perpetrators to determine whether these programmes
      were effective and could be demonstrated to bring about change in the
      abusers’ behaviour. Where such programmes could be identified, their
      replication may be considered. To this end, such programmes must be
      equipped with suitably-trained personnel and adequately resourced.
    • It was proposed that Thuthuzela Care Centres and the services offered
      should be made available for victims of domestic violence and not only
      be limited to rape survivors.

Effective information systems
    • An effective systemised screening within and across government
      departments such as Health, Education and Police, for domestic
      violence against children and women was lacking. For example, a victim
      of domestic violence can present numerous times at a health care
      facility but this information maybe absent at the Department of Police
      if a case has not been opened. A framework for screening was required
      and a mechanism for locating pertinent information regarding the
      victim. This could be achieved by establishing databases at hospitals
      and schools in order to identify victims of violence. This could
      monitor trends and incidences of violence as it relates to particular
      demographics. Databases can also be used to identify and refer victims
      to the necessary and appropriate psychosocial services based on their
      specific cases.

Policy and strategy development
    • The Department of Health should develop a comprehensive health sector
      policy to deal with domestic violence. Such a policy must clearly
      outline the roles and responsibilities of health care workers, the
      training required by health workers to implement the policy, a
      monitoring and evaluation strategy as well as a budget to effectively
      implement such a policy. It would be imperative that a policy of this
      nature should be developed in consultation with civil society
      organisations rendering services to victims of domestic violence to
      ensure effective networking and referral between role players
      concerned. It is Parliament’s role to oversee that the policy is
      developed and implemented.
    • It was recommended that the Department of Health should develop a
      strategy to work with the Department of Police in ensuring that
      victims of domestic violence are taken to a medico-legal facility to
      have the incident reported officially. This, in turn, would require
      that health personnel should be adequately trained and competent in
      documenting the nature and extent of the injury and be able to testify
      in a court of law.
    • In the context of the HIV and AIDS pandemic, the Department of Health
      should develop a plan stipulating how the existing public
      communications campaigns will address domestic violence in the current
      messaging. A targeted strategy was required to deal with women in
      abusive relationships who had limited choices in terms of applying the
      Department’s current prevention strategies (abstain, be faithful, use
      a condom).

Human Settlement

    • The Department of Human Settlement was recommended to develop a policy
      that addresses the secondary housing needs of domestic violence
      victims.

6. CONCLUSION

The committees had also agreed to the following:

    • All individual cases from the public hearings must be followed up and
      that government departments would have to account in this regard in an
      official response in writing and through a briefing to the committee.
    • The names of individuals that presented at the public hearings will
      not be published in the committee’s report and that anonymity would be
      adhered to.
    • The report will be used as a tool to monitor government departments
      again in terms of implementation of the DVA. The committees will
      request the relevant government departments responsible for
      implementing the DVA to provide a written report (annually) to the
      committee on progress with regards to programmes implemented and
      services rendered in this regard as well as funding allocated hereto.
    • A copy of the strategic report and the committee’s report will be sent
      to all those participants and respective government departments.
    • Joint oversight with respective portfolio committees to assess the
      implementation of the DVA.
The committees agreed that the report should be published in the ATC and
debated in the National Assembly House in 2010.

Report to be considered.

National Assembly

   1. The Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  of  the  Portfolio
      Committee  on  Correctional  Services  on  the  performance   of   the
      Department of Correctional Services for the  2009/10  financial  year,
      dated 21 October 2010.

   The Portfolio Committee on Correctional  Services,  having  assessed  the
   service delivery performance of the Department of Correctional  Services,
   reports as follows:


1.    INTRODUCTION

1.1   The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act (2009)
      provides for, amongst others, a parliamentary procedure to amend Money
      Bills, thus granting parliamentary committees greater opportunity to
      influence the allocation of funds to the departments they oversee.
      Section 5 compels the National Assembly, through its Committees
      annually to submit Budgetary Review and Recommendation (BRR) reports
      on the financial performance of departments accountable to them. The
      BRR report must be informed by a Committee’s interrogation of, amongst
      others, each national department’s medium-term estimates of national
      expenditure, strategic priorities and measurable objectives, National
      Treasury-published expenditure reports, annual reports and financial
      statements, as well as observations made during oversight visits.
      Essentially the BRR report is a committee’s assessment of a
      departments’ service delivery performance given its available
      resources, as well as the effectiveness and efficiency with which its
      programmes are implemented. Although BRR reports must be published at
      a specific time in the budget cycle, it is clear that the work that
      informs the report must be ongoing.

1.2   According to Section 2 of the Correctional Services’ Act (CSA), the
      Department of Correctional Services (DCS) is mandated to contribute
      towards maintaining and protecting a just, peaceful, and safe society,
      by enforcing court-imposed sentences in the manner prescribed by the
      CSA, detaining inmates in safe custody and promoting social
      responsibility and human development of all offenders and persons
      subject to community corrections.

1.3   The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services is mandated to,
      amongst its other statutory obligations, support the DCS in delivering
      on its mandate through rigorous monitoring of the implementation of,
      and adherence to, policies such as the White Paper on Correctional
      Services (“White Paper”) and legislation such as the CSA, as well as
      the delivery of services to all sentenced and unsentenced offenders
      incarcerated in South Africa’s state-owned and privately operated
      correctional centres.

1.4   At the start of its term in May 2010, the Committee had agreed to six
       focus areas that inform its oversight activities. Most importantly
      the Committee agreed to intensify oversight of the DCS’ administration
      and financial management, as weaknesses in that area impact negatively
      on, amongst others, the implementation of the rehabilitation and
      reintegration objectives contained in the “White Paper”. To this end,
      the Committee receives quarterly financial and administrative reports
      from the DCS which are closely scrutinised, in order to detect
      weaknesses and recommend remedies in a timely manner. The Committee is
      not merely a watchdog over the DCS and its entity, the Judicial
      Inspectorate for Correctional Services (JICS), but a strategic partner
      in ensuring that the vision of a better life for all South Africans,
      shared by Parliament and enshrined in the Constitution, is vigorously
      pursued. The Committee’s oversight must therefore be driven by
      ensuring service delivery to both sentenced offenders and remand
      detainees i.e. humane conditions of incarceration, effective
      rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, and adequate care and
      development. The successful delivery of these programmes will ensure
      that upon release, offending behaviour would have been “corrected”,
      thus ensuring successful reintegration of offenders.

1.5   The JICS receives its budget from the DCS. At the time of the
      compilation of this report, the JICS had however not yet tabled its
      2009/10 Annual Report and therefore their performance in the 2009/10
      financial year will not be detailed here.

1.6   In preparing to report on the DCS’ financial and service delivery
      performance for the 2009/10 financial year and the first two quarters
      of the current financial year the Committee considered, amongst
      others, all its previous reports and recommendations related to the
      DCS’ service delivery and financial performance, the 2009/10 Annual
      Report and Financial Statements, National Treasury-published
      expenditure reports, reports of the Standing Committee on Public
      Accounts (SCOPA) and the Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA), DCS
      briefings to the Committee, as well as stakeholder-input on the DCS’
      performance.

1.7   The Report comprises four parts detailing the Committee’s
      observations and recommendations (Part A); analyses of DCS’ 2009/10
      Annual Report and Financial Statements (Part B); and its prevailing
      strategic objectives, budget allocation and financial performance to
      date (Part C); as well as the Committee’s concluding remarks (Part D).

PART A: OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1.1   OBSERVATIONS
1.1.1 The Auditor-General’s assertion that, had the DCS been audited on its
      pre-determined service delivery objectives, it would have received an
      adverse opinion, is noted with concern. This assertion echoes the
      Committee’s own evaluation of centre-level service-delivery in
      particular.
1.1.2 Unlike previous years, the Auditor-General did not note overcrowding
      in correctional centres as a matter of emphasis. This is welcomed,
      particularly as overcrowding can largely be attributed to the large
      numbers of remand detainees in the DCS’ care. The time a person spends
      incarcerated without having been sentenced is largely dependent on the
      speed with which matters are investigated, and court proceedings
      completed. Prison overcrowding can therefore not be reduced without
      dedicated efforts from both the departments of Justice and
      Constitutional Development, and Police.
1.1.3 Despite the DCS’ persistent qualifications owing to poor performance
      and financial management, and despite SCOPA recommendations, the DCS
      has failed to strengthen its internal audit capacity. This has without
      a doubt contributed to its persistent audit qualification.
1.1.4 Both stakeholders and the Committee have raised concerns about DCS
      senior managers’ capacity to manage. Regions are not adequately held
      to account, and there appears to be no effective system for managing
      their performance. Senior managers appear to be completely unaware of
      what happens at centre-level, as they rely solely on sporadic, and
      often inaccurate reports received from regions.
1.1.5 The Committee realises that the “White Paper”  is  to  be  implemented
      over  a  15-year  period,  and  therefore  does  not  expect   radical
      improvements to occur overnight. However, the fact that there  appears
      to be little or no improvement in the DCS’ performance, and even  more
      disturbingly, little if any commitment  to  such  improvements,  is  a
      matter of grave concern.
   6. The Committee has  reported  its  extreme  concern  that  despite  the
      rehabilitation and social reintegration objectives  contained  in  the
      “White Paper”, and echoed in the DCS’ core mandate, Development,  Care
      and Social Reintegration programmes remain underfunded. The  Committee
      undertook to interact with the DCS to monitor whether there is synergy
      between strategic objectives and budget allocation. The 2010/11 budget
      did not reflect such synergy, and thus it is difficult to believe  the
      DCS’ claim that it is placing rehabilitation  at  the  centre  of  its
      activities.


   7. It is a matter of serious concern that programmes responsible for  the
      welfare and rehabilitation  of  offenders  have  always  received  the
      smallest share of the DCS’ budget. It  remains  to  be  seen  whether,
      without sufficient funds having been allocated  to  these  programmes,
      the DCS will achieve Government’s objective of  reducing  serious  and
      violent crime through rehabilitating inmates and equipping  them  with
      skills to be used after release, thus reducing the recidivist rate and
      contributing to South Africans being and feeling safe.

   8. The high rate of repeat-offending is indicative of the DCS’ limited
      success in the area of social reintegration. If a significant
      improvement is to be made, a radical shift in the budget allocation to
      this programme would have to be effected..

   9. The Inspecting Judge is mandated with, amongst  others,  reporting  on
      the treatment of inmates, conditions  and  any  corrupt  or  dishonest
      practices in correctional  centres  .This  duty  is  to  be  performed
      independently and without fear or favour. While the JICS has played an
      important role in creating awareness around conditions  of  detention,
      especially  through   its   annual   reports,   concerns   about   its
      effectiveness and power to improve  conditions  of  detention  remain.
      This is largely owing to concern about  how  independent  it  can  be,
      given that it is reliant on the department it is meant to monitor, for
      its funding.


  10. Finally, the Committee must emphasise its extreme  concern  about  the
      DCS’ recent leadership instability. In the past five years alone,  the
      DCS has had three accounting and three chief  financial  officers.  At
      least two regional commissioners have been  suspended  for  very  long
      periods, one for more than  a  year.  In  addition,  resignations  and
      suspensions in key management positions are too frequent not to impact
      negatively on the DCS’ stability.

2.2   RECOMMENDATIONS
2.2.1 The National Commissioner must as a matter of urgency put in place
      measures for ensuring compliance with all relevant legislation,
      particularly the CSA, and service delivery in line with its mandate.
      The DCS reported that a turnaround strategy has been developed to
      address these  and other challenges. This strategy must contain clear
      performance indicators, be clear about who is responsible for
      functions, and the sanctions should those functions not be performed.
      The complete turnaround strategy should be tabled before the Committee
      by no later than 28 February 2011.
2.2.2 The DCS, though not solely responsible for the high levels of
      overcrowding in its centres, must spearhead interventions aimed at
      lowering the inmate population, as it is feeling its impact most.
      Heads of correctional centres (HCCs) have the powers to approve parole
      for eligible inmates serving sentences of two years or less. The
      National Commissioner must submit a report detailing the extent to
      which HCCs apply their powers for reducing overcrowding, and the
      numbers of offenders that have been released as a result thereof. This
      report, as well as the proposed policy/action plan for managing the
      remand system, must be tabled before the Committee by 28 February
      2011.
2.2.3 Internal Audit departments play an integral role in ensuring that
      effective internal controls are in place, thus enabling government
      departments to identify areas of weakness before they become areas of
      audit qualification. All the DCS‘ internal audit vacancies must be
      filled as a matter of urgency. The National Commissioner must, by 24
      November 2010, provide the Committee with a progress report in this
      regard.
2.2.4 Asset management remains a major challenge and a source of
      qualification for the DCS. The DCS must theredfore develop and
      implement a strategy that will address verification, recording and
      documentation of tangible assets. While the Committee welcomes the
      appointment of interns as an immediate intervention, their appointment
      will be temporary. The interns must be appointed by 31 January 2011,
      and the Chief Financial Officer must, by 15 March 2011, provide a
      report on this intervention’s sustainability beyond the expiration of
      the intern-contracts.

2.2.5 The DCS’ attempts at realising the rehabilitation and reintegration
      objectives contained in the White Paper are undermined by its
      continued administrative challenges. Leadership instability, lack of
      discipline and corruption seriously impede delivery and must be
      addressed as a matter of urgency. Long suspensions are of particular
      concern, and will therefore be monitored closely. The National
      Commissioner must ensure that investigations into allegations against
      all officials, including senior managers, are addressed within the
      required timeframes, and recent years’ extraordinarily high staff
      turnover at senior management level must be prevented going forward.

2.2.6 As recommended in previous reports on the DCS’ budget allocation, the
      budget must be aligned with its rehabilitation and reintegration
      objectives. The DCS must reconsider and increase its targets for
      developmental interventions and make the requisite allocations to its
      Care and Development, Social Reintegration and Corrections programmes.
      These programmes are integral to the reduction of recidivism, which is
      the only measure for determining the DCS’ success in “correcting”
      offending behaviour and rehabilitating offenders.

   7. As the JICS plays a major  role  in  ensuring  humane  detention,  all
      measures aimed at strengthening it, including  a  legislative  review,
      should be investigated. The National Commissioner must, by 28 February
      2010, provide a progress report on the DCS’  exploration  of  ways  in
      which the JICS’ can be allocated its own budget  and  be  sufficiently
      resourced to perform the functions it is mandated to perform.

PART B:     THE DCS’ 2009/10 ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
3.1   While the DCS’ 2009/10 Annual Report reflects an  attempt  to  improve
      on previous reports,  more should be done to guarantee a more  reader-
      friendly  and  accessible  document  that  clearly  outlines   whether
      strategic objectives for the year under review have been met, and,  if
      not, the reasons for  that.  In  some  instances  information  is  not
      presented in the same format as the target, making  it  difficult  for
      the  reader  to  determine  whether  the  target  has  been  achieved.
      Furthermore some indicators could not be linked to targets,  and  more
      disturbingly some information was, upon closer interrogation, found to
      be inaccurate.
3.2   Austerity measures and capacity constraints have led to  most  of  the
      targets not being met. The 2009/10  financial  statements  reflect  an
      under-expenditure of 1.1%. Underspending  occurred  in  the  security,
      care, development and facilities programmes and  can  be  related  to,
      amongst others, lower than anticipated expenditure on medical benefits
      for staff with the conversion to  GEMS,  savings  owing  to  the  non-
      appointment of officials to the  New  Kimberley  Correctional  Centre,
      vacancies  resulting  from  natural  attrition,  lower  than  expected
      expenditure arising from late billing  by  the  Department  of  Public
      Works (DPW) as well as the non-finalisation of the new Public  Private
      Partnership (PPP) correctional centre bid process.

3.3   Performance across programmes
3.3.1 Administration:  Compliance with regard to financial and supply  chain
      management remains a major challenge, with the DCS not meeting any  of
      the targets it has set for itself. Though it  managed  to  maintain  a
      less  than  50%   vacancy  rate  in  relation  to  scarce  skills  and
      professionals, it  failed  to  meet  any  of  the  other  targets  for
      compliance with Human Resource  policies,  procedures,  standards  and
      applicable legislation.
3.3.2.      Security:  In an effort to improve security,  the  DCS  intended
      to roll out eight additional sites with security  access  control  and
      fences. This could however not be realised owing  to  there  being  no
      budget for this activity. This is surprising given that  the  security
      programme received a  budget  allocation  of  R4.4  billion.  The  DCS
      reported 2 240 assaults, a figure far below the 83 per 10 000  inmates
      targeted.
3.3.3 Corrections:     The DCS failed  to  comply  with  policy,  procedure,
      standards and legislation applicable to  this  programme.  It  further
      failed to implement unit management, structured day programmes and the
      three-meal system. The installation of video arraignment equipment and
      the development of remand detention tools and protocols were also  not
      achieved.  At  the  end  of  March  2009,  165  230   offenders   were
      incarcerated in correctional centres across the country i.e. the  140%
      overcrowding target, maintained across centres, could not be met.
3.3.4 Care: The 2009/10 strategic plan did not reflect clear and  measurable
      targets for the attendance  of  care  programmes.  The  Annual  Report
      however claims that 171 746 social work sessions were conducted,  thus
      exceeding  the  targeted  105  sessions.  In  terms  of  psychological
      services, 9 494 offenders participated, against  a  target  of  8  400
      offenders. This was  attributed  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of
      psychologists in the period under review.
3.3.5  Development:      Only  15  130  offenders  participated  in   formal
      education programmes i.e. the target was not  met.  This  failure  was
      ascribed  to  the  DCS  not  meeting  the  Department  of  Education’s
      requirements for fulltime schools, thus resulting  in  a  decrease  in
      enrolments. Although  the  report  is  unclear  as  to  whether  self-
      sufficiency targets have been  met,  it  does  reflect  that  the  DCS
      produced 1 160 748 kg of chickens, 1 543 542 dozen  eggs,  6  133  467
      litres of milk and 581 477 kg of red meat. It further produced 56  632
      wood, 71 752 steel and 1 350 285 textile products.
3.3.6  Social  Reintegration:  Owing  to  austerity  measures  and  capacity
      constraints, most  of  the  targets  related  to  the  supervision  of
      probationers and parolees, and compliance with policy  and  procedures
      programmes could not be met. Although the  DCS  continued  with  their
      monitoring  of  parolees  and  probationers,  the  number  of   parole
      violations increased.
3.3.7 Facilities: All regions implemented existing policies,  including  the
      Minimum Facilities Standards. Renovations and  upgrading  of  existing
      facilities  continued  in  the  2009/10  financial  year:  Ceres  (262
      additional beds); Brandvlei (346 additional beds)  and  Van  Rhynsdorp
      (338 additional beds). As in earlier years, provision was made for  12
      000 bed spaces via public-private partnership projects  at  Allandale,
      East London, Klerksdorp and Nigel. Provision  was  also  made  for  53
      Parole Board offices of which 81.1% were completed. 11.3%  are in  the
      process of being built, while 7.5% are at the tender stage.

3.4   Budget Overview
3.4.1 The DCS was allocated an adjusted budget of R 13 834  545  billion  in
      the 2009/10 financial year and succeeded in spending up  to  98.9%  of
      that budget. The 13.6% average annual growth as projected in the  2009
      Estimates of National Expenditure was as a  result  of  the  following
      additional allocations over the medium term: R300 million per year for
      the implementation 7DE: R419.5 million,  R409.7  million,  and  R415.4
      million  for  inflation-related   adjustments   in   compensation   of
      employees; and a R1.2 billion adjustment to the 2011/12 baseline as  a
      capital contribution to the public- private partnership facilities.
3.4.2 R900  million  was  added  to  the  2009/10  financial  year’s  budget
      allocation: R308 million was added for Administration, R248 million or
      Security, R50 million for Corrections, R174  million  for  Care,  R1.7
      million for Development, R13.2 million for  Social  Reintegration  and
      R103 million for Facilities. Savings of up to R187 million  have  been
      made in goods and services,  and  transfers  to  public  entities.  In
      addition the implementation of the 7DE will result in savings of up to
      R720 million per year on overtime.
3.4.3 There has been movement of funds  between  different  programmes.  The
      Administration, Corrections,  Development  and  Facilities  programmes
      showed net increases of R40,77 million, R10 million, R18.1 million and
      R21,6 million  respectively.  While  the  Security,  Care  and  Social
      Reintegration programmes showed net decreases  of  R60,  140  million,
      R25.4 million and R4.9 million respectively.
3.4.4 In the year under review  the  DCS  incurred  fruitless  and  wasteful
      expenditure to the value of approximately R87 000. This was due to the
      hiring of a charted aircraft at  R25  000,  a  trip  from  Makhado  to
      Randburg at R1 000, and R61 000  paid  for  an  EAP  conference  which
      delegates failed to  attend.  All  three  of  these  cases  are  being
      investigated. The DCS has also incurred material losses to  the  value
      of R9 million.
3.4.5 The Accounting Officer condoned irregular expenditure to the value  of
      R788 000, while and additional R377 000 in  irregular  expenditure  is
      still being investigated. Two officials  are  said  to  have  received
      written reprimands for approving price quotations to the value of R536
      000 when they ought to have invited bids.

3.5   Audit outcome

3.5.1 The DCS was unable to provide supporting documents for adjustments  to
      the value of R129 million in the opening balance,  and  therefore  the
      occurrence, accuracy and completeness of these adjustments  could  not
      be verified. The DCS’ records also did not allow  for  an  alternative
      means of verification.
3.5.2 The Auditor-General could not confirm the  existence  i.e.  physically
      identify major movable tangible assets to the value  of  approximately
      R63 million, nor could the  completeness  of  major  movable  tangible
      capital assets disclosed in the financial statement be verified.

3.5.3 Departments are required to value assets at cost, fair  value  or  R1.
      The DCS’ major movable tangible assets as disclosed in  the  financial
      statement did however not always reflect the cost or fair value of the
      assets and as a result, assets were over-valued by  approximately  R57
      million. This is the consequence of inadequate control  measures  over
      information captured in the assets register.

3.5.4 The Auditor-General reported that the unauthorised expenditure to  the
      value of R483 million that the DCS incurred in the  2008/09  financial
      year was, at the time of the  latest  audit  report,   still  awaiting
      Parliament’s authorization.

3.5.5 Owing to a significant loss in state vehicles (R5 million),  claims  (
      R3 million ) and other sources (R1million) the DCS  incurred  material
      losses to the value of R9 million.

3.5.6 The DCS failed to comply with Treasury Regulations 8.2.3  and  section
      38 (1)(f) of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) as  it  did  not
      always settle debt to creditors within  30  days  of  the  receipt  of
      invoices

3.5.7 The Auditor-General also detailed a number of weaknesses in  the  DCS’
      leadership, governance, and financial and performance management  that
      had contributed to the qualified audit opinion. These included a  lack
      of  an  effective  organisational  structure,  placing   people   with
      appropriate accounting skills  in  assets  management,  especially  at
      regional level; insufficient action taken to address risks relating to
      the achievement of complete and  accurate  financial  and  performance
      reporting; human resource policies that did  not  facilitate  adequate
      training and discipline of personnel as far as  assets  management  is
      concerned; and internal controls that were not carefully selected  and
      adequately developed to prevent material  misstatements  in  financial
      reporting and reporting on predetermined objectives.

3.5.8 The Auditor-General further noted that had the  DCS  been  audited  on
      its service delivery objectives, it would  have  received  an  adverse
      audit opinion.


PART C:     THE DCS’ PREVAILING STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES, 2010/11 BUDGET
           ALLOCATION AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE AS AT SEPTEMBER 2010

4.1   Overview of the DCS’ key strategic areas

4.1.1 According to its strategic  plan  the  DCS  is  committed  to  putting
      rehabilitation at the centre of all its activities through:
      - the integrated  application  and  direction  of  resources  to  the
        correction of offending behaviour,  and  the  promotion  of  social
        responsibility;
      - the provision of cost-effective correctional facilities  that  will
        promote  efficient  security,  corrections,  care  and  development
        services; and
      - progressive and ethical management and staff practices within which
        every correctional official performs an  effective  correcting  and
        supportive role.

4.1.2 The DCS has committed itself to the  pursuit  of  the  following  five
priorities over the medium term:
      - an intensified fight against crime and corruption through  improved
        security, hopefully resulting in a decrease  in  escapes,  assaults
        and unnatural deaths;
      - entrenching  corrections  as  a  societal  responsibility  through,
        amongst others, facilitating structured stakeholder  participation,
        the establishment of community safety  fora,  contributing  to  the
        development of the national policy framework for community  safety,
        and the promotion of the care and development of offenders in order
        to facilitate reintegration and decrease recidivism;
      - improving service delivery at correctional centre level through the
        development of correctional sentence plans and the establishment of
        remand detention facilities;
      - building  internal  capacity  for  improved  centre  level  service
        delivery; and
      - aligning the Correctional Services legislation with the 2005  White
        Paper on Corrections


4.2   Overview of the DCS’ 2010/11 budget allocation

4.2.1 The DCS received R15 129,1 billion in the 2010/11 financial year  i.e.
      3,8 % of the total national budget and 14 % of the allocation  to  the
      Justice, Crime Prevention and Security (JCPS) cluster, which  received
      23,6% (R108 781 billion) of the national budget. The DCS’ budget  thus
      reflects a R1,3 billion nominal increase which translates  to  a  real
      increase of only R344,5 million.

4.2.2 The DCS’ allocation is expected to reach R18,3 billion in the  2012/13
      financial year i.e. an annual increase of 9,7 % owing  largely  to  an
      additional  allocation  over  the  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework
      (MTEF) period for the Occupational  Specific  Dispensation  (OSD)  for
      correctional officials (R300 million per year) and the  adjustment  to
      compensation of employees (R583,1 million in 2010/11;  R619,4  million
      in  2011/12  and  R652,8  million  in  2012/13).  The  allocation   of
      additional funds for  the  construction  of  four  new  public-private
      partnership (PPP)  correctional  facilities  in  Paarl,  East  London,
      Klerksdorp and Nigel, at a combined cost of  R1,4  billion,  has  also
      contributed to the increased allocation.

4.2.3  As  was  the  case  in  2009/10,  the  Administration  and   Security
      programmes received the largest allocation of the budget –  26,3%  and
      34% respectively. 70% (R10 483 billion) of the total budget allocation
      will go towards the compensation of employees which, until 2012/13  is
      expected to grow at an average annual rate of 7.6%.
4.2.4 Together receiving only 7,3% of the total budget, the Development  and
      Social Reintegration programmes received  the  lowest  allocation.  In
      addition, the Care programme showed a 5% decrease  (R80,1  million  in
      real terms).

4.3   Overview of the DCS’ allocation and measurable objectives  across  its
seven programmes
4.3.1 The Administration programme provides the administrative,  management,
      financial, information communication and technology, research,  policy
      co-ordination and good  governance  support  functions  necessary  for
      service delivery, good  governance  and  accountability  to  oversight
      institutions. As in 2009/10 the  programme  has  received  the  second
      largest allocation. The 14, 66% increase  in  the  allocation  in  the
      current financial year and the  increases  in  recent  years  are  due
      mainly  to  the  DCS’  use  of  consultants  for  the   provision   of
      computerised systems,  maintenance  of  information  systems  and  for
      payment of legal, as well as internal and external audit services.  As
      stated above, in the medium-term growth in expenditure will be  mainly
      for  the  implementation  of   the   OSD,   inflation-related   salary
      adjustments and allocations for the Master Information System.
      Measurable objectives: provision of effective and efficient financial
                            and supply chain management;
                            improving human resource capacity and
                            management; and
                            ensuring effective planning, resourcing,
                            delivery, project management, monitoring,
                            evaluation and reporting for improved service
                            delivery.
4.3.2 The Security programme aims to provide safe and healthy conditions  of
      incarceration that are consistent with human dignity for all  inmates,
      thereby ensuring security  for  both  personnel  and  the  public.  It
      remains the programme receiving the highest allocation  -  in  2010/11
      34% of the total budget. It reflects a nominal increase of 3.66 % i.e.
      just over R5,1 billion, in real terms translating to a R141, 3 million
      (2,85%) decrease compared to 2009/10  allocation.  The  activities  of
      this programme are labour intensive and employee compensation accounts
      for 98%of the programme’s budget.
      Measurable  objectives:  preventing  inmates  from  participating   in
                            criminal activities and escaping, by  providing
                            an environment that ensures the safety  of  all
                            persons entrusted to  the  DCS’  care,  thereby
                            ensuring public safety.


   3. The Corrections programme provides needs-based  correctional  sentence
      plans and interventions based on an assessment of an inmate’s security
      and  criminal  profile.  It  targets  all  elements  associated   with
      offending behaviour, and focuses on the offence for which a person  is
      sentenced to correctional  supervision,  remanded  in  a  correctional
      centre, or paroled. The programme receives only  10,5%  of  the  total
      budget, reflecting a 27,38% increase and a real increase of only  R240
      million. 99,3% of the allocation to this  programme  will  go  towards
      employee compensation. Increases in expenditure are  ascribed  to  the
      implementation of the OSD and Seven-Day Establishment (7DE) as well as
      inflation-related salary adjustments.

      Measurable objectives: to address the specific rehabilitation needs of
                            persons  paroled,  sentenced  to   correctional
                            supervision or incarcerated in  a  correctional
                            centre,  through  regular  assessment  and  the
                            provision    of    needs-based     correctional
                            programmes  to   address   all   the   elements
                            associated with offending behaviour.


4.3.4 The Care programme provides for needs-based  programmes  and  services
      aimed at maintaining the personal wellbeing of incarcerated  offenders
      by facilitating physical fitness; social functioning; health care  and
      spiritual, moral and psychological wellbeing. The allocation  to  this
      programme shows a 5,06% decrease, in 2010/11 receiving  only  R1,  504
      billion, 47% of which  will  go  towards  employee  compensation.  The
      increase in expenditure on this programme over the MTEF is mainly  due
      to additional remuneration for health care workers in  line  with  the
      OSD and inflation- related salary adjustments.
      Measurable  objectives:  to  ensure   the   personal   well-being   of
                            incarcerated persons by providing various needs-
                            based services


   4. The Development programme  focuses  on  the  personal  development  of
      offenders through the provision of programmes and  services  aimed  at
      both skills and  social  development;  including  technical  training,
      recreation, sports, education and the operation of  prison  farms  and
      production workshops. The programme receives only 3,5%  of  the  total
      budget  i.e.  R526  million,  78%  of  which  goes  towards   employee
      compensation, and growth  in  expenditure  over  the  MTEF  period  is
      largely due to the implementation of the 7DE and the OSD.

      Measurable objective:  to provide needs-based educational, skills  and
                            other development-related  programmes,  thereby
                            facilitating  the  reintegration  of  offenders
                            into communities.


4.3.6 The  Social  Reintegration  programme  provides  services  focused  on
      offenders’ preparation for release, their effective supervision  after
      being  paroled,  and  on  facilitating  their  social   reintegration.
      Although the programme reflects a 21,7%  increase,  it  receives  only
      3,8% of the total budget i.e. R574,7 million. 96.6% of that allocation
      goes towards employee compensation.
      Measurable objective:  to provide needs-based programmes and  services
                            to  offenders  to   facilitate   their   social
                            acceptance  and  effective   reintegration   of
                            offenders into their communities.

4.3.7  The  Facilities  programme  provides  physical  infrastructure   that
      supports safe and secure custody; humane  conditions;  and  corrective
      services, care, development and general administration. This programme
      has  been  allocated  R1,813  billion,  reflecting  a  9,33%  increase
      accounting for 12 % of the total budget. The allocation of  additional
      funds for the construction of four new (PPP)  correctional  facilities
      in Paarl, East London, Klerksdorp and Nigel at a combined cost of R1.4
      billion has also contributed to the increased allocation.
      Measurable objective:  Provide facilities to support the department in
                            its core  function  of  security,  corrections,
                            development, care and social reintegration.

   3. The DCS has identified  the  following  11  specific  strategies  for
      realising its five medium priorities:

4.4.1 Implementation of 7-Day Establishment: The DCS  intends  to  implement
      the new shift system in  2010/11,  but  full  implementation  is  only
      expected to be reached in 2013/14.
4.4.2 Remand Detention Management:      The 2010/11 target is to  develop  a
      white paper on remand detention and to establish  a  remand  detention
      management branch. This  priority  will  be  pursued  further  in  the
      2011/2012 financial year.

4.4.3 Offender Population  Management:    In  its  efforts  to  improve  the
      management of the offender population, and the effective management of
      the remand detention population, the DCS will in  2010/11  keep  to  a
      level of no more than 38% overcrowding, reducing it by 2% in  each  of
      the following years until overcrowding is eradicated altogether.

4.4.4 Utilisation of offender  labour:    In  2010/11  the  DCS  intends  to
      effect a 25%  improvement  on  the  2005  agriculture  and  production
      workshop baseline for offender skills utilisation and employability in
      agriculture and production workshops. This would be  achieved  through
      increased participation in skills development programmes.

4.4.5 Enhanced Parole System:     The DCS has since 2009/10 been engaged  in
      a review of the parole system, and for the 2010/11 year envisaged  the
      development of revised medical  parole  policy  and  legislation,  the
      finalisation of the incarceration framework and the development  of  a
      work study report on revised  norms  and  caseloads  for  correctional
      supervision and parole boards.

4.4.6 Service Provision for Youth and Child Offenders:   In its efforts to
      enhance the level of education among offenders, particularly youth and
      children, the DCS will in 2010/11 report on offender enrolment and
      participation in formal education, skills development, sports,
      recreation, art and culture and participation in production workshops
      and agricultural programmes.
4.4.7 Improvement of Governance:  The DCS will implement a mechanism for
      the effective prevention, detection and response to fraud and
      corruption in the Department, by, in 2010/11, developing, approving
      and implementing a litigation turnaround strategy. Progress will be
      reported on a quarterly basis. Furthermore, the effectiveness of the
      DCS’ anti--corruption and fraud prevention programme elements will be
      assessed.

4.4.8 Stakeholder Relations Management: The DCS must develop and execute an
      integrated stakeholder relations management strategy for Correctional
      Services. To this end the DCS will in 2010 /11 aim to improve
      relations with existing and new stakeholders through the effective
      execution of a five-year integrated and overarching stakeholder
      relations management strategy that includes development and use of
      quantitative and qualitative measuring tools.

4.4.9 Delivery on Targets on Performance Indicators:     The DCS must
      improve its monitoring of service delivery against performance
      indicators and service delivery targets in its operations strategy,
      and will from 2010/11 produce annual performance reports.

4.4.10      Legislative Framework:      The DCS will develop a policy and
      legislative framework on remand detention. Its target for 2010/11 is a
      “widely consulted White Paper”.

4.4.11      Offender Rehabilitation Path Implementation: This strategy is
      aimed at enhanced offender participation in skills development
      programmes, resulting in increased employability. The target for
      2010/11 is increased participation in sports, recreation, and art and
      culture programmes, with special emphasis on the participation of
      youth and child offenders.



4.5.  Summary of areas where, following its in-year review, the DCS’
      targets for 2010/11 have been shifted.

4.5.1 According to its 2009/10 strategic plan the  DCS  intended  to  reduce
      its vacancy rate to 7% in the 2010/11 financial year. That target was,
      however, reduced to 3%. The 2009/10 plan sets the turnaround time  for
      the filling of vacancies for the 2010/11 year  at  90  days,  but  the
      2010/11 strategic plan has set  the  target  at  60  days.  While  the
      2009/10  plan  sets  targets  for  reducing  the  vacancy   rate   for
      professionals, that target is not contained in the  2010/11  strategic
      plan at all.

4.5.2 In 2009/10 the DCS set a less than 3.9  escapes  per  10  000  inmates
      target, but in the 2010/11 that target has been reduced to  4  escapes
      per 10 000 inmates. Similarly the 2009/10 strategic  plan  targeted  a
      10% reduction in security incidents over the festive season, while the
      latest review sets the target at 5% for the same period.

4.5.3  In  2009/10  the  DCS  committed  itself  to  compiling  Correctional
      Sentence Plans (CSPs) for 12  100  newly  admitted  offenders  serving
      sentences of 24 months  and  more;  yet  the  current  strategic  plan
      increased that target  to  all  (100%)  of  newly  admitted  offenders
      serving sentence of longer than 24 months having CSPs prepared.

4.5.4 The 2009/10 strategic plan set the  target  for  the  installation  of
      video arraignment facilities at 12 correctional centres,  whereas  the
      current strategy sets the target at roll-out to 14 facilities.

4.5.5 The 2009/10 strategic plan did not have measurable targets for  social
      work, psychological service, spiritual care, heath care  and  HIV  and
      AIDS programmes; whereas the 2010/11 plan has set clear and measurable
      targets for provision of these services.

4.6   Financial Performance in the first two quarters of 2010/11
4.6.1 Of the R15.1 billion budget allocated to it, the  Department  had,  by
      the end of September, spent R6.5 billion (43%). This is 6% lower  than
      the 49% approved projection. The DCS has underspent  on  all  but  the
      care programme. Explanations for the under-expenditure  include  lower
      than anticipated expenditure on compensation for employees,  owing  to
      migration to centres; advertised posts not being filled; delays in the
      re-allocation of posts from the security programme; and delays in  the
      finalisation of salary negotiations. Clearing backlogs on purchases of
      items such as food,  medicines  and  hygiene  materials  for  inmates,
      resulted in the slightly higher than projected expenditure in the Care
      programme.
4.6.2 Section 43 of the Public Finance Management Act (No 1 of  1999)  makes
      provision for virements and shifting of funds from  one  programme  to
      another, and the movement of funds within  programmes,  provided  that
      the accounting officer meets the requirements outlined in  subsections
      (2) and  (4).  While  the  DCS  has  not  indicated  or  reported  any
      virements, additional funds have been spent on the Administration  and
      Reintegration sub-programmes despite  such  funding  not  having  been
      budgeted for.

PART D:     CONCLUSION
      The Portfolio Committee on Correctional  Services,  having  considered
      the DCS’ performance in the 2009/10 financial year, and the first  two
      quarters of the current financial year, remains dissatisfied with  the
      latter’s financial management and service  delivery  performance.  The
      recommendations made in  this  report  are  aimed  at,  in  the  main,
      addressing the DCS’ perennial audit qualification owing to poor  asset
      control, while echoing earlier recommendations for  the  alignment  of
      the DCS’ budget with its rehabilitation mandate. The Committee  trusts
      that  under  the  leadership  of  the  recently   appointed   National
      Commissioner and Chief  Financial  Officer  positive  change  will  be
      effected.
Report to be considered

2.  The  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  of  the   Portfolio
   Committee on Mining on the  performance  of  the  Department  of  Mineral
   Resources for the 2009/10 financial year, dated 21 October 2010.

   The Portfolio Committee on Mining, having assessed the performance of the
   Department of Mineral Resources, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

During May 2009, the President of the Republic  of  South  Africa  announced
the  restructuring  of  Cabinet  and  national  departments  to  align   the
structure  and  electoral   mandate   of   government   with   developmental
challenges. As a result, the Department of Minerals  and  Energy  (DME)  was
divided into two Departments, that of Mineral Resources and that of  Energy.
A government-wide task team  was  established  under  the  auspices  of  the
Department of Public  Service  and  Administration  (DPSA)  to  oversee  the
transition. The establishment of the Department of Mineral  Resources  as  a
stand alone Department was finalised at the end of the  2009/2010  financial
year.  This  report  therefore  seeks  to  analyse,  amongst   others,   the
performance and expenditure of the Mineral Resources part of the former  DME
during the 2009/2010 financial year.

1. The Committee

1.1.1 The role of the Committee

In terms of the Constitution of the  Republic  of  South  Africa,  Portfolio
Committees  have  a  mandate  to  legislate,  conduct  oversight  over   the
Executive and facilitate public participation.
The Portfolio Committee on Mining’s  mandate  is  governed  by  Parliament’s
mission and vision, the rules of Parliament and  Constitutional  obligation.
The mission of the Portfolio Committee on Mining is  to  contribute  to  the
realisation of a developmental state and ensure effective  Service  Delivery
through  discharging  its  responsibility  as  a  Portfolio   Committee   of
Parliament. Its vision includes enhancing and  developing  the  capacity  of
Committee Members in the exercise of effective oversight over the  Executive
Authority. One of the Committees core objectives is to  oversee,  scrutinise
and influence the action of the Executive and  its  agencies.  This  implies
holding the Executive and related entities accountable through oversight  of
objectives of  its  programmes,  scrutinising  its  budget  and  expenditure
(annually), and recommending through Parliament actions it  should  take  in
order to attain its strategic goals and contribute to service delivery.

Furthermore, Section 5 of the Money Bills Amendment Procedures  and  Related
Matters Act, No 9 of 2009 (the Act) provides  that  the  National  Assembly,
through its  committees,  must  annually  assess  the  performance  of  each
national department and these  Committees  must  annually  submit  Budgetary
Review and Recommendations reports for tabling  in  the  National  Assembly.
These should be submitted to  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  relevant
Ministers.

   2. Process/method followed by the Committee in writing the BRR Report

For  the  period  under  review,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Mining,  in
exercising its  oversight  role,  had  interacted  with  the  Department  of
Mineral Resources and analysed its 2009/10 to 2011/12  strategic  plan,  the
2009/10 annual report, the 2009/10 Estimates  of  the  National  Expenditure
and used the Constitution as its basis.
   1. The Department

The  Department  of  Mineral  Resources  (DMR)  is  the  primary  Government
institution that is responsible for formulating and implementing  policy  on
mining. It reports to and advises the Minister of Mineral Resources who,  in
conjunction with the Cabinet,  takes  final  responsibility  for  Government
policy. The DMR is headed by the Director-General responsible  for  ensuring
the exploration, development,  processing,  utilisation  and  management  of
South Africa’s mineral resources.

The mandate of the stand alone Department of Mineral Resources is to  ensure
transformation, economic growth, health, safety and  sustainability  of  the
minerals and mining sector. Its vision  is  to  promote  investment  in  the
mineral  sector  and  through  regulation  ensure  a  healthier,  safer  and
equitably transformed mineral sector by 2014, and also be a  leader  in  the
transformation of South  Africa  through  economic  growth  and  sustainable
development by 2025. Its  mission  includes  promoting  and  regulating  the
Minerals and mining  sector  for  transformation,  growth,  development  and
ensures  that  all  South  Africans  derive  sustainable  benefit  from  the
country’s mineral wealth.

The mandate of the former Department of Minerals and Energy was  to  provide
services for effectual transformation and governance of minerals and  energy
industries for  economic  growth  and  development,  thereby  improving  the
quality of life. The vision of the Department was to become the  world-class
minerals and  energy  sectors  through  sustainable  development,  with  its
mission being to regulate and promote the minerals and  energy  sectors  for
the benefit of all.

2.    Department’s Strategic Priorities and Programmes

2.1   Strategic Priorities of the Department

The strategic objectives of the Department of Minerals and Energy (DME)  for
the period under review comprised the following:

 • Promoting and regulating the minerals and energy sector, through ensuring
   optimal service  to  all  stakeholders  by  improving  turnaround  times,
   providing  clear  regulatory  and  policy  frameworks  and  credible  and
   accessible  information,  building  alliances   and   partnerships,   and
   improving the awareness and reputation of the DME.

 • Ensuring effective  service  delivery  through  efficient  organisational
   processes-through implementing  legislation,  consistent  monitoring  and
   enforcement guidelines, standardised  policies  and  procedures,  service
   standards and managed service level agreements, as well as  understanding
   and managing customer expectations and providing regular consultation and
   feedback.

 •  Promoting  and  maintaining  a  learning   organisation-by   attracting,
   developing and retaining  skills,  improving  leadership  and  management
   capabilities,  instilling  core   institutional   values   and   managing
   institutional knowledge.

 • Ensuring efficient, effective and economic use of financial  resources-by
   aligning strategy with budget, managing budgets  and  costs,  effectively
   providing  State-owned  entity  oversight  and  ensuring  good  corporate
   governance.

2.2   Programmes of the Department

The  activities  of  the  Department  were  organized   in   the   following
programmes:
Programme 1: Administration

The purpose of the Administration programme was to enable the Department  to
deliver on its mandate by providing strategic management and  administrative
support to the Department of Minerals and Energy and its Ministry.

Programme 2: Promotion of Mine Health and Safety

The purpose of the Promotion of Mine Health  and  Safety  programme  was  to
execute the Department’s statutory  mandate  to  safeguard  the  health  and
safety of the mine employees and people affected by mining activities.

The measurable objective of  the  programme  was  to  reduce  mining-related
deaths, injuries and ill-health through the formulation of  national  policy
and legislation, the provision of advice and  application  of  systems  that
monitor, audit and enforce compliance in the mining sector.

Programme 3: Mineral Regulation

The purpose  of  the  Mineral  Regulation  programme  was  to  regulate  the
minerals and  mining  sectors  to  achieve  transformation  and  sustainable
development.

The objective of the programme was to  transform  the  minerals  and  mining
sectors  into  one  that  competitively  contributed  to   the   sustainable
development in the country.

Programme 4: Mineral Policy and Promotion
The purpose of this programme was to formulate mineral-related policies  and
promote the  mining  and  minerals  industry  of  South  Africa,  making  it
attractive to investors.

The measurable objective of the programme was to, through research,  provide
relevant information to enhance global competitiveness, review policies  and
formulate legislation to achieve transformation and attract  new  investment
into South Africa’s minerals industry.

Programme 7: Associated Services

The purpose of the Associated Services programme was to provide services  in
support of the Department’s mandate through funded and non-funded  statutory
bodies and organisations.

The measurable  objectives  were  to  enhance  the  Department’s  objectives
through policies and  directives,  promoting  its  legislative  mandate  and
leading  to  the  creation  of  an  environment  conducive  to   sustainable
development, investment and the improvement of the quality of  life  of  all
South Africans.

3.    Analysis of the  Department’s  Prevailing  Strategic  and  Operational
Plans

Programme 1: Administration

Under this programme, the Department has done the following:
    • Successful implementation of the  President’s  request  to  split  the
      Department of Minerals and Energy into Department of Mineral Resources
      (DMR) and Department of Energy (DOE) by:
               ▪ Successfully realigning  the  Organizational  Structure  in
                 line  with  the  new  mandate  of  the  newly   established
                 Department.
               ▪ Successful matching and placing.
               ▪ Developing a Service Level Agreement  and  agreeing  to  be
                 the hosting Department for DOE.
               ▪ Sharing Support Services.
    • Evaluation of Memorandum of  Understandings  signed  with  prioritized
      countries.
    • Implementation of the Media and stakeholder engagement plan.
    • Compliance Framework developed, approved and implemented.
    • Policies, procedures and guidelines approved.
    •  Development  and   implementation   of   the   balance   score   card
      implementation plan.
    • Completion of the executive  leadership  development  program  through
      Wits.
    • Improved security measures.
    • Continued addressing of issues of transformation regarding  vulnerable
      groups.

Programme 2: Promotion of Mine Health and Safety

With regard to  this  programme,  the  Department  has  managed  to  do  the
following:

    • Improved stakeholder relationships by having quarterly meetings in all
      regions with Unions and also by having  quarterly  meetings  with  the
      Department of Labour, Department of Human Settlements and Director  of
      Public Prosecution.
    •  Addressed  Health  and  Safety  Risks  by  completing  inquiries  and
      investigations as planned with Audits by 83 percent and Inspections by
      91 percent.
    • Developed  Guidelines  by  reviewing  the  existing  Guidelines  (e.g.
      Underwater Mining; Emergency  Preparedness;  and  Drawpoints,  Tipping
      Points and Orepasses).
    •  Reviewed  and  developed  internal   policies   and   procedures   by
      establishing Exams Policy, Medical Appeal Procedure; and Inclusion  or
      Non-Inclusion of Fatal accidents in Statistics.
    • Developed Human Resources by letting 99 Officials complete a course on
      Risk Management in Mining  and  97  Officials  on  Health  and  Safety
      Training (Legal, Inspection, Audit, Investigation and inquiries).

Programme 3: Mineral Regulation

Some achievements of the programme include:
 • A total of 465 mineral rights were granted to historically  disadvantaged
   South Africans (HDSA) against a target of 27.
 • A total of 73 women led companies were licensed against a target of 18.
 • The Mineral Regulation Branch conducted a  total  of  18  workshops  with
   mineral and mining industry stakeholders against a target of 10.
 • The Branch achieved 317 Mining Charter compliance inspections  against  a
   target of 140.
 • It conducted 3 449 environmental management plan  inspections  against  a
   target of 1 380.

Programme 4: Mineral Policy and Promotion

Achievements for this programme were the following:

    • Mining Summit was held with all industry stakeholders.
    • Mining Industry Growth Development and Employment Task Team  (MIGDETT)
      intervened to mitigate job losses and saved 60 000 jobs in excess.
    • A strategy on sustainable  growth  and  meaningful  transformation  of
      mining industry by stakeholders was adopted.
    • The state’s exposure to mining industry was evaluated leading  to  the
      moratorium on disposal of State owned mining assets.
    •  A  report  outlining  the  mining  industry’s  progress  against  the
      developmental targets agreed at the 2002 United Nations Commission  on
      Sustainable Development (UNCSD) was submitted.
    • The Mining Charter Assessment report was completed.
    • The Minister approved the strategy for rehabilitation of derelict  and
      ownerless mines.

4.    Analysis of Expenditure Reports


4.1   The Overall Departmental Allocations and Expenditures for 2009/10


For the period under review, the  Department  of  Minerals  and  Energy  was
allocated an amount of R4.65 billion, which was 1.08  per  cent  of  R429.64
billion which was the main budget. When adjustments are taken into  account,
the total budget amounted to R4.68 billion. Of  the  R4.68  billion  budget,
the Department managed to spend R4.54 billion or 96.9 per cent  at  the  end
of the fourth quarter of the 2009/10 financial year.  The  variance  between
total budget and actual expenditure amounted to R143.21 million or  3.1  per
cent. This is less  than  the  five  per  cent  benchmark  of  the  National
Treasury. The expenditure  in  the  fourth  quarter  per  programme  was  as
follows:

4.1.1 Administration:

The total  budget  for  the  Administration  programme  amounted  to  R257.3
million. The programme had spent R252.3 million or 98.1  per  cent  of  this
budget at end of the fourth quarter. This means  that  the  programme  under
spent by R4.963 million or 1.9 per, which  is  an  insignificant  amount  of
under expenditure.

4.1.2 Promotion of Mine Safety and Health:

Programme 2 had a budget  of  R138.7  million  after  adjustments.  Of  this
budget amount, the programme spent about R138.5 million or 99.9 per cent.

4.1.3 Mineral Regulation:

The total budget for Mineral Regulation programme was R151.1 million in  the
2009/10 financial year. The programme spent R147.6 million or 97.6 per  cent
at the end of the fourth quarter. The reason for the lower than  anticipated
expenditure related to delays in the signing  of  contracts  with  appointed
service  providers  and  subsequent   payments   for   projects   aimed   at
rehabilitating ownerless and derelict mines.

4.1.4 Mineral Policy and Promotion:

Of the R69.3 million total budget allocated for  this  programme,  R73.7  or
106.5  per  cent  was  spent.  The  reason  for  the  higher  than  expected
expenditure under this programme was due to an increase in  compensation  of
employees as a result of additional staff employed above the limitations  of
the existing approved structure.

4.1.5 Associated Services

Out of the R3.7 billion total allocated programme budget,  R3.5  billion  or
96.5 per cent was spent. The reason for the lower than expected  expenditure
was mainly due to transfers amounting to  R82  million  that  did  not  take
place as anticipated for the Integrated National  Electrification  Programme
(INEP-Non Grid service providers), due to delays in the finalisation of  the
contracts with commissioned service providers.

Of  the  R43.1  million  allocated  for  assistance  to  mines  under   this
programme, R31.1 million or 72.1 per cent was spent. A total of R12  million
was not spent due to delays in submission of invoices from beneficiaries  of
the mining subsidy.

4.2   Expenditure analysis per Economic Classifications

4.2.1 Transfers and Subsidies

A lower than expected spending in the 2009/10 financial  year  amounting  to
R143.2 million comprised of the following transfers:

 • INEP: Non-grid service providers: Out of the R84 million total  allocated
   programme budget, R1.3 million was spent leading to a lower than expected
   expenditure amounting to R82.7 million. This was due  to  delays  in  the
   procurement processes of appointing service providers and the signing  of
   contracts thereof.
 • INEP municipalities: Out of the R932.95 million  total  allocated  budget
   for transfers to municipalities, only R899.55 million was transferred  as
   at 31st March 2010, culminating in a lower than expected  expenditure  of
   R33.41 million (equivalent to  3.6  per  cent).  This  was  due  to  late
   submission  of  requests  for  funds  by  municipalities  and  delays  in
   finalising the service level agreements between  municipalities  and  the
   Department.
 • Assistance to mines: Out of the R43 million total allocated budget, R31.1
   million which translates to 72 per cent of the total available budget was
   spent leaving R12 million not transferred due to delays in submission  of
   invoices from beneficiaries of the mining subsidy.

4.3   The First Quarter Expenditure Report for the 2010/11 Financial Year

In the 2010/11 financial year,  the  Department  of  Mineral  Resources  was
allocated a budget of R1.0 billion which is 0.2 per  cent  of  R461  billion
which is the main budget. This does not take into  account  the  adjustment.
Of the R1.0 billion budget, the  Department  has  managed  to  spend  R249.1
million or 24.2 per cent at the end of the  first  quarter  of  the  2010/11
financial year. This is in line with the 25 per  cent  benchmark  which  the
Department is supposed to spend every  quarter.  The  expenditure  in  first
quarter per programme was as follows:

4.3.1 Administration: Programme 1 was allocated a  total  budget  of  R239.0
million. The programme spent R67.4 million or 28.2 per cent of  this  budget
in the first quarter. This means that the Department has over spent  by  3.2
per cent in the first quarter  budget.  The  over  expenditure  was  due  to
spending on goods and services, which was associated with  the  payments  of
the previous financial year that took effect in  April  and  May  2010.  The
expenditure for this programme was therefore expected to  slow  down  during
the second quarter of the financial year.

4.3.2 Promotion of Mine Safety and  Health:  Programme  2  was  allocated  a
total amount of R145.9 million. Of this budget  allocation,  the  Department
spent about R34.6 million or 23.7 per cent. This was below the 25  per  cent
per quarter benchmark for the programme. This  programme  spent  almost  the
total budget allocation for the 2009/10 financial year at 99.9 per cent.

4.3.3 Mineral Regulation: Programme  3  was  allocated  a  total  amount  of
R215.9 million in the 2010/11  financial  year.  The  programme  only  spent
about R40.5 million or 18.7 per cent  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter.
Slower than expected spending was as a  result  of  spending  on  goods  and
services, which stood at 5.3 per cent by the end of the first quarter.  This
programme managed to spend only 97.6 per cent of  its  total  budget  during
the 2009/10 financial year.

4.3.4 Mineral Policy and  Promotion:  Programme  4  was  allocated  a  total
budget of R429.2 million in  the  2010/11  financial  year.  The  Department
managed to spend about R106.7 million or 24.9 per  cent.  The  spending  was
reported to be 18 per cent below the projections for the  quarter  and  this
was due to a technical challenge with  the  contracts  that  the  Industrial
Development Corporation of South Africa (IDC) signed with the SSME  and  for
Assistance  to  mines  where  the  administrative  processes  were  not  yet
finalised, therefore the funds could not be transferred. This appears to  be
a recurring problem since an amount of R12 million reserved  for  assistance
to mines could not  be  transferred  in  the  last  financial  year  due  to
administrative problems.

Of the R106.7 million that has been spent by the  programme,  R96.3  million
or 90.2 per cent  was  spent  on  transfers  and  subsidies.  This  included
transfers to the Council for Geoscience and Mintek.

4.4   Expenditure analysis per Economic Classifications

Table 1: Economic Classification spending  trends  as  at  the  end  of  the
fourth quarter of the 2009/10 financial year.
|                      |             |ACTUAL EXPENDITURE|                  |
|ECONOMIC              |AVAILABLE    |TO DATE           |                  |
|CLASSIFICATIONS       |BUDGET       |                  |% SPENT           |
|Compensation of       |352.344      |83 930            |23.8              |
|Employees             |             |                  |                  |
|Goods and Services    |254 919      |53 724            |21.1              |
|Current Payments      |607 263      |137 654           |22.7              |
|Transfers and         |408 681      |108 421           |26.5              |
|Subsidies             |             |                  |                  |
|Payment for Capital   |14 072       |3 076             |21.9              |
|Assets                |             |                  |                  |
|Payments for Financial|             |12                |                  |
|Assets                |             |                  |                  |
|TOTAL                 |1 030 016    |249 163           |24.2              |


Source: National Treasury (2010)

4.4.1 Current Payments

4.4.1.1     The compensation of employees was allocated a  total  budget  of
R352.3 million in the 2010/11 financial  year.  The  Department  of  Mineral
Resources has managed to spend up to 23.8 per  cent  of  this  budget.  This
spending is in line with the 25 per cent spending per quarter benchmark.

4.4.1.2     Goods and Services were allocated a total amount of R254 919  in
the 2010/11 financial year. The  Department  has  only  spent  up  to  R53.7
million or 21.1 per cent on goods and  services.  This  indicates  that  the
Department has spent far below the 25  per  cent  benchmark  for  the  first
quarter  in  goods  and  services  budget.  It  is  therefore  important  to
ascertain what could be the reason for this slower spending.

4.4.2 Transfers and Subsidies

The transfer and subsidies were allocated a total amount of  R408.7  million
for the 2010/11 financial year. The Department managed to spend  about  R108
4 million or 26.5 per cent of the budget. While this spending appears to  be
above the 25 per cent benchmark, the Department reported that it was 18  per
cent  below  the  projected  expenditure  for  the  quarter   due   to   the
administrative processes  that  were  not  finalised  and  the  funds  could
therefore not be transferred by the IDC to the SSMEs for mine assistance.

4.4.3 Payments for Capital Assets (CAPEX)

The CAPEX  were  allocated  an  amount  of  R14.1  million  in  the  2010/11
financial year, however, the Department only spent  about  R3.1  million  or
21.9 per cent in the first quarter. The reason for slower  spending  had  to
be ascertained from the Department.

4.4.4 Payments for Financial Assets

The Department spent only R12 000 on payments for financial assets  for  the
first quarter of the 2010/11 financial year.

4.5   Roll-overs of Unspent Funds during 2010/11 Financial Year

Table 2  below  reflects  that  an  amount  of  R5  million  roll-overs  was
requested for the rehabilitation of ownerless asbestos mines project at  the
end of the 2009/10 financial year and approved by the Ministry of Finance.
Table 2: Approved Roll Overs for the Department
|R thousand                                        |Requested   |Approved   |
|Department of Mineral Resources                   |5 000       |5 000      |
|Rehabilitation of ownerless asbestos mines project|5 000       |5 000      |


Source: National Treasury (2010)

4.6   Virements and Shifting of  Funds  from  and  to,  within  and  between
      Programmes during the Adjustment Period in line with  the  Legislative
      Framework

Though section 43 of the Public Finance Management Act No 1.  of  1999  (the
Act) makes provision for the  virements  and  shifting  of  funds  from  one
programme to the other, as well as movement of funds within  the  programme,
there are certain  requirements  that  need  to  be  met  by  an  accounting
officer.

These conditions are as follows:

    • The Act provides that the amount of a saving under a main division  of
      a vote that may be utilised to defray excess expenditure under another
      main division may not exceed eight per cent of the amount appropriated
      under that main division.”

Moreover, section 43 (4) states that  the  section  on  virements  does  not
authorise the utilisation of a saving in:

    • An amount specifically and  exclusively  appropriated  for  a  purpose
      mentioned under a main division within a vote;
    • An amount appropriated for transfers to another institutions; and
    • An amount appropriated  for  capital  expenditure  to  defray  current
      expenditure.

Most importantly, it was noted that the Department of Mineral Resources  did
not report any virements and shifting of funds during the first  quarter  of
the 2010/11 financial year.

4.7   Issues for the Committee’s Considerations

Mostly, the over or under expenditure of  the  departmental  budget  in  the
first quarter of  the  2010/11  financial  year  was  as  a  result  of  the
following issues:

 • The administrative processes that were not finalised and the funds  could
   not be transferred.
 • Payments of the previous financial year that took effect in April and May
   2010.
 • Slower expenditure on goods and services.

5.    Analysis of the Department’s Annual Report and Financial Statements

The following brief seeks to analyse the performance of  the  Department  of
Minerals and Energy during the  2009/2010  financial  year  with  a  special
focus on the programmes of the Mineral sector.

1. Performance analysis

5.1.1  Programme performance
The  former  Department  of  Minerals  and  Energy  was  composed  of  seven
programmes that are reflected in Table 3 below. Some of the programmes  were
sector  specific  like  Promotion  of  Mine  Health  and   Safety,   Mineral
Regulation, and Mineral Policy and Planning were specific  to  the  minerals
sector while Hydrocarbons and Energy Planning, and Electricity, Nuclear  and
Clean  Energy   were   specific   to   the   energy   sector   respectively.
Administration  and  Associated  Services  programmes  were   over   arching
programmes providing services to both sectors.

This analysis therefore focuses on the minerals sector since It  relates  to
the Department of Mineral Resources.

Table 3: Summary of expenditure per programme
|Programme        |Original      |Total     |Actual      |Variance |Variance|
|                 |Budget as per |Budget    |Expenditure |         |        |
|                 |ENE           |          |            |         |        |
|                 |R’000         |R’000     |R’000       |R’000    |%       |
|Administration   |229.282       |250.216   |249.253     |963      |0.4     |
|Promotion of Mine|133.027       |138.717   |138.543     |174      |0.1     |
|Health and Safety|              |          |            |         |        |
|Mineral          |168.066       |158.164   |150.596     |7 568    |4.8     |
|regulation       |              |          |            |         |        |
|Mineral Policy   |62.363        |73.776    |73.724      |52       |0.1     |
|and Promotion    |              |          |            |         |        |
|Hydrocarbons and |55.285        |56.973    |56.925      |48       |0.1     |
|Energy Planning  |              |          |            |         |        |
|Electricity,     |338.363       |338.936   |334.070     |4.866    |1.4     |
|Nuclear and Clean|              |          |            |         |        |
|Energy           |              |          |            |         |        |
|Associated       |3 660.810     |3 665.222 |3 541.605   |123 617  |3.4     |
|Services         |              |          |            |         |        |
|Total            |4 647 196     |4 682 004 |4 544 716   |137 288  |2.9     |


Source: Department of Minerals and Energy-Annual Report 2009/2010
5.1.1.1     Administration

The performance  of  this  programme  was  affected  by  the  split  of  the
Department into two separate departments since it was providing services  to
both minerals and energy sectors. However, the  Department  attributed  some
of the failures to achieve set targets to budgetary constraints. This  might
be a sign of poor planning since the Department is  supposed  to  draft  its
planning based on available resources.

Table 3 indicates that  the  Department  under-spent  by  R963  000  on  the
Administration programme.

5.1.1.2     Promotion of Mine Health and Safety

The  Inspectorate  reported  that  it  appointed  19   Engineering   Learner
Inspectors on 1 August 2007 on a two-year training contract which  ended  on
31 July 2010.  The  learners  comprised  15  males  and  four  females.  The
Inspectorate also reported that it offered 18 bursaries to  students  during
the reporting period.

The objective of promoting and regulating minerals and  energy  sectors  was
not achieved. The failure to achieve this objective was  attributed  to  the
system still being developed.

The Inspectorate conducted fewer audits (83 per cent)  and  inspections  (91
per cent) than it set out to and  the  reason  proffered  was  the  lack  of
capacity.

5.1.1.3     Mineral Regulation

The Annual Report of the Department indicated that funds amounting  to  R9.9
million were shifted from the  Mineral  Regulation  programme  in  terms  of
section 43 of the Act, resulting to the reduction  of  the  total  programme
budget from R168 million to R158 million as reflected in Table 3.

5.1.1.4     Mineral Policy and Promotion

The achievements of this programme during the  year  under  review  included
the following:

 • The programme continued to play a lead role in the Mining Industry Growth
   Development and Employment Task Team (MIGDETT), which sought to  mitigate
   job losses and position the mining industry  along  a  growth  path  with
   concurrent transformation. This intervention saved in excess  of  60  000
   jobs, representing more than  half  of  the  original  projected  losses.
   MIGDETT also  developed  a  draft  strategy  on  sustainable  growth  and
   meaningful transformation in  South  Africa’s  mining  industry  with  an
   emphasis on growth and transformation.
 • The Mineral Policy and Promotion undertook a survey of the South  African
   assets in the mining industry with the ultimate aim of  ascertaining  the
   possibility for consolidation of those  assets  to  establish  the  state
   owned mining company.  Consequent  to  the  findings  of  this  exercise,
   Cabinet imposed a moratorium on the disposal of any state  mining  assets
   subject to a  more  detailed  audit  completed  by  the  Department.  The
   completed report on the creation of the state mining company was expected
   to be tabled for consideration by Cabinet during the 2010/2011  financial
   year.
 • The consultation of the beneficiation  strategy  was  finalised  and  the
   strategy is now ready for tabling before Cabinet for formal adoption as a
   policy of South Africa.
 • The Branch developed a rehabilitation strategy for derelict and ownerless
   mines, which was  approved  by  the  Minister  of  Mineral  Resources  in
   December 2009. An interim rehabilitation  oversight  committee  was  also
   established to develop an  implementation  plan  for  the  rehabilitation
   strategy until the Branch was adequately capacitated to  take  over  this
   responsibility.
 • South Africa’s sustainable development (SD) framework was  finalised  and
   the SD thematic report submitted to  the  United  Nations  Commission  on
   Sustainable Development (UNCSD) in preparation for the  18th  session  of
   the Commission.

5.1.1.5     Associated Services

The greater percentage of the Departmental budget (close  to  80  per  cent)
was allocated to this  programme.  The  greater  portion  of  the  programme
budget was for transfers and subsidies. Funds  were  transferred  from  this
programme to entities like, Mintek, Council for  Geoscience,  State  Diamond
Trader  and  the  South  African  Diamond  and  Precious  Metals   Regulator
(SADPMR). During the year  under  review  the  amounts  of  R155.5  million,
R129.5 million, and R39.4 million were  allocated  to  Mintek,  Council  for
Geoscience  and  SADPMR  respectively.  An  amount  of  R43.1  million   was
allocated to Assistance of Mines sub-programme. This sub-programme aimed  to
prevent the uncontrollable movement of water in and out of underground  mine
openings  or  holdings  in  the  Witwatersrand  area  by  providing  pumping
subsidies to marginal  mines  and  to  undertake  research  to  develop  and
implement  strategic  solutions  for  mine   water   management,   including
contaminated water. The actual transfers to  entities  are  discussed  under
Statement of Financial Performance.

5.2.  Annual Financial Statements

5.2.1 Report of the Auditor-General

The Department received a qualified audit opinion on the following basis:
 • In terms of section  38(1)(a)(i)  and  section  40(1)(a)  of  the  Public
   Finance Management Act (Act 1 of 1999)  the  accounting  officer  of  the
   Department did not ensure that full and proper records of the receivables
   for the Departmental revenue were kept as prescribed  by  the  norms  and
   standards. The Department could not provide sufficient appropriate  audit
   evidence to support the  Departmental  receivables  for  revenue  balance
   amounting to R25.6 million. There were no satisfactory alternative  audit
   procedures that could be performed to obtain  reasonable  assurance  that
   all the receivables for Departmental revenue were properly  recorded  and
   disclosed.
 • Interest was not levied and recorded on all outstanding balances and  for
   the individual receivable balances where interest was  levied,  the  rate
   used was not in accordance with the rate specified  by  the  Minister  of
   Finance, as required by Treasury Regulation 11.1.

5.2.1.1     Emphasis of matter

The Auditor-General drew attention to; inter alia, the following matters:

 • Irregular expenditure to the amount of R4.2 million incurred as a  result
   of contravention of  the  authorised  delegations  of  authority  of  the
   Department, the irregular expenditure was condoned in the financial year.
 • The Department has materially under spent  the  budget  on  Programme  5:
   Associated services to the amount of R123 million.

5.2.1.2     Report on other legal and regulatory requirements

Incomplete reporting on all predetermined objectives
The  actual  achievements  with  regard  to  26  per  cent  of  all  planned
indicators and targets specified in the strategic plan for  the  year  under
review  for  the  selected  programmes  were  not  reported  in  the  annual
performance report submitted for audit purposes.

Timeliness of the reported performance information
The reliability of 40 per cent of the targets could not be  verified,  since
the information was not received in time for audit purposes.

5.2.2 Statement of Financial Performance

The total revenue of the Department  amounted  to  R4.9  billion  comprising
R4.7 annual appropriation  and  R217.1  million  departmental  revenue.  The
total revenue increased by 20.35 per cent from the allocation  of  the  last
financial year. However, the departmental revenue  decreased  by  17.95  per
cent.

The total expenditure amounted  to  R4.6  billion  comprising  R673  million
total current expenditure; R3.8 billion total transfers and  subsidies;  and
R48.7 million total  expenditure  for  capital  assets.  The  total  current
expenditure increased  by  10.94  per  cent  and  the  total  transfers  and
subsidies by 22.63 per cent respectively. The overall expenditure  increased
by 21.42 per cent from the R3.8 billion spent in the  last  financial  year.
The surplus for the year amounted to R348.6 million. The transfers  included
R150.3 million to Council for Geoscience, R5.1 million to  Mine  Health  and
Safety Council, R39.4 million to South African Diamond and  Precious  Metals
Regulator and R1 million to State Diamond Trader.  The  transfer  to  Mintek
amounted to R161.1 million during the year under review. A total  amount  of
R21 million was made available for transfer to Grootvlei  Proprietary  Mines
but R13.5 million was actually transferred. The  Assistance  to  Mines  sub-
programme had a total budget of R38.6 million after the adjustments but  its
actual expenditure was R31.1 million.

5.2.3 Statement of Financial Position

The value of total assets of the Department amounted  to  R215  million  and
total liabilities  to  R211.7  million  resulting  in  net  assets  of  R3.3
million. The total assets of the Department increased by 20.61 per cent  and
total liabilities by 20.84 per cent from the previous financial year.

5.3.  Human Resource Management

The former Department of Minerals and Energy had an establishment of  1  554
employees during the year under review. Of these posts, 1 350  were  filled,
translating to a vacancy rate  of  13.1  per  cent.  The  vacancy  rate  was
highest among the highly skilled supervision salary band at 17.4  per  cent.
The expenditure on compensation of employees  amounted  to  R403.3  million,
which constituted 8.9 per cent of the R4.5 billion total voted  expenditure.
The training expenditure amounted to R7.3  million,  which  constituted  1.8
percent of the total expenditure on personnel.

The Department made 202 appointments and 79 terminations during  the  period
under review, which translated to a turnover  rate  of  6.5  per  cent.  The
majority of terminations (58.2 per cent) were through resignations.

Total number of employees per occupation category

Table 4: Total number of employees per occupational category

|Occupation Category |Male                   |Female                  |Total|
|                                  |A                                 |
|Office on the Rights of the Child                                    |
|Children’s Rights Mainstreaming   |Mainstreaming of a child centred  |
|Conceptualised and advocated in   |approach in development,          |
|80% of the Districts and Local    |governance and service delivery   |
|Municipalities                    |processes.                        |
|Review the National Plan of Action|Ensure that policies are          |
|Policy  for children in South     |children’s rights sensitive       |
|Africa                            |Capacity building on mainstreaming|
|To conduct an audit of children’s |children’s rights in Government   |
|rights focal points at all spheres|Advocacy for children's rights    |
|of government                     |delivery in government            |
|To review the South African       |Coordination, Monitoring,         |
|Children’s Charter                |evaluation and reporting on the   |
|Piloting of the Child Friendly    |children's rights.                |
|Cities Model in select            |                                  |
|Municipalities.                   |                                  |
|Facilitate processes towards the  |                                  |
|Commemoration of the Day of the   |                                  |
|African Child and Celebration of  |                                  |
|the National Children’s Day       |                                  |
|Finalise planning on an accredited|                                  |
|CR training programme working in  |                                  |
|collaboration with PALAMA and use |                                  |
|manuals to train municipalities   |                                  |
|Tracking the implementation of    |                                  |
|inclusive education.              |                                  |
|Review functionality of the       |                                  |
|National Children’s Rights        |                                  |
|Advisory Council                  |                                  |
|Facilitate finalisation and       |                                  |
|submission of South Africa’s 3rd  |                                  |
|Children’s Rights Country Report, |                                  |
|2005-2007 to the United Nations   |                                  |
|Committee on the Rights of the    |                                  |
|Child (UNCRC)                     |                                  |
|Develop standardised National     |                                  |
|Monitoring and Evaluation         |                                  |
|Framework and populate Children’s |                                  |
|Rights indicators                 |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|Office on the Status of Disabled Persons                             |
|Facilitate inclusion of People    |Review and facilitate             |
|with Disabilities and disability  |implementation of policies        |
|mainstreaming in all economic     |pertaining to the rights of       |
|growth and development programmes.|persons with disabilities.        |
|                                  |Promote capacity development      |
|Coordination of disability related|programmes & mainstreaming of     |
|research conducted by higher      |disability considerations into    |
|education Institutions, Stats SA, |government programmes.            |
|HSRC and other research           |Conduct Monitoring and Evaluation |
|institutions.                     |and undertake research to ensure  |
|Supporting principals in          |compliance and comprehensive      |
|coordinating NCOP and Izimbizo    |reporting on the implementation of|
|events.                           |disability programmes.            |
|Submit National Disability Policy |Provide strategic leadership,     |
|to Cabinet, train stakeholders,   |support and oversight.            |
|and monitor.                      |Facilitate networking and liaison |
|                                  |within departmental,              |
|                                  |inter-departmental and            |
|                                  |stakeholders including national   |
|                                  |and provincial focal points and   |
|                                  |National Machineries              |
|Office on the Status of Women                                        |
|Review the National Policy        |Mainstreaming of gender issues in |
|Framework for Women’s Empowerment |development, governance and       |
|and Gender equality               |service delivery processes.       |
|Develop comprehensive monitoring  |Ensure that policies are gender   |
|and evaluation system and         |sensitive and there is compliance |
|reporting framework.              |in terms of gender responsive     |
|Develop effective coordination    |implementation                    |
|mechanism with National Gender    |Facilitate and coordinate capacity|
|Machinery partners                |development for gender            |
|Develop a costed five year action |mainstreaming                     |
|plan                              |Advocacy and awareness-raising on |
|Establishment of gender units in  |issues of women’s rights,         |
|all national  and provincial      |empowerment and gender equality   |
|departments and in local          |Coordination, planning,           |
|government structures             |Monitoring, evaluation and        |
|Focus on the financial crisis and |reporting on  women’s empowerment |
|its negative impact on women and  |and gender equality issues        |
|girls, including the              |Compliance with international and |
|conditionality for rescue         |continental commitments on women’s|
|packages.                         |empowerment and gender equality.  |


CREDA INSERT T101025e–insert5 – PAGES 3130 - 3142

CREDA INSERT T101025e–insert6 – PAGES 3143 - 3165


6. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Police on  Property  Management  and
   Capital Works within the South African Police Service, dated  21  October
   2010.

   The Portfolio Committee on Police reports as follows:

Introduction

This report identifies key research findings of the Task Team, and areas  of
concern emanating from the meetings held with  the  SAPS  on  the  issue  of
Supply Chain Management: Property Management (18 May 2010  and  3  September
2010).  It highlights the response of the Department of  Police  (and  where
relevant the response of the Department of Public Works) to these  concerns.
 In  addition,  the  report  identifies  recommendations  of  the  Portfolio
Committee on Police to address some of these concerns.

1.    Background

1.1.  Portfolio Committee meeting 18 May 2010

1.1.1 On 18 May 2010,  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Police  met  with  the
National Commissioner of Police and a  delegation  from  the  Department  to
discuss the issue of Supply Chain  Management:  Property  Management  within
the South African Police Service (SAPS).

1.1.2.      The Department provided a briefing to the Committee on  Property
Management within the SAPS. Key areas covered in the briefing included:
    • Agreements between SAPS and the Department of Public Works  (DPW)  and
      the principles on the devolvement of the budget from DPW to the SAPS
    • Property management including the number of leased buildings (1  368),
      government-owned buildings occupied by the SAPS (5 843)  and  devolved
      properties from DPW (271)
    • The process for planned and unplanned maintenance projects
    • Budget and expenditure for capital works, municipal services,  private
      leases, maintenance and property rates (including planned  maintenance
      and unplanned maintenance) from 2006/07 to 2009/10.
    • Capital Works budget and expenditure per types of infrastructure (such
      as   forensic   science   laboratories,   police   stations,    office
      accommodation etc) from 2006/07 to 2009/10
    •  Infrastructure  development  including   process,   police   stations
      completed  (2006/07  to  2009/10)  and  projects   (including   police
      stations) planned for completion in 2010/11-2015/16
    • Projects completed by SAPS Building Services (including  construction,
      repairs, renovations and upgrades) since  2004/05  and  SAPS  Building
      Service projects currently in progress.

1.1.3.      Members  posed  a  number  of  questions  and  concerns  to  the
delegation at this meeting. However,  the  National  Commissioner  requested
that the meeting be adjourned to a later date to enable  the  Department  to
fully prepare itself in order to address the questions and  concerns  raised
by Members. The chairperson acceded to this request.

1.1.4.      A key concern noted by Members during  the  meeting  of  18  May
2010, was that the  capital  budget  for  construction,  including  for  the
building of police  stations,  has  increased  enormously  since  1994,  and
especially over the past four years. Yet, only a  few  police  stations  are
reported to be completed each year. Members were  therefore  concerned  that
there seemed to be no  correlation  between  the  increased  resourcing  for
capital projects and the outputs, specifically in the  form  of  new  police
stations constructed.

1.2   Task Team on the construction of police stations

1.2.1 As a result of this key concern and other concerns raised  by  Members
during the meeting of 18 May 2010, a Task Team on  Property  Management  and
Capital Works was initiated by the chairperson, led by  Honourable  van  Wyk
and comprising of the following additional Members from the Committee:

    • Honourable Schaefer
    • Honourable Dube
    • Honourable Ndlovu
    • Honourable Meshoe

1.2.2 The focus of the Task Team was to research  comprehensively  the  area
of construction and expenditure on police stations, specifically new and re-
established police stations, from 1994 to date.

1.2.3 The key objective of the Task Team  was  to  empower  Members  of  the
Portfolio Committee on Police to provide effective oversight over a  crucial
area of Property Management, the area of  construction  of  police  stations
by:

    • providing a comprehensive  overview  of  the  construction  of  police
      stations by collating all available information about the construction
      of police stations from 1994 to date, and organising this  information
      into a searchable format; and
    • analysing this information in  order  to  identify  trends,  areas  of
      concern and discrepancies in information.

1.2.4 This information would also be prepared for use by the Members of  the
Portfolio Committee on Police in preparation for the  follow-up  meeting  on
Supply Chain Management: Property Management which  was  scheduled  to  take
place on 3 September 2010 between the Committee and the SAPS, thus  enabling
the Members to interrogate  the  issues  with  the  SAPS  from  an  informed
position.

1.2.5 The Task Team sourced and collated the information  contained  in  all
Annual Reports of the SAPS (and the Reports of  the  Auditor-General),  SAPS
Strategic Plans, Estimates of National Expenditure, briefings  by  the  SAPS
to the Portfolio Committee on Police,  additional  information  provided  by
the SAPS to  the  Committee,  as  well  as  the  Reports  of  the  Portfolio
Committee on Police from 1994 to date.

1.2.6 In this process, the Task Team compiled a searchable database  on  the
construction of  police  stations,  which  can  be  used  by  the  Portfolio
Committee on Police  in  all  future  oversight  initiatives  around  police
station construction. This database will enable the Portfolio  Committee  on
Police  to  effectively  and  efficiently  oversee  construction  of  police
stations  (irrespective  of  whether  the  construction   project   is   the
responsibility of the Department of  Police  or  the  Department  of  Public
Works).

2.  Findings of the Task Team

2.1   The following are the key research findings emanating  from  the  work
of the Task Team, into the area of the construction of police stations:
 • Since 1994, a total of 100 police  stations  have  been  constructed.  Of
   these 100 police stations, only 31 are new police stations constructed in
   areas where no  police  station  existed  previously.  The  remaining  69
   stations are  re-established  police  stations  whereby  existing  police
   stations are replaced by new structures on their existing sites or on new
   sites. Since 1994, a total of R6.25 billion (including the allocation for
   2010/11) has been allocated to the Capital Works  budget  which  includes
   (but is not limited  to)  expenditure  for  the  construction  of  police
   stations. Conclusion: the high capital works budget since  1994  to  date
   has not been used effectively to increase the number of police stations.

 • The capital budget has increased from R80,261  million  in  1999/2000  to
   R1,049 billion in 2009/10 (by 1206%). Yet the number of  police  stations
   completed  each  year  is  not  increasing  commensurately.  Despite   an
   allocation of R1,049 billion for 2009/10 only five police  stations  were
   completed during that financial year,  in  comparison  with  nine  police
   stations that were completed in 1999/2000. In addition, from  2006/07  to
   2009/10 the capital budget has doubled from R510,5 million in 2006/07  to
   R1,049 billion in 2009/10. Yet in 2006/07,  eight  police  stations  were
   completed, in comparison to the five completed  in  2009/10.  Conclusion:
   the increasing  capital  works  budget  especially  between  2006/07  and
   2009/10 is not reflected in an increase in the number of police  stations
   completed.

 • Most police stations that have been completed (71 out of the  100  police
   stations) have been the responsibility of the Department of Public Works.
   A total of 19 police stations  have  been  completed  by  the  SAPS.  The
   remaining 10 police stations were completed under  the  auspices  of  the
   European Union. Between  2006/07  and  2009/10,  a  total  of  23  police
   stations were completed (new and  re-established).  Of  these  23  police
   stations completed, only four were completed by the SAPS.
 • A focus on those 19 stations completed by the SAPS since 1994 and on  the
   11 construction projects currently in execution by the SAPS  reveals  the
   following:
- Most of these 19 police stations took over three  years  to  complete.  In
some cases the time taken to complete the police stations  was  as  high  as
six-and-a- half years, such as in the case  of  the  Inanda  police  station
which was commenced on 1 April 2003 and was finally completed on  21  August
2009.
- The cost escalations in SAPS construction  projects  were  in  some  cases
extremely high. The Inanda police station escalated by 270% from  a  planned
cost of R15,9 million to an actual expenditure of R43 million.
- Of the 11 projects currently in execution by the SAPS, five  commenced  as
early as 2004 and five commenced in 2006.  Only  one  project  (Ga-masemola)
commenced after 2006 - in 2009. Thus expected completion  dates  for  10  of
the 11 current SAPS projects are between four and six years. Conclusion:  In
the majority of cases where the SAPS is  responsible  for  the  building  of
police stations, these stations take at  least  three  years  (and  in  most
cases between four to six years) to complete and the  cost  escalations  are
extremely  high.  In  comparison,  police  stations  completed  by  DPW,  on
average,  are  completed  in  shorter  time  periods  and  with  less   cost
escalation.

 • When the SAPS is responsible for  police  station  construction  projects
   extensive use is made of both consultants and contractors. On average  it
   is estimated that approximately 18% of the  total  expenditure  for  each
   police station is  spent  on  consultants.   Despite  requests  for  this
   information, the Department did not provide a breakdown  of  exactly  how
   much was spent on consultants for each building project undertaken by the
   SAPS. Both National Treasury guidelines and the Acquisition Manual of the
   SAPS themselves state that consultants should only be appointed when  the
   requisite skills are not available within  the  organisation.  While  the
   appointments of consultants and contractors for building projects are not
   in themselves problematic, the Task Team raised the concern as to whether
   the extensive use of consultants and contractors is in fact in line  with
   the agreement entered into with the Department of Public Works. As  early
   as 2006 the SAPS stated that it  had  the  necessary  core  expertise  in
   architects, engineers, quantity surveyors, technical personnel,  builders
   and financial managers and was in the process of further recruitment.  On
   this basis, DPW agreed to the devolution  pilot.  Conclusion:  Continuous
   outsourcing to consultants and contractors reflects that the SAPS may not
   have the required expertise within the organisation. It is a concern that
   the Department could not provide details of the exact  amount  spent  for
   each project on consultants. The 18% estimate seems high.

 • The research revealed  a  number  of  potential  problems  with  the  bid
   processes used by the SAPS.  Until very recently, 1 April 2010,  the  Bid
   Adjudication Committee within the SAPS were  responsible  for  the  final
   decision on all bids, without the approval of the National  Commissioner.
   The two Bid Adjudication Committees were, until  very  recently,  chaired
   respectively by General Hlela and General Siwundla. In addition, National
   Treasury notes that consultants should, wherever possible,  be  appointed
   through a bid process, yet the research revealed  that,  in  many  cases,
   consultants are appointed though quotations rather than the bid  process.
   Conclusion:  There are danger signs with regard to possible mismanagement
   in the tender and appointment process in capital projects.

 • The research revealed that the SAPS had outsourced the development of the
   Immovable Asset Management  Plan  to  a  consultant,  but  there  was  no
   indication that this plan had been completed or adopted. The  plan  is  a
   requirement in terms of the Government Immovable Asset Management Act, No
   19 of 2007. In addition, it  has  not  finalised  a  Planned  Maintenance
   Policy or an updated Unplanned Maintenance Policy which would reflect its
   current agreement with DPW around maintenance issues.  It  also  has  not
   completed a Prioritisation Model which  would  assist  in  systematically
   identifying  projects  for  prioritisation,  particularly  in  terms   of
   construction. Conclusion: key policy and plans required both in terms  of
   law and to assist the organisation in property management have  not  been
   finalised even though costs have been incurred.
 • The collation of information  from  the  sources  used  revealed  extreme
   inaccuracies in the reporting  of  information  on  the  construction  of
   police stations. These inaccuracies are apparent in formal  documentation
   such as the Annual Reports of the South African Police Services, as  well
   as the written documentation  provided  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
   Police during briefings and  written  responses  to  questions.  In  many
   cases, police stations are reported as completed for a  particular  year,
   when they were not actually completed during that year (for  example,  in
   the presentation to the Committee 18 May 2010- where is was  stated  that
   Steinkopf police station was completed in 2006/07 when  it  was  actually
   completed in July 2005)  . Planned completion dates are totally arbitrary
   and are merely shifted from one reporting year to another.  For  example,
   Inanda police station was reported to  be  projected  for  completion  in
   January 2006 in the 2004/05 Annual Report, in October 2006 in the 2005/06
   Annual Report, in 2007 in the 2006/07 Annual Report and in  2008  in  the
   2007/08 Annual Report. It was eventually completed in 2009. In  addition,
   financial figures provided in the Infrastructure tables in the  Estimates
   of Expenditure produced by National Treasury are sometimes inaccurate and
   therefore  unusable.   Conclusion:  Reporting  errors  in  published  and
   unpublished information renders effective oversight impossible.

3. Proclamation 42:2010 by the President of the Republic of South Africa

3.1   During this same time period, there were reports  in  the  media  with
regard to possible irregularities in the  leasing  agreements  for  the  new
police head office in Pretoria and the building  in  Durban.  On  10  August
2010, the President of South Africa issued Proclamation 42,  2010  published
in the Government  Gazette.   This  Proclamation  referred  certain  matters
regarding  the  SAPS  to  the   Special   Investigating   Unit   (SIU)   for
investigation. Four key areas are covered by this investigation including:
    • Issues  around  procurement  of  and  contracts  for  goods,  work  or
      services, including leased accommodation by the SAPS or on  behalf  of
      the SAPS by DPW or SITA
    • Irregularities/problems in relation to payments made to DPW  and  SITA
      or  to  suppliers/service  providers  for  goods,  work  or   services
      (including leased accommodation) procured by the SAPS or on behalf  of
      the SAPS
    • Problems in the manner in which SAPS Building Services  conduct  their
      projects including non-compliance with the Government Immovable  Asset
      Management Act or non-compliance with the ‘devolution agreement’
    • Unlawful or irregular conduct  by  members  of  the  SAPS,  suppliers,
      service providers or third parties  relating  to  any  of  the  above-
      mentioned allegations.

4.  Further Developments

4.1   On instruction of the Minister of Public Works  all  lease  agreements
(including the two  SAPS  agreements  mentioned  above)  were  put  on  hold
pending the results of the investigation.

4.1.1 In addition, approximately a week prior to the follow-up meeting  with
the National Commissioner and the  members  of  the  SAPS  scheduled  for  3
September 2010  on  the  issue  of  supply  chain  management  and  property
management, it was reported in the media that  a  number  of  key  officials
within the Supply Chain Management division of the SAPS had resigned.  These
included the head of Supply Chain Management,  General  Hamilton  Hlela,  as
well as General Stefanus Terblanche and General Matthews Siwundla.

5.    Portfolio Committee meeting 3 September 2010

5.1 On 3 September 2010, the National Commissioner and  his  delegation  met
again with the Portfolio  Committee  on  Police  in  order  to  address  the
concerns raised by Members in the meeting of 18 May  2010  on  Supply  Chain
Management: Property Management.

5.2   The Director-General  of  the  Department  of  Public  Works  and  his
delegation were also invited to this meeting, as were  representatives  from
the Special Investigation Unit (SIU) and the Hawks.

5.2.2 Key issues discussed at this meeting included:

    • The resignations of three key Supply Chain Management managers
    • The Pretoria head office lease and the lease of the Durban office
    • Agreements and relationship between DPW and the SAPS
    • The capacity of the police to build police stations  including  issues
      around the use of consultants, and the internal capacity  within  SAPS
      Building Services.

5.2.3 The presentation by the SAPS, which attempted to address some  of  the
concerns that had been raised by Members at the previous meeting of  18  May
2010, included information on:

    •  Current  challenges  within  SAPS   Supply   Chain   Management   and
      interventions to address these challenges
    • Agreements between DPW and  the  SAPS  including  the  advantages  and
      disadvantages of the devolution of custodial functions
    • Summary of capital works projects completed by DPW and those completed
      by the SAPS from 2006/07 to 2009/10
    • Needs analysis and the prioritisation process for the construction  of
      police stations, including the identification of backlogs
    • The status of current funding  for  police  station  construction  and
      other facilities
    • The bid process for the appointment of consultants and contractors
    • Information on the Eastern Cape Radio upgrading project
    •  Expenditure  and  allocation  for   forensic   science   laboratories
      construction projects
    • Leases including the lease reduction plan
    • Planned and unplanned maintenance including process,  expenditure  and
      backlogs.

6.    Deliberations of the Committee: Issues of discussion and concern

The following are the key  issues  of  discussion  and  of  concern  to  the
Committee:

6.1.  Irregularities in Supply Chain Management including lease agreements

6.1.1 Committee  concerns:  Members  raised  numerous  concerns  around  the
controversial leases.  Areas of  particular  concern  to  Members  included:
whether the leases for the Pretoria office (Sanlam  building)/Durban  office
were published for tender, and,  if  not,  why  not;  whether  the  National
Commissioner had signed the needs assessment and budget  letters  confirming
available funds for the Pretoria building; and why a second lease  agreement
for a second building was signed while the lease agreement for  the  current
head office in Pretoria had been extended.

6.1.2 Members also asked for the reasons for revoking the decision to  build
a new head office using the public  private  partnership  model  (PPP);  and
whether costs had been involved in the investigation of the  feasibility  of
using PPP. The Committee had information that a transaction  adviser  and  a
project officer had been appointed as consultants for this process.

6.1.3 Departmental response and response  by  the  Director-General  of  the
Department  of  Public  Works:  With  regard  to  the  PPP,   the   National
Commissioner noted that soon after he was appointed  he  had  been  given  a
document to sign, containing details  and  costs  of  building  a  new  head
office for the SAPS, using PPP,  to  be  constructed  on  a  plot  near  the
Department of Correctional Services’ building in Pretoria. He had  requested
further information, and had not signed the document, as,  in  his  opinion,
this money would be better spent on building more police stations,  than  on
building a new head office. The matter was not raised with him again.

6.1.4 According to the National Commissioner the lease for the current  head
office had been renewed by DPW (on  28  July  2009)  without  informing  the
SAPS. The National Commissioner stated that he had not signed the new  lease
agreement for the Sanlam building. In  terms  of  affordability,  he  stated
that the SAPS budgeted R1.2 billion per year for leases,  and  thus  as  the
reported R500 million lease was actually the amount over a  10-year  period,
it was affordable to the SAPS.

6.1.5 The Director-General of the Department of Public Works noted that  the
DPW  is  responsible  for  entering  into  lease  agreements  on  behalf  of
departments, based on their needs and  confirmation  of  budget.  He  stated
that the Minister of Public Works,  on  his  appointment  had  identified  a
number of concerns around the Supply Chain Management (SCM) within DPW.  The
Special Investigating Unit was thus approached to investigate SCM  processes
within DPW,  which  included,  but  was  not  limited  to,  lease  agreement
processes. The manner in which the Sanlam building as  well  as  the  Durban
building leases had been  procured  raised  concerns  around  due  processes
within DPW, and required further investigation. DPW thus supported  the  SIU
investigation into this matter as well as  embarking  on  its  own  internal
investigation, and have also suspended the lease agreements for  both  these
buildings pending the outcome of the investigation. DPW  has  escalated  all
urgent  leases  to  the  office  of  the  Director-General  and  implemented
additional measures to strengthen procurement processes.

6.1.6 Members agreed that it  would  be  important  to  discuss  the  matter
further pending the finalisation of the current internal investigations  and
the investigation by the Special Investigating Unit.  Many of the  questions
posed by Members could not be answered by either the  National  Commissioner
or the Director-General of the Department of Public Works at the meeting  of
3  September  2010,  as  the  facts  would  only  be  uncovered  during  the
investigations.

6.2   Resignation of key managers in the area  of  supply  chain  management
and property management

6.2.1 Committee concerns:  Committee  concerns  about  the  resignations  of
General Hlela, General  Terblanche  and  General  Siwundla  centred  on  the
timing of their resignations and whether their  resignations  were  directly
related to probing by the Portfolio Committee into the issues around  supply
chain management, and the investigation by the  Special  Investigating  Unit
(SIU). Members were concerned that when problems within the  Department  are
brought to light, key members are allowed to resign. Members wanted to  know
the reasons for the resignations, whether these officials left of their  own
volition or were ‘pushed out’, and whether these  Members  received  ‘golden
handshakes’. Members voiced disappointment that the top  management  of  the
Supply Chain Management, who had resigned, were  therefore  not  before  the
Committee, and would not therefore be held accountable for their actions.
6.2.2 Departmental response: The National Commissioner stated  that  General
Siwundla had retired for personal reasons as he wanted to take care  of  his
sick wife. General Terblanche had been shifted ‘in order  to  open  up  some
space for the investigation’ but had preferred to resign rather than  to  be
shifted  to  a  different  environment.  The  Commissioner  noted  that  the
Generals resigned in the interest of  the  organisation  and  to  allow  for
improved  ‘efficiency’  within  the  organisation.  None  of  the   Generals
received ‘golden handshakes’ but had only received the money that  was  owed
to them.

6.3   Agreement between the SAPS and the Department  of  Public  Works  with
regard to property management

6.3.1 Departmental presentations: According to the SAPS, agreements  between
the DPW  and  the  SAPS  around  devolution  of  budget  and  functions  are
consolidated  in  three  documents.  The  devolution  of  budgets  and   the
introduction of accommodation charges were introduced on 18  December  2005.
A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on the devolution  of  immovable  assets
between SAPS and DPW was  signed  by  SAPS  on  31  January  2006.  Thirdly,
National Treasury approved SAPS’ State of Readiness  on  the  Devolution  of
Custodial Responsibilities from NDPW to SAPS on 3 December 2008.   According
to the SAPS, the SAPS and DPW still needed to  agree  on  and  finalise  the
draft Service Level Agreement dated April 2010.

6.3.2 The devolution  of  custodial  functions  from  DPW  to  the  SAPS  is
limited, in terms of the agreement, to functional  assets,  such  as  police
stations and supporting structures. To date, a total of 271 police  stations
have been devolved.  The SAPS has stated that the SAPS is still  negotiating
with DPW on the exact number of police stations that will be  devolved  from
2011/12 onwards, but that they estimate that 59 additional  police  stations
would be devolved to the SAPS in 2011/12.

6.3.3 The MOU  on  custodial  devolution  addresses  four  areas  including:
maintenance and property rates;  payment  of  municipal  services;  property
leases; and capital works.   Currently,  neither  property  leases  nor  the
payment of municipal services has been  devolved.  Thus  the  two  areas  of
particular interest to the Committee are the devolvement of maintenance  and
property rates functions; and the area of capital works.

6.3.4 In terms of these functions, the SAPS presented to the Committee  that
there were advantages to devolving the maintenance function to the  SAPS  as
it gave the SAPS more control over their maintenance plans and  expenditure.
However, they acknowledged that the absence of a maintenance plan (for  both
planned and unplanned maintenance) was a problem. This plan was still  being
developed. In terms of the devolvement of capital works functions, the  SAPS
believed that this was advantageous to them as  they  would  have  increased
control over planning, in terms  of  time  frames  as  well  as  contractual
issues. In their presentation to the Committee they did not acknowledge  any
of the disadvantages in taking over this  construction  responsibility  from
DPW.

6.3.5 Committee concerns: During the two meetings, Members of the  Portfolio
Committee raised a number of key concerns around  the  devolution  of  these
functions.  Key concerns of Members included:

6.3.6 The request for the devolution of capital budgets and  functions  from
DPW to the SAPS was on request of the SAPS as early  as  2005/2006.  It  was
clear that the DPW had agreed to this request based on assurances  given  to
it that the SAPS ‘would develop the necessary capacity  and  expertise’  and
were given in  addition  the  assurance  that  the  SAPS  already  had  core
expertise in this regard.  Members raised concerns that, in fact,  the  SAPS
did not have this capacity and expertise as could be seen by the  myriad  of
functions  (ranging  from  technical  functions  such  as  engineering   and
quantity surveying to basic building  functions)  that  were  outsourced  to
consultants and contractors.
6.3.7 Members highlighted that the  extremely  poor  track  record  of  SAPS
Building Services to date  (including  high  cost  escalations  in  building
projects completed and the fact that it can take between four to six  years,
or longer, for the SAPS  to  complete  construction  of  a  police  station)
raised very serious questions as  to  whether  it  was  desirable  for  this
function to be devolved from DPW.  While DPW’s track record in  this  regard
was far from perfect,  it  was  clear  that  both  in  terms  of  costs  and
timeframes, its record was better than that of the SAPS. Members  questioned
whether the building of police stations was in line with the  core  function
of the police, which is to fight crime.

6.3.8 Members highlighted concerns in terms of the increased  responsibility
that the SAPS would have in terms of the  devolution  agreements.  Currently
only 271 police stations have been devolved, with possibly 59  more  in  the
2011/12 financial year. Members questioned whether the SAPS would  have  the
ability to cope with the responsibility of  all  of  the  over  1100  police
stations around the country. Members noted that they had  no  faith  in  the
ability of the SAPS to cope with this responsibility in  the  light  of  its
poor track record to date.

6.3.9 Members stated that they  hoped  that  the  SAPS  would  reassess  its
desire to be responsible for the building of police stations and  that  this
function should remain with DPW.  An alternative view expressed by a  Member
was to  further  capacitate  the  SAPS  Building  Services  to  fulfil  this
function more effectively.  Members noted that it  would  be  important  for
the SAPS to ascertain whether it was more cost-effective, as  well  as  more
efficient, to hire additional permanent staff within the SAPS  or  to  allow
DPW to do the work of construction of police stations.

6.3.10      Departmental response: The SAPS  in  its  presentations  to  the
Committee did not express any concerns around the devolution of the  capital
works custodial function from DPW to the SAPS. In fact, in the  presentation
on 3 September 2010 in particular, the devolution of this building  function
from DPW to the SAPS was presented as having a number of advantages  to  the
SAPS, primarily in terms of  control  over  timeframes  and  contracts.  The
presentation seemed to imply that it would be  desirable  for  the  SAPS  to
take over this responsibility for other assets  currently  not  included  in
the devolution agreement such as forensic science laboratories and  training
centres by recording as a disadvantage  the  fact  that  the  ‘SAPS  has  no
control over contractual issues between a supplier/contractor’ with  respect
to non-devolved assets. In addition, it was stated in the presentation  that
the SAPS wanted to actively drive the  devolution  process  to  ensure  that
more stations could be devolved in the next few years.

6.3.11      However, the National  Commissioner,  in  his  response  to  the
concerns of Members, acknowledged that the SAPS did not  have  the  capacity
to build police  stations.  He  stated  that  all  capacity,  including  the
capacity to oversee projects, was  outsourced.   The  National  Commissioner
requested that he be allowed to discuss the issue of  capacity  for  capital
works projects within the  SAPS  so  that  they  could  respond  to  Members
adequately.  He would then report to the Committee with a  final  conclusion
on the matter.  The chairperson agreed to this request.

6.3.12       The  Director-General  of  the  Department  of   Public   Works
acknowledged that DPW also faced challenges around the turnaround  time  for
capital projects and were also concerned about the escalations in costs  and
the managing of consultancy fees. However, the Director-General stated  that
he welcomed the National Commissioner’s admission  that  the  SAPS  did  not
have the capacity  to  build  police  stations,  and  stated  that  the  DPW
believed that it did indeed have this capacity to deliver  on  projects  and
provide infrastructure to client departments.

6.4   Track record of the SAPS in capital construction projects

6.4.1 Departmental presentation: The  SAPS,  in  its  presentations  to  the
Committee, did not explicitly acknowledge  any  problems  with  its  current
track record with regard to the construction of  police  stations.   In  the
briefing of 3 September 2010, the SAPS presented a slide illustrating  ideal
and actual construction time periods  for  small,  medium,  large  and  mega
stations. It did acknowledge in this  slide  that  the  actual  construction
time periods were indeed longer than those  that  are  ideal.  However,  the
actual time periods for construction identified in the slide  (ranging  from
two years for a small station to under three years for a mega  station)  are
clearly not a reflection of  the  actual  time  periods  for  SAPS  building
projects.  The research of the Task Team highlighted above, has  illustrated
that these range between three to over six  years.  In  addition,  the  SAPS
presented a slide illustrating rising costs  for  construction.   The  slide
did  not  illustrate  the  difference  between  planned  and  actual  costs.
However, some acknowledgement was  made  of  the  fact  that  SAPS  building
projects had not historically been completed within  acceptable  timeframes,
in the slide which states that the ‘aim is to  have  shorter  delivery  time
(1st project currently ahead of program-Ga-Masemola)’.

6.4.2 Committee  concerns:  Members  raised  numerous  concerns  around  the
length of time taken by the SAPS to build a  police  station  and  the  high
cost  escalations  involved.  Members  questioned  whether   the   projected
timeframes for completion of  the  current  SAPS  Building  Services  police
stations would in fact be realised, given the fact  that  the  research  has
shown that the SAPS continuously extends its projected completion dates.

6.5   Supply Chain Management

6.5.1 Departmental presentation: In contrast to the presentation on  18  May
2010,  the  Department,  in  its  presentation  on  3  September  2010,  did
acknowledge some serious problems with Supply Chain  Management  within  the
SAPS. Problems identified included the lack of a professional  supply  chain
management practice and understanding; a fragmented management approach  and
practices, including general lack of command  and  control,  poor  financial
and  asset  management  and  selective  compliance   with   the   regulatory
environment; the lack of availability of  management  information;  and  the
lack of a coherent strategic framework, including  a  policy  framework,  no
strategic planning and no development framework for supply chain  management
capabilities.   Additional   challenges   included   integrity    challenges
specifically around bid and  tender  processes  and  conflict  of  interests
between members and service providers; management  complacency  with  regard
to undetected incidents of corruption and fraud; and  ineffective  alignment
between   performance   outputs   and   services   rendered.   The   present
organisational culture within the supply  chain  management  environment  is
characterised by a lack of service orientation  and  professionalism  and  a
poor administrative attitude.

6.5.2 The acting head of Supply  Chain  Management,  Lieutenant  Gary  Kruse
identified a number of guiding principles for interventions  that  would  be
taken to address these extremely serious problems within the  Division.  The
interventions  would  focus  on:  strategic  management   issues   (improved
strategic planning processes and agenda; scoping of  a  professional  supply
chain  management  practice  for  the  SAPS;   development   of   management
information capabilities for priority areas; and  alignment  of  performance
management); service delivery priority areas (including facility management-
 building of police stations, vehicle fleet management- mechanical  services
and availability of vehicles, provider (supplier) management, and  inventory
management);  and  addressing  integrity  issues  (including  integrity  and
corruption awareness; integrity  reporting;  coordinated  interventions  and
investigations and integrity risk identification).

6.5.3 Committee concerns: Members welcomed the acknowledgement by  the  SAPS
in the meeting of 3 September  2010  of  the  serious  problems  that  exist
within the supply chain  management  environment  within  the  organisation.
Members  were,  however,  extremely  concerned  about  these  problems   and
questioned how they had been allowed to continue  and  fester  for  so  long
within the SAPS. The Members also questioned whether in the light  of  these
extremely serious challenges within the supply  chain  management  division,
it was correct for the SAPS to be taking on even  more  responsibilities  in
terms of the construction of  police  stations.   Concerns  around  the  bid
processes, selective adherence to policies and procedures, and the  lack  of
an effective management information system had been identified  as  concerns
in the research conducted by the Task Team as well.

6.6   Use of consultants and contractors

6.6.1 Departmental presentation: The Department in its presentations to  the
Committee identified that when SAPS are responsible for  building  projects,
they have two options- they may decide to use  own  resources  for  planning
(in-house architects, engineers etc) and own resources for construction (in-
house builders); or they may decide to outsource planning (or some  planning
functions) to consultants and outsource building functions  to  contractors.
The presentation described the situations when the  formal  bid  process  is
used for the appointment of consultants and contractors and when  quotations
are used for the appointment. In the case of consultants the SAPS  uses  the
pre-qualified roster, on a rotational  basis,  for  appointments.  The  SAPS
described that in terms of design planning, in-house personnel are  used  to
control quality in terms of planning and  monitoring.  They  presented  that
professional consultants/service providers are  appointed  when  specialised
skills  are  required  and  where  specialised  conditions  add  risk.  Only
registered professionals are used and are paid in terms  of  milestones  and
set fees. The SAPS in-house  professionals  are  used  in  planning  and  to
monitor projects and service providers.

6.6.2 Committee concerns: The key concern of the  Committee  centred  around
the extensive use of consultants and contractors and the high percentage  of
costs of construction projects (on average  18%)  that  are  paid  to  these
consultants, in particular.  Members raised this concern  in  the  light  of
assurance that had been  made  to  DPW  and  to  the  Committee  at  various
meetings, that the SAPS did indeed  have  internal  capacity,  for  example,
architects, bricklayers, quantity surveyors,  etc.  to  take  over  devolved
functions,  including  the  building  of  police  stations.  Members  raised
numerous questions in this regard.

6.6.3 Additional concerns raised with regard  to  consultants  included  the
amount paid to consultants (project manager  and  transaction  adviser)  for
the Head Office that at one point  was  going  to  be  built  though  Public
Private Partnership.  Members queried why a consultant  was  used  to  draft
the immovable asset management plan instead of in-house SAPS  personnel  and
whether this reflected lack of internal capacity in this regard.  They  also
queried  the amount paid to this consultant and whether the  plan  had  been
completed and implemented;

6.6.4 Departmental response:  The  National  Commissioner  acknowledged  the
concern  of  Committee  Members  with  regard  to  the  extensive   use   of
consultants and stated that, in his opinion,  where  the  SAPS  referred  to
internal capacity they were in fact referring to outsourcing.  The  National
Commissioner stated that  he  was  concerned  about  the  extensive  use  of
consultants and the fact that 18% of  costs  were  for  consultant  fees.  A
possible solution was to ensure that  internal  skills  were  retained  more
effectively.

6.6.5 The Head of Expert Services seemed to  disagree  with  this  position.
She explained to the Committee that the SAPS never intended to  execute  all
construction work in-house and they only intended to manage the  process  of
appointments and construction. The in-house capacity was to be used for  in-
house planning and documentation. In addition she stated that not  all  SAPS
projects were outsourced and that some  projects  were  indeed  planned  in-
house. However, she did not have the documentation before  her  to  identify
those stations that had been completely planned in-house.
6.7   Prioritisation of police stations for construction

6.7.1 Departmental presentation:  The  SAPS  in  its  presentation  noted  a
number of important challenges with regard  to  the  current  prioritisation
process  whereby  police  stations  for  construction  are  identified   and
prioritised. Essentially the process relies on input via  the  provinces  on
identification of provincial priorities which are then consolidated  into  a
national list and prioritised and approved by the National  Commissioner.  A
work-study  is  used  to  quantify  the  need  in  terms  of  the  available
resources. Key problems include that the Prioritisation Model,  required  in
terms of the  Government  Immovable  Asset  Management  Act,  has  not  been
completed; and there are no clear criteria in place to  ascertain  backlogs.
Thus to date the SAPS does not know what the extent of its backlogs  are  in
terms of police stations and satellite stations (estimated at 158  of  which
28 are currently in execution, 103 are in the 2010-2016 building  programme,
but construction has not yet begun; and 27 have approved works  studies  but
are not included in the 2010-2016 building programme), or indeed  the  other
facilities (estimated at 182). The SAPS: Efficiency Services in  conjunction
with the Department of Public Services and  Administration  will  develop  a
scientific process to identify backlogs.

6.7.2 Committee  concerns:  Members  raised  a  number  of  concerns  around
prioritisation and the identification of backlogs.  A  central  concern  was
the fact that stations that were identified as prioritised for  construction
sometimes take many years  before  they  are  eventually  constructed.  Many
stations identified as a priority as early as 2005 have yet to be built.

6.7.3 Departmental Response: The National Commissioner acknowledged  serious
constraints in the prioritisation process and stated that, as  Commissioner,
he knew that there was a shortage of police  stations,  but  could  not  get
information from the SAPS as to the extent of that shortage and how long  it
would take to address this backlog. He reiterated that he  would  revert  to
the Committee after consultation with SAPS as to the  exact  extent  of  the
backlog and time frames to address this backlog.

6.8   Maintenance

6.8.1 Departmental presentations: The  agreements  with  the  Department  of
Public Works with regard to devolution of functions means  that  in  effect,
from 1 April 2009, in terms of the devolved and  new  police  stations,  the
SAPS is responsible for both planned  and  unplanned  maintenance  of  these
stations.  In terms of non-devolved police stations  and  other  facilities,
the Department of Public Works is responsible for  planned  maintenance  and
for unplanned maintenance over R30 000. Unplanned maintenance under R30  000
(increased from R20 000 as of April 2010) comes from the  provincial  budget
for both devolved and non devolved facilities.

6.8.2 Committee concerns: Members raised concerns  around  how  practically,
at station level, Station Commanders access funds/authority to fulfil  their
responsibility in terms of maintenance complaints  under  R30  000.  Members
noted that in many cases,  Station  Commanders  complain  that  they  cannot
access this money without authorisation from  the  provincial  offices,  and
that many delays are experienced in this regard. Members  remained  confused
during both briefings on  this  issue,  as  the  presentations  continuously
state that Station Commanders are responsible for the management of  day-to-
day maintenance; yet, because the money comes from  the  provincial  office,
the Committee is aware that in fact they do not have the autonomy to act  in
this regard, but  need  to  process  these  maintenance  complaints/requests
through the provincial office.

6.9   Inaccuracies in reporting on capital projects

6.9.1 Committee concerns: The results of  the  research  by  the  Task  Team
identified serious concerns around inaccurate  reporting  on  the  issue  of
police station construction. Committee Members raised numerous  concerns  in
this regard including the identification of inaccuracies in the  information
given in the presentation of 18 May 2010. Inaccuracies in this  presentation
included the reporting of two stations as completed in 2006/07 when in  fact
these stations were completed in mid 2005; and the incorrect  reflection  of
actual expenditure for Capital  Works  which  did  not  correlate  with  the
audited expenditure figures.  Members  were  extremely  concerned  that  the
written information, both  in  official  publications  such  as  the  Annual
Reports and  Estimates  of  National  Expenditure  and  in  written  reports
presented to or provided to the Committee,  reflected  serious  inaccuracies
and contradictions. This severely hampers effective oversight.

6.9.2 Members questioned the motivation  for  inaccurate  reporting  to  the
Committee and there were  concerns  that  this  reporting  was  purposefully
inaccurate in order to mislead the Committee.  This could in  fact  be  seen
as ‘lying’ to Parliament.

6.9.3 Departmental response: The National Commissioner agreed that this  was
a serious concern and stated that he had himself addressed this  issue  with
his officials,  specifically  with  regard  to  the  information  that  they
relayed to the Committee in meetings. He reflected  that  it  seemed  as  if
members of SAPS  were  purposefully  providing  inaccurate  answers  to  the
Committee so that the SAPS ‘looked like fools’.  He  hoped  to  be  able  to
address this problem.

7.    Information required

7.1   Investigations

7.1.1       It is recommended that the Special Investigating Unit and  other
bodies  investigating  the  issue  of  Supply  Chain  Management  and  lease
agreements (DPW, HAWKS, Public Protector),  relating  to  the  SAPS,  should
present a report to the Portfolio Committee on Police, on completion of  the
investigations.

7.2   Agreement between the SAPS and the Department  of  Public  Works  with
regard to property management

7.2.1 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Police  by  mid
February 2011 on the capacity (and continued  desire)  within  the  SAPS  to
take responsibility for the devolved  function  of  capital  works  for  the
building of police stations. This report  should  not  be  limited  to,  but
should include the vision and objectives of the Immovable Assets and  Expert
Services Management structure currently and in the medium to long term,  for
each  of  the  units  that  fall  under  this  structure,  including  Demand
Management and Policy Coordination, Resource Management: Facilities,  Expert
Services, and Building Services; current capacity  constraints  within  each
of these units/sections; assessment of current performance of each of  these
units in delivering on its key objectives; and steps that  are  or  will  be
taken to address the challenges faced by each of  these  units.  The  report
should include comment on whether, in the  light  of  the  track  record  of
Building Service, the SAPS still believes that it  is  desirable  that  they
take over this function from DPW.  The Portfolio Committee  on  Police  will
also make a recommendation on this matter.

7.2.2 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Police  by  mid
February 2011 on progress and any changes with regard  to  the  finalisation
of the Service Level Agreement (draft SLA dated April 2010) between DPW  and
the SAPS.

7.2.3 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Police  by  mid
February 2011 on progress on  the  agreement/plan  with  DPW  on  the  exact
number of police stations that will be devolved from 2011/12 onwards.

7.3   Track record of the SAPS in capital construction projects

7.3.1 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Police  by  mid
February in the form of a written report on the status of completion of  the
11 Building Service projects (or 10  if  the  project  for  the  Khayelitsha
police station is excluded)  projected  for  completion  in  2010/11.   This
report should not  be  limited  to,  but  should  include,  status  of  each
project; explanation of delays or extension of  projected  completion  date;
new (realistic) projected  completion  dates;  expenditure  to  date;  final
expenditure; explanation for escalation  if  actual  expenditure  is  higher
than projected expenditure; description of  what  technical  functions  were
performed in-house and which were outsourced; if  technical  functions  were
outsourced, outline of the expenditure on consultants;  and  explanation  of
the decision for using contractors or for construction being  completed  in-
house.

7.3.2 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee on Police on a  six-
monthly basis, in the form of a written report on the status  of  completion
of all projected projects each year until  completion  of  the  Medium  Term
Framework period. This report  should  includethe  status  of  the  project;
explanation of  delays  or  extension  of  projected  completion  date;  new
(realistic)  projected  completion  date;   expenditure   to   date;   final
expenditure; explanation for escalation if actual  expenditure  higher  than
projected  expenditure;  description  of  what  technical   functions   were
performed in-house and which were outsourced;  if  technical  function  were
outsourced, include the cost of expenditure on consultants; and  provide  an
explanation for reasons for using contractors  or  completing  function  in-
house.

7.4   Supply Chain Management

7.4.1 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee on Police on a  six-
monthly  basis,  in  the  form  of  a  written  report,  on  progress   with
interventions taken to  address  the  challenges  within  the  supply  chain
management environment. This report should include  progress  on:  strategic
management  issues,  service  delivery  priority   areas,   and   addressing
integrity concerns.

7.4.2 The Office of the Auditor-General should report to  the  Committee  by
mid February 2011  on  findings  of  the  Auditor-General  on  Supply  Chain
Management in the SAPS over the past five years.  The SAPS has  received  an
unqualified audit for the past six years (the last qualified report  was  in
2003/04). The Report should address the reasons  for  why  certain  problems
may not have been detected by this Office  or  taken  seriously  enough.  In
addition, the Office should  provide  a  report  to  the  Committee  on  the
finding of its investigation into the use of consultants  by  the  SAPS,  on
finalisation of this performance audit.

7.5   Prioritisation of police stations for construction

7.5.1 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Police  by  mid
February 2011 on progress with regard  to  the  accurate  identification  of
current backlogs for police stations/satellites stations as  well  as  other
facilities. This report should include progress  in  the  development  of  a
scientific process to identify backlogs by Efficiency Services and the  DPSA
and details on this ‘scientific’ process’; progress in  the  development  of
the Prioritisation Model as  required  by  the  Government  Immovable  Asset
Management Act and key aspects of  this  model;  identification  of  current
backlogs; the medium- to long-term plan with  timeframes  to  address  these
backlogs; and detailed projected costs.
7.6   Maintenance

7.6.1 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Police  in  the
form of  a  written  report  to  the  Committee  by  mid  February  2011  on
maintenance issues within the SAPS. This report should  not  be  limited  to
but should include a report on the average time  taken  by  each  provincial
office to address maintenance concerns emanating from stations, reasons  for
delays experienced in each province, and the steps taken  to  address  these
problems.

7.6.2 The SAPS should report to the Portfolio Committee  on  Police  by  mid
February 2011 on progress in finalisation  of  the  Maintenance  Plan/s  for
both planned and unplanned maintenance indicating projected completion  date
for these plans.

7.7   Inaccuracies in reporting on capital projects

7.7.1 The  SAPS  needs  to  ensure  that  it  has  an  effective  Management
Information system in place to accurately track and report on progress  with
capital projects.  The SAPS should report  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
Police in the form of a written report by mid February 2011 detailing  steps
taken to ensure that  information  both  in  formal  publications  (such  as
Annual Reports; and relayed  to  National  Treasury  for  inclusion  in  the
Estimates  of  National  Expenditure)  and  written  and  oral   information
provided to the Committee during meetings and in response  to  questions  is
accurate. The SAPS should liaise  with  National  Treasury  to  ensure  that
information in the Infrastructure tables is  both  accurate  and  consistent
over time. The same categories of information should  thus  be  reported  on
each year and the same variables contained within each category.

7.8   Debate
The Portfolio  Committee  requests  that  this  report  be  debated  in  the
National Assembly.

Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


      1) Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 26 October 2010 and returned for consideration of
         Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 13 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements,
             Tablings and Committee Reports, 20 October 2010, p 2929).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
             Development and Land Reform of the National Assembly for a
             report on the amendments proposed by the Council.
          b) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 14 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements,
             Tablings and Committee Reports, 21 October 2010, p 2954).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural
             Development and Land Reform of the National Assembly for a
             report on the amendments proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
        International Co-operation Fund  for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.


     b) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the establishment
        of a Joint Commission of Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.


     c) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Uganda for the establishment of a Joint Commission of Cooperation.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


CREDA INSERT T101026e-insert1 – PAGES 3199 - 3224

CREDA INSERT T101026e-insert2 – PAGES 3224 - 3239

CREDA INSERT T101026e-insert3 – PAGES 3239 - 3280

4.  The  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  of  the   Portfolio
Committee on Labour on the performance of the Department of Labour  for  the
2009/10 financial year, dated 26 October 2010

The Portfolio Committee on Labour,  having  assessed  the  service  delivery
performance of the Department of Labour, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

Government Gazette No. 32137 indicated that the President  had  assented  to
the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009 (Act  No.9
of 2009) and the Act was published on 16  April  2009  and  therefore  comes
into effect on this date. The Act aims to provide for a procedure  to  amend
money Bills before Parliament and related matters. In broad  terms  the  Act
provides the  procedure  for  Parliament  to  amend  the  budget,  in  which
includes the annual Division of Revenue  Bill  (although  the  bill  is  not
classified as a money  bill  in  terms  of  the  Constitution),  the  Annual
Appropriation Bill and Adjustments Appropriation  Bill.  Provision  is  also
made for the procedure to amend other money Bills.

2. The role of the Committee

The role of the Portfolio Committee on Labour is  to  represent  the  people
and to ensure government by the people by providing  a  national  forum  for
public consideration of issues through legislation and overseeing  executive
action over the national Department of Labour on behalf  of  the  House.  In
terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related  Matters  Act  (Act
No.9 2009),  the  procedure  hinges  on  the  constitutional  obligation  of
Parliament to maintain oversight  over  the  national  executive  authority.
Therefore the annual assessment of  national  departments  by  the  National
Assembly through its committees provides the starting of the procedure.

In this respect the Act  requires  committees  of  the  Assembly  to  submit
annually  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  (BRRR)  after  the
adoption of the  adoption  of  the  Appropriation  Bill  and  prior  to  the
adoption of the reports on the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement  (MTBPS).
The BRRR and the reports  on  the  MTBPS  serve  as  an  indication  whether
amendments might be proposed to the fiscal framework and  the  budget  bills
when these are introduced the following year. In fact, when the Minister  of
Finance introduces the  national  annual  budget,  a  report  to  Parliament
setting out how the Division of Revenue Bill and the  national  budget  give
effect to, or the reasons for not taking into account,  the  recommendations
contained in the BRRR and the reports on the MTBPS.

1.2 The Department

The mandate of the Department of Labour is to play  a  significant  role  in
reducing unemployment, poverty and inequality through a set of policies  and
programmes developed in consultation with social partners, which  are  aimed
at:

    ▪ Improved economic efficiency and productivity
    ▪ Skills development and employment creation
    ▪ Sound labour relations
    ▪ Eliminating inequality and discrimination in the workplace
    ▪ Alleviating poverty in employment
    ▪ Enhancing occupational health and safety awareness and  compliance  in
      the workplace
    ▪ Nurturing the culture of  acceptance  that  worker  rights  are  human
      rights


The Department of Labour will strive for a labour market which is  conducive
to  economic  growth,  investment  and  employment  creation  and  which  is
characterized by rising skills, equity, sound labour relations, respect  for
employment standards and worker rights.


2. Department’s Strategic Priorities and Measurable Objectives

2.1 Strategic Plans of the Department

The Department has adopted the following strategic priorities:

    • Speeding up economic growth and transforming  the  economy  to  create
      decent work and sustainable livelihoods
    • Strengthen skills and human resource base
    • Improve the health profile of the nation
    • Comprehensive rural development strategy linked to land  and  agrarian
      reform and food security
    • Intensity the fight against crime and corruption
    • Massive programme to build economic and social infrastructure
    • Build cohesive, caring and sustainable communities
    • Sustainable resource management and use
    • Pursuing African advancement and enhanced international co-operation
    • Build a Development State including improvement of public services and
      strengthening democratic institutions

2.2 Measurable Objectives of the Department

    • Communication creates awareness about available services in DoL
    • Financial Management, enhance assets  and  office  administration  and
      supply chain management
    • Human Resources Management ensures effective and efficient utilization
      of human capital and renders legal services to the department
    • Information Technology through  the  Private  Partnership  (PPP)  with
      Siemens for the full spectrum of IT needs and requirements of the DoL
    • Internal Audit  provides  management  and  the  Audit  committee  with
      independent  objective  assurance  that  improves   effectiveness   of
      governance, risk management and control processes
    • Risk Management pro-actively manages and addresses risks that  have  a
      negative impact on the DoL’ s performance
    • Security Services renders security support  aimed  at  protecting  DoL
      information, staff and assets
3. Analysis of the Department’s Prevailing Strategic and Operational Plan

The Department’s broad policy priorities remained:

     • Contribution to employment creation using  programmes  that  already
       exist such as leanerships, Growth and Development Summit  agreements
       commitments, supporting  Expanded  Public  Works  Programmes  (EPWP)
       initiatives etc.
     • Enhancing skills development by strengthening institutions  such  as
       SETAs in  order  to  support  Small  Medium  and  Micro  Enterprises
       (SMMEs), and other scarce skills programmes
     • Promoting equity in the labour market by  strengthening  enforcement
       mechanisms to promote a culture of compliance in the  labour  market
       through the  Employment  Equity  Strategy  and  the  Broad  Economic
       Empowerment (BEE) targets.
     • Protecting vulnerable workers by  continuously  evaluating  Sectoral
       Determinations and  through  establishing  bargaining  councils  and
       implementing the Child Labour Programme
     • Strengthening multilateral and bilateral relations through effective
       participation  in  the  International  Labour  Organisation   (ILO),
       Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the African  Union
       Labour and Social Affairs Commission
     • Strengthening social protection  through  widening  the  beneficiary
       threshold of Unemployment Insurance and the Compensation Funds
     • Promoting sound labour relations through sound social  dialogue  and
       through effective and efficient dispute resolution system
     •  Strengthening  the  capacity  of  labour  market  institutions   by
       strengthening capacity  within  statutory  institutions  and  public
       entities to deliver services through performance standards
     • Monitoring the impact of legislation through bi-annual labour market
       reviews and labour statistics and by ensuring the  harmonisation  of
       the labour market policies with other government policies
     • Strengthening  the  institutional  capacity  of  the  Department  by
       decentralising services provided  by  the  Department  and  improved
       management practices within the Department

4. Analysis of Section 32 Expenditure Reports

The First Quarter Expenditure Report for Financial Year 2010/11

In the 2010/11 financial year, the Department  of  Labour  was  allocated  a
total budget of R1.78 billion which is 0.3 of the main  budget  for  2010/11
financial year. In the first quarter, the Department  has  only  managed  to
spend about R488 million or  27.4  per  cent  of  the  allocated  budget  in
2010/11 before the adjustment.  In the  beginning  of  the  financial  year,
however, the Department has  indeed  reported  a  number  of  under  /  over
expenditure in various programmes for the first  quarter  2010/11  financial
year. This is highlighted in the following programmes namely,

Programme1: Administration was allocated a total budget  of  R649.9  million
for the 2010/11 financial year before adjustment. The Department  has  spent
about R134.4 million or 20.6  per  cent  of  the  allocation  in  the  first
quarter. Even though  the  programme  has  over-spent  on  its  transfer  to
household budget but it has spent less than expected in  the  first  quarter
in general. The programme had been allocated about  R159  thousand  for  the
household transfer budget but an amount of R1.1 million or  698.7  per  cent
of the allocation has been spent in the  first  quarter.  According  to  the
Department, the programme has under  spent  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is
difficult to budget for such items as it depends on  staff  initiative.  The
over spending on the household budget is  a  symbol  that  funds  have  been
redirected from other programmes to this programme which  is  indicative  of
poor budgeting.

Programme 2: Inspection and  Enforcement  Services  was  allocated  a  total
budget of R356.6 million for the 2010/11 financial year  before  adjustment.
The Department has spent about  R69.8  million  or  19.6  per  cent  of  the
allocation in the first quarter. This expenditure was mainly driven  by  the
subsistence and travelling as well as transfers to household in  respect  of
inspections and severance and retirement packages respectively.  Though  the
programme has over spent on its transfer to  household  budget  by  176  per
cent of the allocation in the first quarter but  the  programme  in  general
has under spend hence this programme has spent less than 25 per  cent  which
is a spending benchmark for all departments per quarter.  This  reflects  an
under expenditure of 5.4 per cent of the programme allocation  in  the  same
period.

Programme 3: Public Employment Services was  allocated  a  total  budget  of
R280.4 million for the 2010/11 financial year  before  adjustment.  However,
the department has managed to spend about R66.8 million or 23.8 per cent  in
the first quarter. Of this expenditure  the  programme  is  still  remaining
with  unspent  funds  of  R2.6  million  which  was  part  of  the  approved
projections for the first quarter. This level of under expenditure  was  due
to the delays in the clarification of role  and  responsibilities  of  staff
within this programme (PES) particularly in provinces due  to  restructuring
process. Part of the  slow  spending  in  this  programme  was  due  to  the
decrease in claims by  civil  servants  for  injuries  on  duty  which  then
reduces the administration costs.

Programme 4: Labour Policy and  Labour  Market  Programme  was  allocated  a
total budget of  R496.8  million  for  the  2010/11  financial  year  before
adjustment period. The Department has managed to spend about R216.9  million
or 43.6 per cent of the allocation in the first  quarter.  The  higher  than
expected expenditure in this programme was  due  to  the  high  spending  on
transfers and subsidies to Strengthen Civil Society, the  once  off  payment
to COSATU and SACOTU for May Day celebration in April.  Part  of  this  high
level of expenditure was also the transfer payment to  CCMA  which  is  done
into two tranches. Though most of the over  expenditure  in  this  programme
emanated from the once off payments which is transfer budget but this is  an
indication that this Department will shift funds or request  for  additional
budget in order to carry out its mandate for the rest of financial year.

5. Analysis of the Department’s Annual Report and Financial Statements

The 2009 global economic  climate  presented  numerous  challenges  for  the
South African labour market, with  several  sectors  shedding  thousands  of
jobs further straining the  already  vulnerable  groups.  Both  the  private
household and agriculture sectors  shed  38  000  and  31  000  respectively
during the fourth quota of 2009. This trend  continued  well  into  2010  as
employment  continued  to  decrease  the  formal  non-agricultural  business
sectors in 2009 and 2010, as 79 000 people lost their jobs between  December
2009 and March 2010. As can be expected, during such periods, much  pressure
is on government’s Active Labour Market Programmes established to deal  with
unemployment through skills training and placement programmes.  Consequently
the Department of Labour’s  resources  and  its  entities  have  been  under
pressure during this period in order to either  assist  people  seeking  new
work opportunities and those in the process of being  retrenched.  The  role
of the National Economic Development and Labour  Council  (NEDLAC)  and  the
Commission for Conciliation  Mediation  and  Arbitration  (CCMA)  were  also
prominent during  this  period.  As  such,  this  demand  on  the  entities’
resources has raised issues  of  their  financial  capacity  to  meet  these
demands.

Moreover,  the  social  insurance  programmes  such  as   the   Unemployment
Insurance Fund (UIF) experience a sharp increase in claims by  the  mounting
numbers of  the  unemployed  and  retrenched  workers.  During  the  2009/10
financial year, the UIF paid out a total of R4  536  million  compared  with
the R2 834 million in  2008/09  financial  year  in  unemployment  benefits,
wherein a total of 628 595 were approved new claims.

The Department of Labour was allocated an amount of  R2.09  billion  in  the
2009/10 financial year which is 4.2 per cent of the main budget. This  takes
into account the adjustment made by the Department during adjustment  period
in the same year. However, the Department has only managed to spend  R  2.06
billion or 98.7 per cent at the end of 2009/10 which  is  R26.8  million  or
1.2 per cent under-spending. Furthermore,  an  amount  of  R36  million  was
shifted from  the  Departmental  budget  during  the  adjustment  period  of
2009/10,  meaning  that  the  allocated  amount  at  the  beginning  of  the
financial year was R2.1 billion before the adjustment.

Administration: Programme 1 was allocated a total  budget  of  R419  million
for the 2009/10 financial year after the adjustment  budget.  The  programme
has managed to spend exactly R419 million or 100 per cent  of  this  budget.
This  means  that  the  Department  has  spent  exactly  according  to   its
projections in this programme. However,  even  though  the  budget  is  well
spent in this programme but there is an amount of R31.3  million  which  was
shifted from other programmes to this programmes, in  turn  increasing  this
programme’s budget balance from R392 million to R419 million. This  movement
of funds was done during the adjustment period, though the  PFMA  allows  it
but it is subject to abuse in a number of ways  and  results  in  unintended
consequences. Firstly, when a Department moves funds from one  programme  to
another those funds do not move with a  programme  therefore  this  movement
defeats the intended goal of that  particular  programme.  Secondly,  people
move funds precisely because of poor financial planning in  that  particular
financial year. It is also an indicative  of  incomprehensible  use  of  the
medium term expenditure framework (MTEF) hence it gives  proper  projections
three years prior on how the budget will look  like.  When  used  correctly,
the medium term expenditure gives a chance to departments  to  adjust  their
budgets prior the implementation stage.

Whilst  the  programme  achieved  some  of  its  objectives,   however   the
Department’s contract with Siemens has been under scrutiny for a  number  of
years, due to failure to deliver on important objectives. As a  result,  the
Auditor-General  and  the  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts   have
repeatedly raised the challenges that have transpired due to the nature  and
conditions of the contract. The  contract  agreement  expires  in  2013.  In
response, during the 2009/09 strategic plan, the department set  targets  to
improve the management of the IT PPP contract with Siemens, to identify  and
document all outstanding items  as  agreed  in  the  PPP  and  agree  on  an
implementation plan to finalise these within the contract period, to  review
the PPP to determine the strengths, weaknesses, shortcomings and  challenges
during the contract period, enhance the capacity of the office of the  Chief
Information Officer (OCIO) to effectively manage the ICT PPP  Agreement  and
drive the Department’s ICT Strategy, Internal Audit.  On these targets,  the
department has partially achieved its objectives.

Service Delivery: Programme  2  was  allocated  a  total  amount  of  R712.5
million for the 2009/10 financial year after  adjustments  period,  but  the
Department only spent about R710 million or 99.7 per cent  of  this  budget.
This shows a 0.3 under expenditure in this  programme  at  the  end  of  the
2009/10 financial year. The reasons for lower than expected expenditure  was
due to the unspent R74.3 million which was supposed to have  been  spent  in
the buying of Hilux bakkies and the  Department  decided  to  purchase  less
than what was budgeted for as well as failure  to  spend  on  machinery  and
other equipments. Of note is that an amount of  R72.3  million  was  shifted
from compensation of employees to other programmes  due  to  high  vacancies
(13.8 % in 2009/10 and 11% in 2010/11) which were not filled in the  2009/10
financial year.

Whereas the service delivery programme has partially delivered  on  its  set
targets, but there are ongoing concerns over issues relating to capacity  to
investigate occupational health and safety incidents  due  to  high  vacancy
rates  and  unqualified  inspectors.   Whilst  the  department  is  actively
implementing the Enforcement and Inspectorate Services  turnaround  strategy
in  order  to  transform  and  empower  the  inspectorate  services,   other
challenges such as those of IT systems  inefficiencies  also  aggravate  the
already strained key service delivery point of the department.

Employment and Skills Development Services /  Human  Resources  Development:
Programme 3 was allocated a total amount of R406  million  for  the  2009/10
financial year. The programme has only spent about R390.6 million or 96  per
cent at the end of the financial year. This level of under  expenditure  was
due to the R16.3 million unspent funds, this due to the  function  shift  of
skills development from the Department of Labour to  the  newly  established
Department of  Higher  Education  and  Training  (DHET).  Furthermore  these
unspent funds are mainly related  to  the  Quality  Council  for  Trade  and
Occupation (QCTO). Since October 2009, all skills  development  competencies
together with unspent funds have  been  transferred  to  the  Department  of
Higher Education and Training for the establishment of  the  QCTO  and  once
off filling of vacancies. Of note is that an amount  of  R74.2  million  was
shifted from this  programme  to  other  programmes  during  the  adjustment
period of 2009/10 financial year.

Labour Policy and Labour Market  Programme:  Programme  4  was  allocated  a
total budget of R541.7 million in 2009/10 financial year and the  Department
has also managed to spend R536 million or 99  per  cent.  According  to  the
National Treasury, the under expenditure attributed to unspent R5.3  million
due to the delays in the tender process  for  the  Research  Monitoring  and
Evaluation Agenda.  The  Department  has  applied  for  roll-overs  in  this
regard. Part of  this  under  expenditure,  was  the  slower  than  expected
expenditure on Membership fees for  International  Organisations  which  was
budgeted R9.2 million and the Department only spent R8.6 million at the  end
of the financial year. To this end it was noted  that  an  amount  of  R40.7
million was also shifted from other programmes towards this programme as  an
additional budget in the same period in this programme.

On the Employment Services System: Unemployment is  acutely  high  in  South
Africa,  especially  amongst  the  youth.  As  a  result,  when   government
announces initiatives, with the promise of immediate or  future  employment,
people hastily flock those offices. It is therefore  no  surprise  that  the
department estimated 30 000 people to be registered with  the  ESSA  was  an
underestimation as 636 140 people registered (606 140 more).  To  illustrate
the demand of services offered by  this  programme,  within  the  first  six
months of the 2009/10 financial year, 13 725 new  jobs  were  registered  on
employment services database and  5  600  of  job  seekers  were  placed  in
permanent employment within the first  six  months  of  the  financial  year
under review.

Whilst more employment opportunities,  than  expected,  were  registered  in
provinces such as the Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng  North,  Gauteng
South, KwaZulu/Natal, and Western  Cape  others  registered  below  expected
numbers. These include the Limpopo Province, Mpumalanga  Province,  Northern
Cape and North West Province. Although not explained in the  annual  report,
part of the reasons could be the  ongoing  skills  mismatch  in  the  labour
market, i.e. continued  oversupply  of  unskilled  to  semi-skilled  labour.
Another reason  could  be  the  continued  use  and  preference  of  Private
Employment Services over the department’s  ESSA  by  employers.  Hence,  the
department should also provide the skills profile of  people  registered  in
ESSA so as to establish reasons for such  low  intake  of  registered  work-
seekers.

The Sheltered Employment Factories: in 2007, when the  department  met  with
the portfolio committee regarding  the  2005/06  audit  performance  of  the
Sheltered Employment Factories (SEF), various assurances were made; such  as
re-establishing the factories in  accordance  with  the  PFMA  and  Treasury
regulations, as well as the commitment to determine the  legal  persona  and
the appropriate structure of the SEF. In response to  the  Auditor-General’s
findings on the  lack  of  staff  with  adequate  financial  and  management
accounting at the SEF,  the  department  made  undertaking  that  a  project
dedicated to addressing these challenges had been initiated, as well  as job
profiles had been completed for finance staff  and  training  was  underway.
These commitments were made four years ago, but similar challenges  continue
within the factories.

It is worth noting that, the Sheltered Employment Factories  (SEF)  received
a qualified audit opinion during the 2008/09 financial year,  following  the
2006/07 qualified audit  opinion  with  numerous  matters  highlighted  that
included internal controls, non-compliance with the legislation and for  the
year 2009/10 the SEF received  an  Adverse  Opinion  Inventories  on  issues
relating to cost  of  sales,  property  and  plant  equipment,  disclosures:
including irregular expenditure.  The dismal performance  of  SEF  over  the
years raises serious concerns about the capacity of the Department  to  give
guidance and oversight over the entity. It is also  quite  clear,  based  on
the  audit  outcome,  that  the  SEF  lack  serious  financial   skills   or
competencies. It is also of great  concern  that,  the  SEFs  are  a  unique
design for the people with  disabilities  and  probably  the  only  form  of
empowerment for  the  disabled  where  they  solely  produce  high  standard
quality products that can compete equally in  the  open  market.  Therefore,
the potential value of  these  factories  is  inconceivable;  as  such  need
immediate attention from the department.

Social Insurance: Programme 5 was allocated a total amount of  R8.9  million
for the 2009/10 financial year. Of this  amount,  the  Department  has  only
spent up to R6 million  or  67  per  cent  of  the  entire  budget  of  this
programme with no adjustment or additional  budget.  Under  expenditure  was
due to the slower than expected  expenditure  on  administration  costs  for
claims by civil servants injured on duty. This level  of  under  expenditure
in this programme remains a cause  for  concern  hence  this  programme  was
meant to compensate people who are injured on duty.

Analysis of Economic Classifications 2009/10

Current Payments are divided into two  categories  namely,  compensation  of
employees and goods and  services.  Compensation  of  employees  only  spent
about 98.9 per cent of  its  adjusted  budget  in  2009/10  financial  year.
Though programme 3 (Employment and Skills Development) was unable  to  spent
a total of R6.5 million in  this  category  in  the  same  period.   It  was
further noted that  an  amount  of  R94.1  million  was  shifted  from  this
category and 98.7 per cent of this amount  was  from  programme  2  (Service
Delivery). When all the unspent funds are added together in  this  programme
(R6.5 million +R94.6 = R100.7  million)  is  equal  to  R100.7  million  was
unspent in the same period. The  high  level  of  poor  expenditure  can  be
attributed, firstly to high vacancy  rate  among  labour  inspectors,  human
resource practitioners and finance staff in the department.  Secondly,  part
of this under expenditure was also  due  to  delays  in  payments  to  State
Information Technology Agency (SITA) for data lines and delays  in  payments
to the Department of Public Works (DPW) for operating lease agreement.

Transfers and Subsidies only spent about 86.3 per cent of its  total  budget
of which 78.8 per cent was a statutory transfer in relation  to  the  skills
development levies and 7.5 per cent was transferred to public  entities  and
non profit institutions.

Capital Payment (CAPEX) the expenditure is relatively poor in this  category
due to the slow spending on buildings and  other  fixed  structures  namely,
the construction of Rustenburg  Labour  Centre.  The  slower  than  expected
spending was due to delays in the  tender  process  and  the  submission  of
claims regarding capital projects on office buildings by DPW.
Audit Performance

The department received a 5th consecutive qualified audit opinion  based  on
certain discrepancies, the Auditor-General (AG) could  not  obtain  adequate
assurance of the PPP assets amounting to R1444 62000 due to:

    • The department’s non-ability to provide reconciliation  of  the  asset
      register to the amount in the financial statements
    • IT assets register that was not adequately maintained, assets  to  the
      value of R37 126 651 did not have purchase dates and assets worth  R16
      131 870 could not be verified

Furthermore, the AG drew the following emphasis of mater:

     • Contingent assets: the department is claiming an amount  of  R5  020
       000 from the Siemens due to the overpayments of unitary  fees  which
       was based on a larger number of users than actually employed by  the
       department. Siemens had not  yet  made  the  repayment  nor  had  it
       acknowledged any overpayments when the report was compiled
     • Unauthorised/Fruitless and wasteful/irregular expenditure  worth  R3
       392 125 due to payments made  a  supplier  after  the  contract  had
       expired, incorrect procurement procedures followed and the inspector
       posts that were upgraded to a higher level  without  prior  approval
       from the Minister.

The AG further raised issues that relate to:

    • Non-compliance with regulatory and reporting requirements: where  the
      department did not comply with Treasury Regulations  5.3.1  regarding
      the establishment  of  procedures  for  quarterly  reporting  to  the
      executive authority. Secondly, the strategic plan did  not  form  the
      basis for reporting on performance information in the annual  reports
      of the accounting officer as required by Treasury  Regulations  5.4.2
      and thirdly, the annual report did not reasonably present the stet of
      affairs of the department and its performance  against  predetermined
      objectives as required by section 40(3) (a)  of  the  Public  Finance
      Management Act (PMFA)
    • Presentation of reported performance  information:  service  delivery
      programme performance information  is  not  presented  in  a  simple,
      accessible format, relevant and useful to the intended user,  and  in
      accordance with the requirements of Treasury Regulation 18
    • Usefulness of reported performance information:  the  department  did
      not report on all the predetermined objectives as required by section
      40(3)(a) of the PFMA  and  Treasury  Regulations  5.2.4  and  18.3.1.
      secondly, the measurable objectives of the service delivery programme
      were not consistent with the indicators as per the strategic plan
    • Compliance with  laws  and  regulations  as  required  by  the  PFMA,
      Treasury Regulations and  the  Public  Service  Act  and  the  Public
      Service Regulations.

The AG also raised issues concerning:

     • Leadership: the accounting  officer  did  not  exercise  satisfactory
       oversight  responsibility  and  internal  control  to   ensure   that
       financial information  and  predetermined  objectives  reported  were
       accurate, complete and existed.
     •  Financial  and   Performance   Management:   financial   information
       supporting  the  amounts  disclosed  in  the   financial   statements
       submitted on the PPP assets were not prepared  timely  to  allow  for
       sufficient review by management.
     • Governance: the  internal  audit  did  not  provide  adequate  review
       function over  the  internal  controls  of  the  department.  The  AG
       identified a number of control weaknesses which were  not  identified
       and corrected by the internal audit.

Other Reports:

    • Investigations in progress: the investigation  was  underway,  at  the
      time of reporting, regarding the alleged internal control deficiencies
      and possible override of controls at INDLELA. Though the programme has
      been transferred to Higher Education, like the rest  of  other  skills
      development competencies, the investigation continued
    • Investigations completed during the financial year:  an  investigation
      into fraudulent payments amounting to R981 450  that  occurred  during
      the 2008/09 financial year was  concluded.  The  department  recovered
      R142 404 from the account that was  used  to  deposit  the  fraudulent
      payments.

6. Consideration of Reports of Committee on Public Accounts

Having  received  a  qualified  audit  opinion,  the  Department  of  Labour
appeared before the Standing Committee on Public Accounts in 2009  regarding
its 2008/09 financial year audit performance. Following which the  committee
made the following recommendations:

   a) Control activities are identified and developed with consideration  of
      their cost and their potential effectiveness in mitigating risks;
   b) Management establishes, documents and implements  a  fraud  prevention
      plan;
   c)  Management  maintains  an  effective  risk  management  policy  which
      continuously  evaluates  and  updates  the  financial  management  and
      internal control risks;
   d) Reasonable steps are taken to recover debts before  they  are  written
      off and further steps are taken to recover debts from the  individuals
      responsible;
   e) Criminal charges are  laid  against  individuals  who  have  committed
      financial misconduct;
   f) Internal control deficiencies are identified  and  communicated  in  a
      timely manner to those responsible for taking corrective action;

   g)  An  effective  and  well  capacitated  internal  audit  division   is
      established;

   h) Management implements regular assessments of supply chain  performance
      to ensure that deficiencies are corrected;

   i) The entity addresses areas of responsibility and establishes lines  of
      reporting  in  order  to  support  effective  internal  control   over
      financial reporting; and

   j) Effective policies and procedures in relation to  financial  reporting
      are established and communicated.

7. Committee’s Observations

Following  the  consideration  of  the  department’s  2009/10  and   2010/11
financial  and  programmatic  performance,  the  committee  identified   the
following issues

 • The high level of vacancy rate which  according  to  the  department  has
   decreased from 24.6 per cent in June 2009 to 11.8 per cent in June  2010.
   It was also noted that these vacancies are  dominated  by  the  following
   categories  of  labour  inspectors  11.4   per   cent,   Human   Resource
   practitioners 16.7 per cent, finance and other administrative posts  13.2
   per cent

 • The delays in the procurement processes such as the  late  submission  of
   invoices and claims by the Department of Public Works (DPW)  for  capital
   projects have also contributed to the culture of under expenditure in the
   first quarter for 2010/11.

 • The misalignment of processes and lack of proper financial planning which
   resulted in the shifting and virements  of  funds  within  and  from  one
   programme to another  programme,  though  this  practise  is  allowed  by
   section 43 of the Public Finance Management Act. However, it does have  a
   negative impact, which ultimately defeats  the  initial  purpose  of  the
   programme. It also promotes the culture of inability to plan  accurately.
   additionally, the committee also observed that,  as  a  result  of  grave
   under-funding of certain entities, the department has had to continuously
   adjust its budget in order to  meet critical programmatic objectives

 • It was also noted that the Department  is  still  struggling  to  project
   accurately for its transfers and subsidies budget particularly those that
   are transferred to household sub-programmes in  various  programmes.  The
   Department  has  over  spent  on  these  sub-programmes  within   various
   programmes, citing the fact that it is difficult to budget for it.

7. Recommendations

    • On Sheltered Employment Factories, the  Committee  observed  that  the
      dismal performance of SEF over the years raises serious concerns about
      the capacity of the Department to give guidance and oversight over the
      entity. It is also quite clear, based on the audit outcome,  that  the
      SEF lack serious financial skills or competencies, starting  from  the
      head of the factories to the staff in general. It  is  also  of  great
      concern that, the SEFs  are  a  unique  design  for  the  people  with
      disabilities and  probably  the  only  form  of  empowerment  for  the
      disabled where they solely produce high standard quality products that
      can compete equally in the open market. Therefore, the potential value
      of these factories is inconceivable. The department must address these
      challenges immediately,  and  report  on  a  quarterly  basis  on  the
      progress regarding all issues raised by the AG.
    • Whereas the department continues to implement the turnaround  strategy
      on the Inspectorate and Enforcement Services,  however  the  committee
      observed that the slow progress at which  this  has  been  implemented
      should be addressed. As a result, the committee  recommends  that  the
      department should on  the  details  of  the  turnaround  strategy  and
      progress with regards  to  targets  set.  Furthermore,  the  committee
      recommends that in addition to  the  consultation  on  the  turnaround
      strategy, the department should also  give  details  of  the  proposed
      Occupational Health and Safety draft policy and Bill as the integrated
      inspectorate services has potential  to  address  numerous  challenges
      regarding the inspectorate services.

    • With regard to Service  Delivery,  additional  funds  should  also  be
      allocated to the Department to  provide  more  mobile  labour  centres
      especially in rural areas in order to bring the services closer to the
      people.

    • The Department must  consistently  report  on  all  the  predetermined
      measurable objectives and indicators, as per  the  relevant  strategic
      plan

    • The Department must prioritise the filling  of  vacancies  within  the
      Inspectorate and Enforcement Services and the entities.
    • Given the amount of work that has been transferred to labour  centres,
      due  to  decentralisation  of  services  from  the  head  office,  the
      Committee recommends that resources, i.e.  both  human  and  financial
      should be transferred to  these  centres  in  order  to  provide  best
      possible services to the people. The  Committee  recommends  that  the
      department should appear before the  Committee  in  order  to  provide
      details on how the department proposes to address challenges faced  by
      the labour centres. Furthermore, the  Committee  recommends  that  the
      Director-General and the Minister  should  commence  regular  meetings
      with their counterparts from the Department of Public Works  in  order
      to fast-track the construction of labour centres.

    • The Committee would have regular briefing sessions with the Department
      in order to report on progress regarding audit  challenges,  with  the
      intention of preventing  further  negative  audits  in  future.  These
      briefing sessions should include reports  on  progress  regarding  the
      filling of key vacancies within the department and its entities.

    • The Global Financial Crisis is just one example of how  much  work  is
      demanded from the National Economic  Development  and  Labour  Council
      (NEDLAC) and the Commission for Conciliation Mediation and Arbitration
      (CCMA). The demand on these two entities far  outweigh  their  current
      appropriation,  hence  such  a  demand   outstrips   their   financial
      resources. Consequent to this, NEDLAC is unable to  attract  requisite
      skills due to financial constraints.  As  a  matter  of  urgency,  the
      Committee  recommends  that  National  Treasury  should  address   the
      financial position of these two entities, in view  of  the  fact  that
      their work has serious socio-economic  implications  if  not  properly
      addressed.



Signed:
               Date:


----------------------------------
              --------------------------------
Hon. L.E. Yengeni (MP)
Chairperson: Portfolio Committee on Labour

Report to be considered

CREDA INSERT - T101026e-insert5 – PAGES 3293 - 3322

CREDA INSERT - T101026e-insert6 – PAGES 3323 - 3355


