---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-03-25
---

THURSDAY, 25 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at the Sekhukhune Further Education and Training College,
Dr CN Phatudi Campus in the Greater Tubatse Local Municipality at 17:11.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see column 000

               AMENDMENT OF ORDER PAPER TO INCLUDE ORDER NO 6

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council agrees that the Order Paper be amended to include
   Order No 6, namely the Consideration of Report of Select Committee on
   Security and Constitutional Development – Regulations made in terms of
   section 97(1) of the Child Justice Act, 2008(Act No 75 of 2008).

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I move without notice –

     That Rule 239(1), which provides inter alia that the consideration of a
     Bill may not commence before at least three working days have elapsed
     since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes
     of consideration of the Division of Revenue Bill [B4-2010] (National
     Assembly – sec 76(1)).

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                WISHES FOR A SPEEDY RECOVERY FOR MR A WATSON

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Before the Secretary reads the First Order of
the day, I take this opportunity, on behalf of the House, to wish one of
our hon members, Mr Watty Watson, a speedy recovery and good health. As you
are aware, he was in hospital. I’m sure he is back home now. However, he is
not yet well and we wish him a speedy recovery on behalf of the Council.

                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, Ministers present here, premiers present, the Premier of Limpopo
in absentia, MECs, permanent and special delegates, traditional leaders,
ladies and gentlemen, I greet you.

This month, which celebrates human rights, is indeed an important milestone
in our country, as it not only marks the 50th anniversary of the
Sharpeville and Langa massacres as the most important events of the
liberation struggle but also acknowledges the progress we have made to
restore the dignity and rights of all South Africans. I want to take this
opportunity to commend the National Council of Provinces, NCOP, for having
taken a decision at this time, during this month, to bring the people’s
Parliament to where it belongs, to the people.

The national orders, the highest awards that our country bestows on its
citizens and foreign nationals who have contributed to our nation’s
attainment of democracy, as well as building democracy and human rights,
were awarded to three distinguished Limpopo veterans and stalwarts who
distinguished themselves in the struggle for justice, democracy, human
rights and development. These recipients include Mr Tlou Theophilus Cholo,
an activist and public representative in his own right, Mr Rashaka Frank
Ratshitanga, and Ms Lydia Komape-Ngwenya, a former Member of Parliament,
and many others. It is through their sacrifices and endeavours that today
we can talk about the freedom and the democracy that we share.

Again I commend the NCOP for having brought this programme at this time and
having chosen Limpopo because of the contribution made by these stalwarts
and many others whom we all know. It was also in this province that the
ANC’s 52nd conference was held and ground-breaking resolutions were passed
to accelerate service delivery and to further democratise the state in
pursuit of the noble objective of a better life for all. We reaffirmed our
commitment towards a developmental state that is responsive to the people’s
needs and allocates resources to fight poverty, inequality and social
deprivation. As our first democratically elected President, Tata Nelson
Mandela, put it in his address to the US Congress on 26 June 1990:

   We must also make the point, very firmly, that the political settlement,
   and democracy itself, cannot survive unless the material needs of the
   people, the bread-and-butter issues, are addressed as part of the process
   of change and as a matter of urgency. It should never be that the anger
   of the poor should be the finger of accusation pointed at all of us
   because we failed to respond to the cries of the people for food, for
   shelter, for the dignity of the individual.

These important events are very appropriate for the 2010 Division of
Revenue Bill that the NCOP is considering today, as the allocations
contained in this Bill are intended to restore the dignity and rights of
all South Africans by catering for services such as education, primary
health, housing, water and sanitation, and electricity. It really makes it
important that our oversight bodies, such as this Council, the legislatures
and the National Assembly, use this legislation and all other information
that National Treasury generates to ensure that the goals that many of our
people in the country fought for during the liberation struggle, including
the stalwarts from Limpopo, as I have identified, are realised.

In terms of section 214 of the Constitution, government needs to ensure a
transparent and equitable system to divide nationally raised revenue
between the three spheres of government. The Division of Revenue Bill that
is before us today and its underlying allocations are the culmination of
extensive consultation processes between national, provincial and local
governments. Of the R112,2 billion additional resources available for
spending over the next three years, national departments will receive R56,2
billion, which is about 50,1%. Provinces will receive an additional
R45,6 billion, which is 40,6%, and municipalities will receive
R10,4 billion, which is 9,3%.

The Division of Revenue Bill that was tabled in the National Assembly by
the Minister of Finance on Budget Day was, as we all would recall, for the
first time processed in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
Related Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009. A report was tabled with the Budget,
explaining how the division of revenue and National Budget gave effect to
the recommendations contained in the committee reports of the 2009 Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement. In that, we also indicated the reasons for
taking this into account, as well as those recommendations that were not
taken into account. So, I am happy to announce that the recommendations by
the Select Committee on Appropriations were taken into account when we
processed it, and responses were provided.

This Bill covers in detail all transfers to be made to provinces and
municipalities over the next three years. The explanatory attachments also
contain detailed information on the formulas for the provincial and local
equitable share allocations and a detailed framework on each conditional
grant to a province or municipality. However, allow me to caution that
certainty of flows alone is not sufficient to ensure that services are
delivered to our people.

In light of the need to speed up progress on South Africa’s developmental
challenges, government is now shifting away from focusing on activities to
targeted outcomes to improve service delivery and increase accountability.
That will become the focus of policy and implementation. These objectives,
with associated activities and defined targets to be reached by 2014, have
helped shape the 2010 Budget. It is important that all national and
provincial departments, as well as municipalities, cut nonessential
expenditure from their budgets and prioritise activities that will lead to
improved outcomes.

Chairperson, let me turn to some of the highlights of the deliberations in
the Select Committee on Appropriations on this Bill that the House is
considering today.

Some of the issues that were raised by those who made representations to
the committee point to the following pertinent matters about our budgeting,
financial management and performance monitoring system: Firstly, and most
importantly, the deliberations highlighted the importance of the NCOP in
exercising its oversight role.

Secondly, the discussions highlighted not only matters of capacity and
quality of spending but also spending pressures faced by provinces and
municipalities. I am told that members of the select committee raised
concerns regarding the ability of certain provinces to deal with costs
associated with the implementation of the occupation-specific dispensation
for health and education. Concerns were also expressed regarding the
funding of smaller municipalities that struggle to maintain institutional
capacity for effective local governance and administration. The lack of
sufficient road maintenance was also highlighted as a key area of concern.

Thirdly, the latest available data needs to be used to determine grant
allocations to individual provinces and municipalities in order to ensure
that service delivery responsibilities are appropriately matched with
resources.

Lastly, discussions also focused on the effectiveness of conditional grants
currently in place. The importance of ensuring that grants’ objectives are
met prior to such grants being withdrawn or abolished, such as those that
cater for water, sanitation and electricity facilities in schools and
clinics, was stressed. The importance of transferring national offices
communicating to receiving offices the qualifying criteria and grant
conditions prior to the commencement of the financial year was also
emphasised.

The committee supported the introduction of a number of new conditional
grants to provinces and municipalities, such as the Rural Household
Infrastructure Grant. These recommendations will be taken forward in
subsequent budgets. The need to ensure an equitable division of the
available resources to individual provinces and municipalities is one of
the founding principles of our intergovernmental fiscal system.

The equitable share formula relating to provinces and municipalities
therefore need to be appropriately structured. In other words, it should
adhere to the principles of equity, efficiency, spill-over effects and
facilitating democracy.

A review of the provincial equitable formula is under way that will,
amongst other things, focus on education, health and social development,
provincial infrastructure, which includes roads, economic services,
governance and administration. The review should be completed in time to be
adopted in the 2011 Division of Revenue Bill.

Similarly, a review of the local government fiscal framework and equitable
share formula are under way in order to more appropriately deal with the
different challenges faced by the 283 municipalities. Accordingly,
historical backlog service delivery responsibilities and socioeconomic and
demographic realities - a one-size-fits-all, therefore - does not recognise
these differences and that is why we are looking at it.

The review, amongst others, also includes a review of all conditional
grants to local governments and that is one of the recommendations that I
indicated will be taken into account in the next financial year.

With regard to provinces, the increase of a baseline for the next three
years to provinces is to sustain the social progress made in recent years
to meet government’s broader developmental objectives and mitigate the
effects of the current economic downturn on the poor. Of the additional
allocation to provinces, R33,9 billion is added to the provincial equitable
share and R11,7 billion to conditional grants. Including these revisions,
allocations to provinces will now amount to R322,9 billion in the 2010-11
financial year.

These allocations are in line with government’s efforts to upgrade the
quality of basic education, improve health outcomes and life expectancy at
birth and develop sustainable rural communities and human settlements. An
amount of R12,9 billion is intended to step up service delivery in health
and education, and to implement the occupation-specific dispensation
agreements in these sectors. Also, an additional R18 billion is intended
for the carry-through costs of the 2009 public service salary agreements.

In support of government’s commitment to step up efforts to deal with HIV
and Aids decisively, R8,7 billion is also added over the next three years
to ensure sufficient resources are available for government to deliver on
its commitment announced on World Aids Day.

Turning to local government, over the next three years municipalities will
receive R210,4 billion, including in-kind allocations and the sharing of
the general fuel levy with metros, or an additional R12,2 billion. These
additional allocations build on previous spending programmes and are
directed to the local government priorities, namely the local government
equitable share, which receives a further R6,7 billion to protect the poor
from increased electricity prices and secure the delivery of free basic
services to poor households.

Municipal infrastructure-related spending is allocated an additional R2,5
billion over the next three years. A process is under way to accredit large
municipalities to administer national housing programmes. This policy shift
should improve co-ordination and alignment of interventions in the built
environment.
Reforms are also under way to introduce programmes targeted at rural areas.
Over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework R1,2 billion is made available
to cater for the roll-out of on-site water and sanitation services to very
poor households where conventional connector services are not viable or
appropriate.

In conclusion, Mr Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Chairperson of
the Standing Committee on Appropriations, Mr T Chaane, for his leadership
and the members of the standing committee alike for their hard work in the
processing of this Division of Revenue Bill.

Chairperson and members, it is clear that the allocations contained in this
year’s Division of Revenue Bill should put government in a better position
to accelerate delivery and improve the efficacy of public services. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Just before I call on Mr Chaane, I
would like to correct the mistake I made this afternoon when we closed the
public hearing. Our sitting tomorrow starts at 09:00. Everybody must be
seated by 08:30.

Ke kgopela setšhaba seo se lego gona mo, le no botšana kamoka gore re tla
thoma ka 09:00 bosasa. Ka 08:30 re swanetše goba re dutše ka mo. Motlatša
Mopresidente o tla thoma go bolela ka 9;00. Re tla goeletša le mo radiong
mathapameng a lehono gore bao ba šetšego ba sepetše ba kgone go kwa. Ke a
leboga. [Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[Please tell those who are not present that tomorrow we will start at
09:00. Everyone must be seated at 08:30. The Deputy President will start
his speech at 09:00. We will also announce it on the radio this evening for
the message to reach those who are already gone. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr T E CHAANE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon premiers, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen. On 17 February 2010 the Minister of Finance, hon
Pravin Gordhan, tabled the Division of Revenue Bill together with the
Budget. This was in accordance with the relevant sections of the Money
Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act of 2009, the Constitution
and the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act of 1997.

Following the tabling of the Division of Revenue and the engagements with
the national Department of Treasury, the Select Committee on
Appropriations, in accordance with section 4 of the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act of 2009, held public hearings on 5 March
2010.

The committee received written and oral submissions from the Department of
Higher Education, Department of Basic Education, Department of Energy,
Department of Health, Department of Rural Development, SA Local Government
Association, Salga, Financial and Fiscal Commission, FFC, Aids Law Project,
Eskom, SA Institute of Chartered Accountants, the City of Cape Town and
inputs from all nine provinces.

Therefore, it follows that today marks an end to the final leg of the very
involved budget process of consultation on the Division of Revenue Bill as
presented by the Minister of Finance. Today’s debate will therefore further
clear the way for the release and transfer of the equitable share of
revenue to all three spheres of government from the beginning of April this
year.

Government resolved many years ago to create a better life for all and to
roll back the frontiers of poverty. Through experience and rich history of
consulting the people, the ANC-led government resolved further that much
more can be done to serve the needs and interests of the people with the
limited and scarce resources available.

The strategy of maintaining focus on key priorities by involving every
citizen was employed and popularised through the coming into being of the
ANC’s slogan of “Together we can do more.” Indeed, if we all work together,
irrespective of our party-political affiliations, doing things faster,
better and differently, we can achieve more, as the President said during
his state of the nation address.

The President declared this year a year of action. This is a call that we
should all embrace if we are serious about improving the lives of our
people. One is happy that the Minister of Finance has taken such bold
action by tabling a Division of Revenue Bill that presents the outlook for
a fragile economic recovery and discusses government’s medium-term spending
priorities.

Therefore, it is upon the recipients of the allocations to take further
action in implementing policy priorities and deliver quality services to
our people. We expect to see less talk and more action.

It is my view, as said by the members of the Select Committee on
Appropriations, supported further by the views of different organisations,
departments, persons who made submissions and political parties, that
indeed the Division of Revenue Bill has achieved its objectives amidst
trying economic turbulence brought about by the dark cloud of recession
hanging over the entire world.

This Bill takes into account the national interests of the ruling party to
allocate government resources in a manner that will benefit the nation as a
whole. It fairly covers the priorities of the ANC as set out in its 2009
election manifesto and reflected in the 2010 state of the nation address.

The Bill takes explicit account of the cost pressures relating to the
occupation-specific dispensation agreement in the health and education
sectors, policies on HIV/Aids treatment, provision of housing, roads,
electricity, water and municipal infrastructure.

The commitment to provide free basic services to the poor is further
reinforced by this Bill through a substantial increase in the local
government equitable share as well as the introduction of new and different
types of grants. This increase will help municipalities to deal with the
increased cost pressures of providing free basic services due to increased
electricity charges as well as to expand such services to the poor people.

Over and above the increase in the local equitable share it will, over the
next three years, benefit substantially from the new rural infrastructure
grant that has been introduced to roll out on-site water and sanitation
services to poor households, an increase in indirect and direct transfers
for the municipal infrastructure grant as well as an increase in the
Regional Bulk Infrastructure Grant to ensure that bulk water projects are
accelerated to provide bulk water to households in a more sustainable
manner as well as drought relief.

Throughout these schemes job opportunities will be created and more of our
youth will be employed. It is encouraging to note that all these issues and
programmes benefiting from the Division of Revenue are underpinned by the
policies of the ANC.

To compensate for low revenue income at rural municipalities, provinces
received a fair share of the nationally raised revenue as well as direct
and indirect grants to ensure better service conditions for the teachers,
doctors and therapists so as to retain skilled and experienced
practitioners in these sectors. This includes new grants aimed at
subsidising nongovernmental organisations, NGOs, dealing with home-based
care programmes, technical secondary school recapitalisation grants to
modernise technical schools and the Dinaledi Schools Grant to provide
support to these schools so as to enhance the quality of mathematics and
science in Grade 12.

As I have already mentioned, the Bill meets the requirements of the law
and, under the current economic conditions, this much, with little and
limited resources, can be done. We expect much more improvement in the
coming years and surely the establishment of the Parliamentary Budget
Office will go a long way to strengthen our future work as parliamentary
committees.

I am satisfied that with the ongoing engagements between National Treasury,
the FFC and all relevant stakeholders issues identified during the
consultation processes will be seriously considered and addressed to the
satisfaction of all involved.
The department should seriously consider recommendations as contained in
our report. As we move towards the release of the funds to different
spheres of government and, therefore, departments and Parliament, important
questions need to be raised. Such questions are: Are all institutions
eligible to receive these funds and ready to use them for the purpose
intended for? Do they have plans and systems in place to achieve this? The
answer could be a quick yes, yet, at a closer look, one might find a
different story.

Allow me to remind this House of some of the scandalous things that are in
sharp contrast with the above answer. Last week, just three days before
Human Rights Day - a day on which we also commemorate the unprovoked brutal
killings of our struggle martyrs in Sharpeville in 1960 by the then
apartheid police force - in the National Assembly, the head of this
country, President Jacob Zuma, was attacked in Parliament by those who
became so obsessed with hatred, driven by anger, bruised egos and crazy
ambitions.

This small group, under the banner of a party called Cope, was on an
attacking spree supported by minority parties whose commitment to the cause
of a transformational agenda becomes more and more questionable. If you
listen to the speeches of some of these leaders you would clearly hear
people crying for the pre-1994 status quo.

Even more strange, laughable and ludicrous is their nerve to launch such an
attack on the head of the country in Parliament on the pretext of
exercising their constitutional rights. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your time has expired. You can
finish up that sentence. Finish up your sentence. Your time for speaking is
over. You may conclude. That’s what I’m saying.

Mr T E CHAANE: As we move for the endorsement of the Division of Revenue
Bill we should also commit ourselves to play an oversight role and check
how these funds are utilised and root out any mismanagement and expose
those who are hell bent on hiding themselves behind their loud voices,
shouting war on corruption and mismanagement when they themselves are
corrupt and unmanageable. On that note I move for the adoption of the Bill
without amendments. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S S MAZOSIWE: Chairperson, the Eastern Cape supports the Division of
Revenue Bill without reservations. I want to say today that South Africa is
one of the few countries that have systematically developed systems of
dealing with the Budget process. It consults with people, stakeholders and
Members of Parliament. The final product of the Budget is indeed a product
of the people. Having said that, we are not saying there are no challenges.
The challenges are huge and they will be with us for a long time because we
come from an era that has been bedevilled by racism and everything that
goes with it.

The Eastern Cape supports this Bill, but notes the following: The debate
takes place when economic crises continue to bare its ugly teeth at
citizens of the world, including our country. South Africa has lost close
to a million jobs during this crisis. Economists and analysts inform us
that the beginning of the end of this crisis is upon us. This is indeed
encouraging news. We welcome this because the economy of the country will
improve as the crisis diminishes. We are pleased to note that government
and the National Economic Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, have
already developed strategies to curb joblessness, including making
available funds to reskill our labour force.

Budgets have stabilised since 1994. I have mentioned before that there is
certainty and stability through the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework,
MTEF, process. Provinces and local governments are able to plan ahead on
their programmes and projects. This is key to the achievement of service
delivery in our country. The Eastern Cape is also encouraged that the
Financial and Fiscal Commission, FFC, in our discussions during the public
hearings, has acknowledged and brought back the whole issue of the costed
norms approach in funding provinces. This, we believe, will go a long way
in addressing the real cost or realistic cost of projects or programmes.

Today the Deputy Minister has also alluded to the whole review process of
the funding criteria. This, I suppose, will also be accommodated during the
hearings or the debates in arriving at the best funding criteria for the
country. We are really pleased that there has been a rethink around funding
formulas because the Eastern Cape is among the provinces that have suffered
the most during apartheid in terms of backlog. The Committee on
Appropriations has undertaken to discuss with Eskom the regional
electrification programme which affects our province negatively,
particularly the Alfred Nzo district in the Eastern Cape. The
electrification programmes in that part of the country are slow or
nonexistent because of the funding model Eskom is using.

Overall, the Eastern Cape believes that the 2010-11 Division of Revenue
brings hope to the electorate. It will be able to deliver some key
government priority areas, namely the alleviation of unemployment through
the public works programme, providing a better health care system,
delivering an improved education system and drastically reducing crime and
corruption through an improved and professional criminal justice system.
Chairperson, with those few words, I thank you. The Eastern Cape supports
the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr R A LEES: Hon Chair, hon Deputy Minister and hon members, there is no
doubt that given the constraints placed upon him by the policies of the ANC
and its alliance partners, the Minister of Finance has produced the best
possible allocation of funds that he could. However, it is unfortunate that
the allocations continue the long-standing trend of establishing a social
welfare system at the expense of economic development. Economic development
is the only way of achieving long-term poverty elimination and the
reduction of income inequality.
In his article in Focus recently, Prof Fedderke of University of Cape Town,
UCT, argues that the stringent fiscal and monetary policy adopted by
previous administrations has made funding available, which has been used
for the development of the social security system and not for the
development purposes of the economy. Thus, there has been reduced spending
on key factors such as education, health and housing. The consequences for
the country will be devastating as we fall further and further behind our
global partners in terms of the availability of a high-quality workforce.

Another consequence of this skewed funding allocation towards welfare will
be the inability to increase funding for health, policing and housing.
There will be a reduction of funds available for these functions and the
high expectations of the poor created by the ANC promises and endless plans
without action will inevitably lead to more and more discontent and protest
action.

Many in this House would have heard admissions and threats by people making
submissions at this week’s public hearings - that unless the government
delivers on its promises of jobs and service delivery, they will continue
to steal or will embark upon theft. What has our society come to when
people can publicly, in the presence of Members of Parliament as well as
senior members of the police, admit to being thieves or disclose their
intention to engage in theft? Is this desperation or is it simply
frustration at the lack of delivery on promises made for the past 16 years?
I think it is the latter, because to suggest that poor people are thieves
is an insult to the millions of poor people who do not resort to crime nor
even contemplate doing so.

The local government sphere is allocated the smallest share of revenue.
This is contrary to the view of the DA, which holds that as much authority
and accountability as possible must be devolved to the sphere of government
closest to the people. Local government is the sphere of government tasked
directly with the provision of services, which, with some notable
exceptions, has failed to meet the expectations of the people and, yet,
they get the smallest allocation.

There is the vexed question of conditional grants, whereby the national
government dictates to other spheres of government how funds should be
spent. The ANC may argue that the municipal sphere of government in
particular is beset with poor governance as well as a critical skills
shortage. The way to deal with this problem is certainly not the
centralisation of power, as is currently happening. The simple and obvious
solution is to rapidly reverse the ANC policy of cadre deployment. Only
persons of ability and who owe no debt of gratitude for their appointments
to the ANC should be appointed as officials.

Despite the urgent need to address the issue of redistribution of land
without negatively impacting upon food production, a mere R1,9 billion has
been allocated to the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform as
compared to the R6,2 billion requested by the department. The question of
land reform cannot continuously, Budget after Budget, be effectively put on
hold by way of relatively small allocations of funds. There is an urgent
need for the remaining and vast rural land claims to be resolved and for
both the claimants as well as landowners to be given closure on this
process which has dragged on for the past 15 years. Unless funding for
settling claims is increased dramatically, there is a distinct possibility
that frustrations experienced by both claimants and landowners will
increase levels of violence and attacks on farmers and, inevitably, will
lead to a lack of food security, as has been the case in Zimbabwe.

Hon Deputy Minister, it is great to hear you say that there should be cuts
in nonessential expenditure. May I suggest to you, sir, that your Cabinet
colleagues look at a few areas where they could cut nonessential
expenditure such as ministerial cars, the presidential jets and high
ministerial hotel bills. Perhaps that’s where we should start.

In conclusion, I raise the thorny issue of the use of police cars and
personnel to escort members of the NCOP over the past few days. Not only do
these vehicles and personnel carry out escort functions but they do so with
blue lights flashing and sirens blaring. This bullyboy behaviour cannot be
justified in our new democratic society. This is the kind of behaviour
which one expects of failed states such as Zimbabwe, but certainly not in
our new and successful South Africa. [Time expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Your time is over, hon member. Just finish
off.

Mr R A LEES: The ANC needs to follow the lead of the DA government in the
Western Cape and ban the use of police escorts and flashing blue lights in
anything but an emergency situation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B P MABE: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
mayors, councillors, distinguished members who have filled this venue, the
North West Province supports the Bill. It is an honour to be offered this
opportunity to participate in the debate on the first Division of Revenue
Bill of this administration.

When we as public representatives debate the manner in which the nationally
collected revenue or cake is divided, we do so in order to make sure that
the competing national, provincial and local needs are addressed in a
manner in which revenue will be shared equitably. We fully understand that
all the needs cannot be catered for at the same time, but consideration
needs to be taken of the pressing challenges and needs facing the
provincial and local government spheres.

Particular attention needs to be taken to cater for areas that do not have
huge capacity to raise their own revenue. Rural provinces and rural
municipalities are always negatively impacted upon by the final sharing of
the cake or allocation of the national Budget.

One of the priorities of this government is rural development. It needs to
be undertaken with the seriousness it deserves. It becomes a challenge when
the two spheres of government in rural provinces have to address the
challenges faced by the communities with the limited resources they have
available at their disposal. It must be kept in mind that the rural
provinces and municipalities are always at a disadvantage when it comes to
their own revenue-generation capacity.

This division of revenue is debated at a time when national government
cannot collect enough revenue due to the recession.

Ka jalo, kwelo tlase ya ikonomi e dira kgatelelo mo pusong ya rona mme go
botlhokwa gore le fa maemo a ntse jalo, puso ya bogareng e tshwanetse e
netefatse gore porofense le dinaga magae di kgone go bona madi a a ka di
thusang go tsweletsa ditirelo pele. (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[As a consequence, the recession puts pressure on the government.
Nevertheless, it is important that the national government must ensure that
funds are allocated to both the provinces and the rural areas to ensure
service delivery.]

I would like to remind this august House that redemarcation of the
provinces impacts negatively on the donating and receiving provinces. The
North West province, in this instance, is always negatively impacted upon
by this process during every election period. In 2006, the reincorporation
of Mabopane, Ga-Rankuwa and Hammanskraal into Gauteng province impacted
negatively upon the province in various ways. With the recent
reincorporation of Merafong into Gauteng, the North West province has once
more been negatively impacted upon. The province always loses high-density
areas to other provinces, a factor that dramatically reduces its
population. It must also be considered that, although the province has many
mines, poverty still continues to increase in the province.

I would like to outline how the reincorporation of Merafong into Gauteng
has impacted negatively upon the equitable share allocation to the
province. The province submitted budget proposals to National Treasury as
expected. These figures were based on the services rendered to the Merafong
community. These included the figures of personnel and the statistics of
communities that were serviced in that area. National Treasury did not take
these proposals or the structural reviews in the final allocation into
consideration, as reflected in the Division of Revenue Bill. National
Treasury top-sliced from the North West allocation without any
consideration for the issues raised above.

Provision for health is one of the priorities of this government and the
reduction of its allocation will impact negatively on the delivery of
health services in the province.

Ke rata go gopotsa maloko a Ntlo e gore Porofense ya Bokone Bophirima e
kaiwa jaaka nngwe ya diporofense tse di sa beeng madi a a bonalang a a
lebaneng le tsa boitekanelo. Ga go a nna jalo, lebaka ke gore gangwe le
gape fa melelwane e segiwa sešwa, madi a a neng a ka tsweletsa boitekanelo
mo matshelong a batho ba rona a feletsa a ngotlega. (Translation of
Setswana paragraph follows.)

[I would like to remind members of this House that the North West province
is regarded as a province that does not give enough budgetary consideration
to health. That is not true; the reason is the new demarcations that happen
now and then, which cause financial strain in the health budget meant for
our people.]

This situation has worsened with the top-slicing from the provincial
equitable share and it will be very difficult for the province to recover
from such a negative impact. With little resources available to the
province, the delivery of this priority will be compromised to a certain
extent. The provincial budget proposals were based on the available
statistics which were not considered.

Fa ke lebelela thuto, le yona e tlile go amega ka ntlha ya phokotso ya madi
a a neng a tshwanetswe a abelwe porofense ya rona. [In my view, education
will be adversely affected due to the decrease in budget that was supposed
to be allocated for our province.]

The same approach was followed when dealing with health and the challenge
we face is how to make up for the money that we budgeted for the provision
of services to our people as a provincial government without the funds that
have been unjustly cut from the final allocation to the province.

Tota go tlile go nna boima gore re kgone go fitlhelela batho botlhe ba
porofense go ka tlisa ditirelo tse di maleba segolo jang mo thutong le mo
boitekanelong fa Matlotlo a Bosetšhaba a sa re thuse ka matlole a mangwe go
fitlhelela maikaelelo a rona. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[It is truly difficult for us to be able to render services to all the
people of our province particularly in the education and health sectors,
especially when the National Treasury does not help us with funds.]

A poor and rural province like the North West province with a low revenue
base cannot provide improved service delivery without the R889 345 million
that has unjustly been transferred to Gauteng as a result of the
redemarcation process. We can do more with this money if it is redirected
to the province. If not, National Treasury must provide additional funding
that can assist us through this financial year to enable us to cope with
the delivery of services.

We strongly believe that with the powers vested in Parliament, as outlined
in Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act of 2009, our
predicament as a province can be addressed for this financial year. Let us
remember that this amount of R889 million can do a lot regarding the
delivery of services to the people of the North West province.

Jaaka baagi le puso ya Bokone Bophirima re na le tsholofelo ya gore puo e
re e tlhagisang mo kopanong eno e tla utlwiwa le go arabiwa ka mokgwa o o
tla tlisang tsholofelo e ntsi go batho ba rona. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[We, the people and the government of the North West province, have hope
that the views expressed by us in this gathering will be heard and be
responded to in a manner that will restore the confidence of our people.]

We are going to improve on the spending of conditional grants during this
financial year. We also started putting measures in place to assist
municipalities to spend conditional grants. We believe that this effort
will go a long way in improving spending of conditional grants.

We have also, as a province, endeavoured to do more with the limited
resources available at our disposal. To stabilise the utilisation of funds
and improved delivery of services in our municipality, we have invoked
section 139 of the Constitution in four municipalities, namely Madibeng
Local Municipality, Moses Kotane Local Municipality, Tswaing Local
Municipality and Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality.

This action was intended to improve the delivery of services to our people
and also to spend funds effectively because of challenges that these people
were faced with.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mme B P MABE: Ke a leboga Modulasetilo le setšhaba sotlhe se se fa, se se
tlileng kopanong ya letsatsi la gompieno. Porofense ya Bokone Bophirima e
dumelana le tokomane e e beilweng e ya Molaotlhomo wa go arolwa ga Matlole.
Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] [Nako e fedile.] (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[Ms B P MABE: I thank the Chairperson and the people who are part of this
gathering today. The North West province adopts the Division of Revenue
Bill. I thank you. [Applause.] [Time expired.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Let us make things easy as we do not have a
watch. When I hit the table you must know that you have one minute left,
and when I hit it for the second time, you must know that your time is
over. It will be easier that way.

Mr S MAAKE (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members of the NCOP,
...

... magoši, setšhaba ka kakaretšo, ... [... chiefs, the House, ...]

... it is indeed an honour for us to address this hon House. We address
this House well aware of the task that has been squarely placed on our
shoulders. We are addressing the House with appreciation and gratitude that
you found it in you to visit our shores in line with the aspirations put
eloquently during the fifties, namely that “The People Shall Govern”.

Ours, hon members, is to ensure that our people realise this necessity. By
indicating that the people shall govern, it was definitely not envisaged
that this particular power should only end up at the polls. It was also not
envisaged that it should end at public hearings and podiums. It was meant
that the power should be bestowed wholly on the populace of the Republic of
South Africa, without taking into account colour, creed, gender, religious
belief, etc. The question that we should be asking ourselves is: Who are
these people referred to by the Freedom Charter? It is, therefore,
submitted that these people are the most downtrodden the most exploited
sections of our society – the poor.

It is, therefore, upon us to ensure that these sections of society, which
are composed of workers and the peasantry, become the governing body
politic. These sections should determine their future. They should have
self-determination and determine the path of their future. It is against
the above background that, as the people of Limpopo, we are taking part in
the debate on the Division of Revenue Bill for the 2010-11 financial year.
As Limpopo we support this Bill.

We are sure that by now, hon members, you have experienced the rural nature
of our province. It is indeed in this province that we still experience
subsistence farming in its classic form. It is in this province that we
find the most poor. It is in this province that we experience lack of
facilities for the advancement of the aspirations of the Freedom Charter.

Our people in this province are part of a large section of extremely
exploited farm workers who, at times, are even denied the universal right
of suffrage by the super profit-making farm houses of this province. It is
indeed painful that, whilst producing good agricultural products, they
cannot enjoy them lest they are murdered because they are mistaken for
baboons that are illegally harvesting products that do not belong to them.
The Freedom Charter calls upon us to ensure that the land must belong to
those who work it.

As citizens of Limpopo we thought that it is important to indicate that
this province is a product of wars of resistance that were waged against
the apartheid regime. The descendants of the great warriors like
Sekhukhune, Makgoba, Mantatisi, Makhado, Ngungunyane, Modjadji, etc, took
it upon themselves to wage “guerrilla warfare” mass action, including the
workers’ struggle, in continuance of the struggle for the total
emancipation of the peoples of South Africa.

It is in this province that we share borders with Zimbabwe, Botswana,
Mozambique and, therefore, it follows that instability in those areas will
directly affect this particular area. It is against the above background
that our people understand and appreciate the call by the Freedom Charter
that there should be peace and friendship. Our people understand that they
should appreciate and live side by side with foreign nationals.

Therefore, as a province, we would want to impress upon you, hon members,
that as you divide the revenue of the country, it should be appreciated
that this province is also home to a lot of foreign nationals that
originate from as far afield as Indonesia. Therefore, this leads to
budgetary constraints in all sectors of government.

Limpopo is one of those areas that experience an acute shortage of water.
There is a slogan that says that water is life. It has been said time and
time again that ordinarily in our province water is a scarce commodity. Let
us ensure that we become innovative in this regard. Let us ensure that we
harvest water. Let us ensure that not a single droplet is wasted. Let us
ensure that we provide water for all.

Health and social development are key to a stable social order. It is,
therefore, imperative that as representatives and messengers of the people
we should at all times ensure that we strive to promote healthy social
conditions and social living. Once more the government of the Republic has
and continues to strive to ensure that the populace of South Africa shares
in the Budget of the country.

We would like to indicate our gratitude to the President of the ANC and the
President of the Republic of South Africa, Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, for
presenting us with hope in the Division of Revenue Bill for the 2010-11
financial year. In the same vein, we will urge all departments in Limpopo
to ensure that they spend their budget fully and wisely. The money as
presented should be transparently spent; integrity should be the order of
the day, and a process of spending coupled with accountability has to be
followed to the letter. Having considered the inputs of the permanent
delegates regarding this matter, we support the Bill accordingly. Thank
you.

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Agb Voorsitter van die Nasionale Raad van
Provinsies, lede van die Raad, Ministers en Parlementslede van die
provinsiale wetgewers en almal teenwoordig, vandag is ’n baie belangrike
dag vir die werksaamhede en die uitvoering van die mandate van die regering
verleen deur die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Hon Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, members of the Council, Ministers and members of the provincial
legislatures and everyone present, today is a very important day for the
functions and the implementation of the mandates given to government by the
Constitution of South Africa.]

The Division of Revenue Bill is the most important annual piece of
legislation for any province. I want to mention the following documents.
According to section 73 of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
Matters Act of 2009, the money bills Act, section 10 of the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, Act 97 of 1997, and section 76(4)
of the Constitution, the Minister of Finance must introduce the Division of
Revenue Bill in Parliament. In accordance with these sections, the Minister
of Finance, Mr Pravin Gordhan, tabled the 2010 Division of Revenue Bill
before Parliament on 17 February 2010.

My province, the Western Cape, will receive 92% of its 2010 revenue in the
transfers arising from this Bill. Most other provinces rely on the Bill for
an even higher percentage of their income.

Sonder hierdie Wetsontwerp is die hande van provinsies afgekap, met ander
woorde, geen dienslewering kan plaasvind nie.

Die manier waarop die land, Suid-Afrika, regeer word, word duidelik
voorgeskryf deur die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika van 1995, naamlik ’n federale
bestuur en die beheer van provinsies. Die nege provinsies is dus, naas die
Nasionale Vergadering, die mees belangrike strukture in die uitvoering van
wetgewende magte ten opsigte van die toewysing van geld aan plaaslike
owerhede.

Die DA is dus ’n party wat op die beginsels van federalisme geskoei is en
daarom waarborg ons dat die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika van 1995 te alle tye
beskerm en verdedig sal word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Without this Bill the hands of the provinces would be tied; in other
words, no service delivery would take place.

The way in which the country, South Africa is governed, is clearly
prescribed by the Constitution of South Africa of 1995, namely federal
governance and oversight of the provinces. Apart from the National
Assembly, the nine provinces are the most important structures in the
execution of legislative powers in respect of the allocation of funds to
local authorities.

Therefore the DA is a party that is built on the principles of federalism
and that is why we guarantee that the Constitution of South Africa of 1995
will be protected and defended at all times.]

The Western Cape welcomes the gradual trend of increasing fiscal federalism
in our national Budget. Five years ago the national sphere of government
spent more than half of the revenue raised. That is 50,3%, to be exact. By
next year this will have dropped to 47%, meaning that provincial and local
governments will together be spending the majority of national revenue.
This shows that our tax money is moving closer to the people it needs to be
spent on.

We are however concerned that an increasing proportion of the allocation to
provinces is carved up into conditional grants. For 2010 almost one quarter
of the money that my province received from the division of revenue comes
in the form of conditional grants. This is an alarming trend. The more it
continues, the more section 40 of the Constitution, which defines the
provinces as distinct from the national sphere, is undermined.

We understand that certain provinces require a heavy hand from national
government to prevent them from wasting money meant for service delivery,
but we must be wary of limiting the freedom of those provinces that use
their proximity to people to better target delivery.

The Western Cape welcomes the review of the fiscal transfer system that
National Treasury has committed to complete in time for next year’s Budget
process. We are told that the review will have a special focus on the
economic activity component of the provincial equitable share.

This is a progressive approach that will hopefully result in money being
spent in those areas that can ratchet up economic activity, thereby
multiplying government spending.

We hope that the review will be in line with the recommendations by the
Financial and Fiscal Commission in 2009 that the form of revenue sharing
should replace the economic activity component of the formula.

Hierdie aanbeveling sal die DA ondersteun, nadat dit bekend geword het. Dit
kan ons verseker. [The DA will support this recommendation once it becomes
public. That we can assure you.]

The education component of the provincial equitable share is by far the
biggest at 51%. This is appropriate, given the importance of education
spending. Importantly, it is also driven by data that is relatively
accurate and up to date.

Onderwys is die sektor wat die beste moontlikhede vir ons mense daar buite
stel. [Education is the sector that offers the best possibilities for our
people out there.]

We cannot say the same about other components that are based on population
figures that are neither recent nor accurate. Provinces such as the Western
Cape experience permanent immigration as a daily reality. An analysis of
the increases in the provincial equitable share over the medium term shows
that the Western Cape will receive higher increases in the percentage terms
than other provinces, but it is unclear whether these increases are in line
with population increase.

More alarmingly, anecdotal evidence suggests that short-term medical
tourism is taking place. That is where citizens of other provinces travel
to the Western Cape, specifically to use our medical facilities. They come
from provinces which received funds for care that they don’t provide, while
my province provides care that is unfunded.

Ons moet kyk om hierdie funksies, waarvoor daar nie `n mandaat is nie, te
beheer, sodat die Wes-Kaap dit kan hanteer en ook die diens kan lewer aan
die mense wat in die Wes-Kaap bly. [We will have to look at controlling
this function, for which there is no mandate, in order for the Western Cape
to deal with it and provide this service to people who are residing in the
Western Cape as well.]

We have requested that Parliament be kept up to date on National Treasury’s
review of the fiscal transfer system as it is completed. The Western Cape
supports the Division of Revenue Bill ... [Interjections.].

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You still have one minute left. The first hit
means you have one minute.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: We have requested that Parliament be kept up to date
on National Treasury’s review of the fiscal transfer system as it is
completed this year. We hope that this review helps to secure a fairer
share of revenue for the provinces against the circumstances of the
provinces.

The Western Cape supports the Division of Revenue Bill on the condition
that this review brings the provincial equitable allocation in line with
immigration into the province. I thank you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M ZULU: Mhlonishwa Sihlalo, iPhini likaSihlalo, iPhini
likaNgqongqoshe walo Mnyango, oNdunankulu bazo zonke izifundazwe zethu
zaseNingizimu Afrika, njengeqembu uma sibuka siyaweseka uMthethosivivinywa
wokweHliswa kweziNtela njengabantu abakhe kuleli lizwe laseNingizimu
Afrika.

Bese sibeka ukuthi kufanele kube namasu okubheka ukuthi izigebengu
ezisebenza kulabo masipala, kohulumeni basekhaya, ikakhulukazi izimenenja
nabaphathi bezimali ikhona yini indlela eyenziwayo ukuze bachaze
ngokusetshenziswa kwezimali zomphakathi.

Njengeqembu futhi siyakweseka ukuthi uMnyango ophatha izimali, noMnyango
Kahulumeni Wokubambisana kanye Nezindaba Zezendabuko, kufuneka ubhekelele
kulezo zibonelelo eziya komasipala abampofu njengasekhaya eMelmoth,
eNkandla nakuzo zonke ezinye izindawo lapho kunomasipala abancane futhi
abampofu kakhulu. Kufuneka kube khona indlela yokubhekelela ukuthi kulezi
zibonelelo abanikezwa zona ikhona yini enye indlela abasizakala ngayo,
nokuthi bangenza kanjani ukuba bakwazi ukuthola imali, bakwazi ukuzimela
ngoba ekugcineni kuyofuneka bazimele ukuze bakwazi ukuhlangabezana
nezidingo zabantu.

Njengeqembu seseka izincomo zekomidi elincome ukuthi kufuneka kubekhona
lokhu okuthiwa yisibonelelo sezingane ezisezincane, ukuze kukwazi ukuthi
nezingane zethu ezisemabangeni emfundo eyisisekelo zikwazi ukubonelelwa
emphakathini njengabantu abanelungelo lokuphila.

Mhlonishwa uma ningenazo izindlela zokubheka ukuthi sizintshontsha kanjani
izimali zikahulumeni kuyobe kusetshenzelwa ize leze. UMnyango wakho
noMnyango Kahulumeni Wokubambisana kanye Nezindaba Zezendabuko ezweni,
kufuneka kube nezindlela enizibekayo ekubhekeni amafa omphakathi ukuthi
laphaya ebantwini bakithi abampofu njengami bayakwazi ukusizakala. Ngibonga
kakhulu. Iqembu lami liyaweseka uMthethosivivinywa wokweHliswa kweziNtela.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, Deputy Minister of
this department, premiers of all the provinces of South Africa, as a party
and as citizens of South Africa we support the Division of Revenue Bill.

And we need to state that there should be strategies in place so that those
criminals who work at these municipalities – local governments – especially
the municipal managers and the chief financial officers, can account for
the use of taxpayers’ money.

And as a party we also support the call that the Department of Finance and
the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs must be
considerate in terms of the subsidies that are allocated to poor
municipalities like those in my hometown of Melmoth, or Nkandla and all the
other places that have smaller municipalities that are also in great
distress. There must also be other ways that will look into whether these
subsidies can be beefed up in any way wether they can get other funds to
enable these municipalities to stand on their own, because they must be
able to stand on their own at the end for them to be able to meet the
people’s needs.

As a party we support the committee’s recommendations in that there must be
a government grant that supports young children. Our children who are still
receiving basic education should receive assistance through government
funds, because they also have the right to life.

Hon member, if you do not have ways of detecting how we misuse government
funds, we are striving for nothing at all. Between your department and the
Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, strategies
must be put in place to see to it that public funds are accessible to our
people who are poor like me. Thank you very much. My party supports the
Division of Revenue Bill. [Applause.]]

Ms L HLONGWA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members of
the House, it is an honour for us to participate in such an important
debate on the Division of Revenue Bill for 2010-11. The KwaZulu-Natal
finance portfolio committee met on Thursday, 11 March, to consider and
negotiate a mandate in respect of the Bill. The committee agreed to support
the Bill without any amendments. This Bill was subsequently approved by the
House on 23 March 2010.
Chairperson, the Bill met all the requirements of the law and, therefore,
all political parties felt it necessary to support it. We should thank the
Deputy Minister who has today shared with us the good intentions by
government to deliver services to our people amidst the recession. This
confirms the commitment of the ANC to creating a caring society.

At the outset, we wish to express our appreciation for the introduction of
the new grants, namely the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, grant for
the social sector, for which we are already developing a plan for it to be
better utilised. The Technical Secondary Schools Recapitalisation Grant has
brought relief to us as a province, as most of our technical schools were
really not meeting the needs of technical schools. The further education
and training, FET, function shift will help to alleviate the challenges
faced by our FET colleges and also help us to stabilise the sector, which
was somehow becoming a thorny issue in the Department of Education. Other
grants include the water services operating subsidy, the municipal systems
improvement grant and others.

Chairperson, the allocation to KwaZulu-Natal seems fair; we believe that we
are allocated the largest share of all provinces. However, there is a need
to mention the impact of unfunded national mandates that affect all
provinces, inter alia the shortfall in allocation for the implementation of
the occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, allowances made to all
departments. This shortfall has a knock-on effect for future financial
years.

The implementation of the OSD affecting various sectors also continues to
exert pressure on the provincial fiscus, as these OSD packages are agreed
to at the national level but are not always accurately costed when
providing additional funding to the provinces. The shortfall in the higher-
than-anticipated wage increase for public servants for the year 2009-10
also has a knock-on effect for future financial years.

We would like to highlight a few unfunded mandates particular to the
province of KwaZulu-Natal: Firstly, there is the shortfall in the budget of
the devolution of the property rates fund grant to provinces. This
shortfall amounts to R221 million for the 2009-10 financial year, with a
further projected shortfall of R321,5 million for the year 2010-11,
bringing the cumulative shortfall to R542,5 million for the year 2010-11.
This will increase substantially in the outer Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework, MTEF, years.

Secondly, there is the unresolved dispute between the national and
provincial Department of Public Works on the ownership of certain
properties in the province for which rates must be paid. At present, the
municipalities in which these disputed properties exist have to bear the
cost of unpaid rates. The eThekwini Municipality has taken a decision to
cut off electricity and running water to these government institutions.

Thirdly, we need to address the acknowledgement by the SA Social Security
Agency, Sassa, of the debt owed to the provincial department of social
development for the use of provincial facilities and resources for the
current and past financial years but no commitment from the national
Department of Social Development to pay these debts owed.

Another problem is the inability of the Department of Transport to meet its
financial commitments to national road initiatives in KwaZulu-Natal, such
as Sani Pass, the John Ross Highway in Richards Bay and the R102 upgrade
for the new King Shaka Airport in eThekwini.

The new policy on incapacity leave, ill-health and retirement will cost a
fortune in the province. This year it will cost about R28,7 million, R29,9
million in 2011-12 and R31,1 million in 2012-13. Though the province has
sourced money to fund it, this initiative is totally an unfunded mandate
and that is the opinion of the committee on finance.

Provincial Treasury requested a substantial amount of additional funding of
R86,138 million, R92,657 million and R88,591 million for the municipal
support programme for the year 2010-11. This is considered to be an
unfunded mandate as the implementation of the Local Government: Municipal
Finance Management Act in provinces has not been implemented with
additional funds being provided by the National Treasury, but rather it is
expected that provinces find the necessary funding for this mammoth task
from within their provincial baselines. Some funding was allocated towards
this but not nearly enough to cover the actual cost of implementation.

Education has requested additional funding of R338,409 million in this
year, R494,666 million, and R591,399 million for the 2010-11 Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, MTEF, for the expansion of provincial examinations
administrations, for which no additional funding was provided by the
National Treasury.

The incorporation of Umzimkhulu into KwaZulu-Natal has brought about
spending pressure in this Vote, since most of the schools in that area were
mud schools, and we are still struggling as a department to eradicate that
backlog. The province has costed this backlog at R44,1 billion if we are to
deal with the infrastructure backlogs in all our schools in the province of
KwaZulu-Natal.

Chairperson, the last point is that the Department of Public Works has
requested substantial additional funding for R45,461 million, R47, 270
million and R49,566 million for the implementation of Gijima. The
department also requested R2,328 million, R916 000 and R949 000 to enhance
the functionality of the register to, amongst others, comply with the
Gijima minimum requirements of a fixed assets register.

The impeding expenditure arises from the implementation of a new national
Act, for which no additional funding was provided to provinces. Government
departments have attended a workshop on this development, but there is
little indication that they will be able to roll out this mandate in this
current financial year.

The disaster management grant has been allocated R133 million for the year
2010-11. This amount will not cover the cost of emergency housing
interventions, as in 2009-10, because we have already exhausted the
allocation of R150 million and money still has to be paid, and we therefore
need more money for disaster housing in KwaZulu-Natal.

The province of KwaZulu-Natal takes this opportunity to applaud the
Division of Revenue Bill. As we have indicated before, it seeks to better
the lives of our people, and it is certainly in line with the manifesto of
the ANC. We extend our appreciation to Treasury for all the reviews that
have to be done this year. The KwaZulu-Natal province applauds the select
committee on the report tabled to us on 23 March 2010. We think that this
is a step in the right direction, especially the recommendations in as far
as the introduction of early childhood development grants and assistance to
municipalities are concerned. As I alluded to earlier on, most of our
municipalities in KwaZulu-Natal are in a bad state and need more money to
service the people and also to build the capacity as suggested by the SA
Local Government Association, Salga.

Chairperson, in closing, we are also delighted by the intention of Treasury
to review the provincial equitable share, PES, formula as we think the
province has fallen prey to this kind of a formula since KwaZulu-Natal has
more than 8 million people. The KwaZulu-Natal province here commits itself
to ensuring that monies appropriated for this year and allocations in the
outer years are put to good use. With these words, Chairperson, we would
like to thank you. We support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson of the NCOP and your Deputy, Deputy Minister
of Finance, hon MECs and members of the House, I salute you.

Tshivenḓa tshi ri ṅwana o thomaho u mela maṋo a nṱha, ndi shenga. Muvhuso
wo vha wo fanela u zwi ḓivha zwauri musi Cope yo swika, ho bebwa ṅwana wa
shenga ane ha nga vhuyi na ḓuvha na ḽithihi a humela murahu. Zwe ra zwi
thoma ro zwi thoma nahone ri ḓo isa phanḓa. (Translation of Tshivenḓa
paragraph follows.)

[In Tshivenḓa they say a child who cuts teeth on the upper jaw first is
considered abnormal. The government should have known that the formation of
Cope was like the birth of a child who cuts teeth on the upper jaw first -
something unusual and there is no turning back. What we have started we
started, and we will continue.]

The aim of the Division of Revenue Bill is to provide for the equitable
division of revenue raised nationally among the national, provincial and
local government spheres of government for the 2010-11 financial year.

Hambi loko hi pfumelelana na Bili leyi kuna leswi landzelaka. Loko hi
vulavula hi Mpimanyeto wa Timali xana mfumo wu endla yini hi mali leyi ngo
boheleriwa enengeni wa mpfuvu yi famba? Loko mi kamba leswaku i timasipala
tingani ti nga nghenisiwa eka section 139 nhlamulo swi vula mali leyi nga
famba. Sweswi hi pfumelela Nkavelo wa Timali lowu nga mpimanyeto wun’wana.
Hi ya nyika masipala leswaku yi ya yi famba yi lova.

Hikwalaho loko hina va Cope hi ri kona hi lava ku vona leswaku swilo swi
famba kahle. Hi ndlela leyi a hi mi chavisi. (Translation of Xitsonga
paragraphs follows.)

[Although we agree with this Bill there is this: When we talk about the
Budget, what does the government do with the money that is being wasted?
When you check how many municipalities are included in section 139, the
answer is the amount of money that is wasted. Now we support the Budget
Vote, which is another budget on its own. We will give it to the
municipality so that it can be wasted.

Therefore we, as Cope, are here to ensure that things go on smoothly. In
this way we are not threatening you.]

During the public hearing, Treasury indicated that there were some gaps as
far as the formula was concerned and that they were going to review it.

Xi nga vi xitshembiso ntsena. Yi fanele yi langutisisiwa hi vona leswaku
ndzandzeriso lowu loko Financial and Fiscal Commission, FFC yi wu tirhisa
yi kuma leswaku hi wona mpimanyeto lowu nga ta averiwa mfumo wa le xikarhi,
swifundzhankulu na mimfumo ya miganga leswaku mfumo wu kota ku tirha.

Tolo nimadyambu ndzi twe Mutshamaxitulu wa NCOP eka mbulavulo wa yena. Loko
ndzi swi vula eka lembeximali leri nga hundza a mi pfumelanga. Mi lo hleka.
Sweswi ndza tsaka hikuva a mi hleki. I vule swin’wana mayelana na migodi
leyi nga tala laha ka Sekhukhune. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[It must not be a promise only. It must be reviewed to ensure that, as a
follow up, when the Financial and Fiscal Commission, FFC, implements it, it
must find that it is the correct Budget that will be allocated to the
national, provincial and local spheres of government so that the government
can function.

Yesterday evening, I heard the Chairperson of the NCOP’s speech. When I
said it in the previous financial year, you did not believe it. You laughed
it off. I am happy now because you are not laughing. He said something
concerning the many mines in Sekhukhune.]
I can see that there is light inside the Chairperson of the NCOP. He told
us that we should wake up and do something.

Ndzi vulavule hi swihlerisisi swa nsuku na swin’wana. A mi kalanga mi
pfumela. I swi vurile leswaku ku fanele ku endleka xin’wana na xin’wana
leswaku ku va na swihlerisisi. Sekhukhune yi na 31 wa migodi kambe a ku
endleki nchumu. Mfumo a wu pfuneti nchumu.

A ndzi ri eBurgersfort Clinic. Loko u ya lahaya swilo swi hlangahlangene,
swi hlangahlangene. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[I spoke about gold refineries and others. You did not believe me. He said
that anything, something, must be done so that there could be refineries.
Sekhukhune has 31 mines, but there is nothing happening. The government
does not provide any assistance.

I was at Burgersfort Clinic. When you go there things are mixed up, really
mixed up.]

I would like to tell the government - ruling party - to take a step. I said
we support the Bill. Therefore, you should start working. Thank you.

Mna H PAPO (Gauteng): Modulasetulo wa Lekgotla la Bosetšhaba la Diprofense,
mohl Mninwa Mahlangu, Motlatša Modulasetulo wa Lekgotla la Bosetšhaba la
Diprofense, mohl Memela, Sefepisegolo sa Lekgotla la Bosetšhaba la
Diprofense, mohl Ntwanambi, Motlatša Tona ya Ditšhelete, mohl Nene,
Modulasetulo wa Komiti ya Nakwana ya tša Ditšhelete, mohl De Beer,
Modulasetulo wa Komiti ya Nakwana ya tša Ditekatekanyo, mohl Chaane,
Ditonakgolo, baemedi ba diPrimiya  tša diprofense tša naga ya Afrika Borwa,
maloko a Lekgotla la Bosetšhaba la Diprofense, malokokanna a
makgotlatheramolao a naga ya Afrika Borwa, tšhomišo e botse ya ditšhelete
tša setšhaba ke e nngwe ya dikokwana tša mmušo wa temokrasi. Re le profense
ya Gauteng, re thabela go tšea karolo mo poledišanong ye ya Molaokakanywa
wa Karoganyo ya Letseno la Mmušo la 2010 le 2011.

Le ge re tšweleditše go tshwenyega mola le mola, le dikakanyo mabapi le
Molaokakanywa wo, Gauteng e ya o thekga. Re thabela dibilione tša ka
godingwana ga 58 tše di abetšwego profense ya rena. (Translation of Sepedi
speech follows.)

[Mr H PAPO (Gauteng): Hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
hon Mninwa Mahlangu; Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, hon Memela; the Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces,
hon Ntwanambi; Deputy Minister of Finance, hon Nene; the Chairperson of the
Select Committee on Finance, hon De Beer; the Chairperson of the Select
Committee on Appropriations, hon Chaane, Ministers, representatives of
premiers of the different provinces in South Africa, members of the
National Council of Provinces, and members of provincial legislatures in
South Africa, efficient and effective use of public finance is one of the
principles of democratic government. We are glad as members of the Gauteng
Legislature that we are taking part in the debate on the Division of
Revenue Bill 2010-2011.

Even though we indicated a few challenges and also gave our opinions on the
Bill, we support this Bill as members of the Gauteng legislature. We
appreciate the allocation of more than R58 billion for our province.]

We also welcome the review under way of the equitable share formula.  For
the review process to be expedited, it is important for the Select
Committees on Appropriations and Finance, respectively, to work closely and
co-ordinate with finance portfolio committees of provincial legislatures.

We say this because reports of the Select Committees on Finance and
Appropriations and decisions of this House on matters of the division of
revenue have a direct impact on the work which is supposed to happen in the
provinces and in the municipalities.
Therefore, it is important that there is closer co-ordination between the
two select committees and the provincial portfolio committees. I thank you.
[Applause]

Mr K D MOLUSI (Northern Cape): Hon Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, hon Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon
Deputy Minister of Finance, hon MECs and hon members, the Division of
Revenue Act sets out three-year allocations for an equitable share and
conditional grants for provinces and local government. The contraction of
the South African economy in the first half of the 2009-10 fiscal year has
meant a reduction in tax revenue.

On behalf of my province, I would like to thank our government for not
cutting spending over the coming medium-term even though the tax revenue
will only recover slowly from its slumps. We also welcome the provision of
a substantial share of nationally collected revenue from provinces to
strengthen social services programmes that have an impact on human
development and quality of life.

We further welcome the aggregate increase over baseline of the next Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period to sustain the social progress
made in recent years. This will strengthen the government’s broader
developmental objective and further mitigate the effect of the recession on
the poor.

With regard to conditional grants, we take note and welcome the
introduction of four conditional grants to provinces, in particular the
Expanded Public Works Programme for the social sector, which will assist
greatly to ensure that home community-based care volunteers are paid. The
recapitalisation grant for technical secondary schools will be used to
provide equipment and facilities for these schools and improve the levels
of skills required by the economy.

However, the creation of the further education and training colleges grant
to facilitate the transfer of further education and training colleges to
the national government caused great challenges in the Northern Cape. As
part of the preparatory stage to shift the function, the amount spent by
each province in this grant was ring-fenced to create the baseline for a
new national grant.

The amount ring-fenced out of the province’s equitable share would be
received back and thus there would be no direct impact. Out of the Northern
Cape equitable share baseline, an amount of R287,3 million over the MTEF
period was taken away and only R160,5 million was reallocated as a
conditional grant. A shortfall of R126,7 million must be financed from
other equitable shares.

We further note and welcome the introduction of the Dinaledi schools grant
with its intention to provide support to Dinaledi schools to enhance the
quality of mathematics and science achievement in Grade 12 in these
schools. Although the Expanded Public Works Programme Incentive Grant,
which was introduced in the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, Phase 2,
is not new, we appreciate its intention to reinforce and reward public
bodies that actually implement labour-intensive methods and utilise the
existing infrastructure location effectively to increase the labour content
of infrastructure delivery.

We further welcome the increase in the incentive amount for rural
municipalities from R50 to R60 per person for a day’s work. However, the
challenge with the grant is that provinces and municipalities still find it
difficult to integrate it through their infrastructure programme because,
although it is allocated to provinces and thus included in the
Appropriation Act of the province, the eligibility to access the incentive
grant depends on or is based on performance in the previous quarter, once
the thresholds have been met. If thresholds are not met, which is the issue
in most cases, it will imply that the provinces, in real terms, will
underspend their appropriate budget in that particular year. It would,
however, be good practice not to appropriate indicative incentive
allocations, but instead to claim from the national department as the
eligible provincial departments meet their targets.

With regard to the provincial equitable share formula, does the equitable
share formula adequately address the expenditure needs of the province? The
fiscal disparities arise from two sources: Firstly, provinces may differ in
their fiscal capacity - that is their ability to raise a particular level
of revenue - given the revenue assigned to them with administrative effect.
Secondly, provinces may also differ in their expenditure needs. Even when
they have the same fiscal capacity, they may differ in the costs they faced
in the provision of a standardised basket of public services due to
geographic and climatological conditions.

In this regard, geographically large provinces such as the Northern Cape
province will have to spend more on transportation infrastructure and
possibly on recurrent operations in order to achieve the same level of
service as smaller provinces.

Furthermore, the variations in regional prospectus are caused by two
separate phenomena: Firstly, less densely populated areas typically require
higher levels of government service and thus create higher costs because it
is more costly to serve a population that is more spread out. Secondly, the
cost of providing a standard unit of government service may be higher in
less densely populated and more remote areas.

Geographically the Northern Cape shares approximately 30% of South
African’s land area. The institutional component of the provincial
equitable share formula, which constitutes 5% of total transfers, is given
to provinces in equal amounts to each province, irrespective of the size.
The underlying logic is that there are fixed costs associated with the
establishment of the institution for the provincial government and delivery
of public services.

Given the difference in expenditure needs, does this logic still hold? It
must be further noted that during the 2005-06 Division of Revenue Act, the
vastness of the area of the Northern Cape was recognised and it was
discovered that the amount was top-sliced to address the road
infrastructure. However, the cost of delivering the service is not yet
recognised. We understand that the current equitable share formula is
currently under review and I think as an oversight body we must take up an
active role in this process.

In conclusion, the Northern Cape province supports this Bill.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL (Mpumalanga): Hon Chairperson, hon members, guests,
comrades and compatriots ...

... ke a le dumedisa. Dumelang! [... I greet you all. Greetings!]

Sanibonani! [Greetings!]

Hon Chair, I must say it is nice to be back home away from home. I see you
have also improved your Rules to allow points of clarity. I must say, in
our legislature that becomes a point of disorder because you are disturbing
a member when he is still delivering a good speech. That was Comrade Papo.

It is indeed a great privilege for me to make a contribution in this august
House on the occasion of debating the Division of Revenue Bill of 2010, in
the year which the ANC has declared as the year of working together to
speed up service delivery to the people.

Let me take just a short left.

Sihlalo ohloniphekile, ngizwe uMnumzane Lees lapha, ekhuluma okunye
okuyindida. Uma eqala uthe, uMphathiswa ulisike kahle lelikhekhe,
lendlaleka kahle. Eseqhubeka nenkulumo yakhe ... [Hon Chairperson, I heard
Mr Lees here saying something confusing. When he started he said the
Minister sliced this cake and allocated it perfectly. When he continued
with his speech ...]

... he then criticised that there is unacceptably more allocation to social
welfare, which is there to address the downtrodden people left in the lurch
by the apartheid regime. In short, the DA is saying: let us cut the social
grants, poverty alleviation programmes and other means and measures that
are there to assist and uplift the previously disadvantaged people who were
oppressed by the previous regime. Now I understand the reason that the DA-
led Cape Metropolitan Municipality decided to build toilet pans without
walls and call them toilets.

Noma sekuthiwa kusobala kangakanani, ngeke sithi ogogo nomkhulu bethu
abayohlala endle kungenazindonga kulezi zinto abazibiza ngokuthi yizindlu
zangasese. [No matter how logical it may seem to be, we cannot expect our
grandmothers and grandfathers to go and relieve themselves where there are
no walls - in the so-called toilets.]

I tried to listen attentively - because listening is a skill - to what hon
De Villiers was saying. The only thing I could hear in the time allocated
by this august House which was progressive on his part is that tax money is
now moving closer to the people with this Division of Revenue Bill. I think
in that he is coming closer to the ANC, and I thank him for that. I must
also advise him that we expect the Western Cape government and the Cape
Metro to put this into practice; to deal with the squalor of the conditions
in which our people find themselves in Khayelitsha, Gugulethu and other
areas.

I must further say that I could really not make any sense when he spoke
about federalism. One of my English teachers told me that if something is
not making sense, it is nonsense. What I know is that South Africa is a
unitary country. Constitutionally, what we believe in is co-operative
governance, as stipulated in Chapter 3 of the Constitution, whereby the
three spheres of government are expected to complement each other rather
than to compete against each other.

I must then say that this 2010 Division of Revenue Bill, which is being
tabled and is going to be adopted today, is indeed in conformity with
Chapter 3 of the Constitution. As such, to this end, this Bill put into
practical terms and financial logic the affirmation of section 40 of our
Constitution when it says:

   In the Republic, government is constituted as national, provincial and
   local spheres of government, which are distinctive, interdependent and
   interrelated.

Clearly, this 2010 Division of Revenue Bill is crafted and anchored within
the context of achieving the five major priorities as set out in the 2009
Manifesto of the ANC, which are designed to impact positively on the lives
of the people of this country, as we continue to wage the struggle for a
more nonracial, nonsexist and a democratic society.

As a representative of Mpumalanga province, which is one of the rural
provinces, you should not be surprised that we are particularly pleased
about the fact that this division of revenue is also pro-rural in its
nature. Hence, we support the passage of this Bill unreservedly.

This is in line with our manifesto goals, which place rural development as
a key priority focus within the context of rebuilding the potential for
rural sustainable livelihoods. This prioritisation of rural development is
particularly expressed by the Bill through the fact that attention was
drawn to the rising allocation to municipalities in both the local
government equitable share transfers and the municipal infrastructure
grant, MIG, which contribute to the capacity of municipalities to maintain
water infrastructure.

Again, we note that measures have also been taken to increase the Expanded
Public Works Programme Incentive Grant to smaller and rural municipalities
over the 2010 Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period.

Finally, that funding has also been set aside on the Department of Water
Affairs’ Budget Vote to accelerate progress in bringing water and
associated economic opportunities to rural areas. In Mpumalanga we are well
on course, notwithstanding the challenges to address these water issues in
our communities through our flagship programme called Water For All.

We are also pleased to note and accept the new Expanded Public Works
Programmes Grant for the social sector that will subsidise nonprofit
organisations, so that they can pay salaries to care workers currently
working voluntarily on social and health-care related matters in our
communities. Our people have expressed great appreciation, during our
public hearings, to the government for introducing this grant. This
intervention will go a long way, especially in poor and rural communities,
where nonprofit organisations have relied on volunteers to carry out some
of the socioeconomic difficulties faced by our communities without any
remuneration.

We would like to support and align ourselves with the view which suggests
that steps should be taken, that procedures for shifting of funds and
rollovers from municipalities back to the national government should not
disadvantage poor performing municipalities and priority should be given to
supporting structures to assist such municipalities.

In this regard, we think the view that we should develop procedures that
are specifically aimed at both strengthening capacity-building, support for
poor performing municipalities and linking initiatives to withhold stock or
reallocate grants to specific interventions to address capacity constraints
should be applauded.

We strongly uphold this view, because continuous shifting of funds and
rollovers back to national government and best performing municipalities
could be tantamount to taking from the poor to subsidise the rich. We are
particularly pleased as the ANC that this division of revenue is really
going to assist our people as we speed up service delivery.

Yes, the President of the country has made a clarion call for our
government at all levels to work differently; to work harder, faster and
smarter within the context of understanding that this is a year of action.
Again, Comrade President Jacob Zuma, when closing the 2010 ANC national
executive council lekgotla, said, “In our work, therefore, we should
prioritise the people and we must improve on citizen care.”


This also moves in line with what the late president of the ANC, O R 
Tambo, said when he was delivering a speech when awarded an honorary degree
in law on 19 October 1991, in Fort Hare:

   South Africa needs to believe in our capacity to overcome our painful
   history; to begin again and to regard our failures, when they occur, not
   as finite moments, but as occasions for a new beginning.


I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C J DE BEER: Chairperson, it is an historic occasion to participate in
this debate in the Limpopo province during Taking Parliament to the People.
It is also historic because it is the first time that we debate the
Division of Revenue Bill and report to the NCOP as required by the Money
Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act of 2009.

The late Comrade Moses Kotana was an architect of the struggle in this
country to set the pace for renewal and to better the lives of our people.
The Freedom Charter as adopted in 1955, the strategy and tactics as
reviewed by the Polokwane conference, the ANC manifesto for which the ANC-
led government received overwhelming support on 22 April 2009 and the state
of the nation address inform the division of revenue to address the
specific objectives to improve the people’s lives and give them dignity. In
1994, the people of this country got political freedom, but the struggle
for economic freedom is still on. That work to get economic freedom, which
the late Comrade Moses Kotane started, still continues.

Last Thursday, the new alliance of the opposition parties had the audacity
to put forward a motion of no confidence in the Head of State of this
country. One thing that they forget is that the Head of State of this
country engaged with countries of the world to get programmes going, to
uplift the people in Africa to get water and to get sanitation and went to
Copenhagen to engage with countries of the world to set the pace and get
sensible resolutions to save the world. That is the Head of State about
whom they put forward a motion of no confidence.

During the state of the nation address, the Head of State gave the marching
orders for South Africa for the next five years. Going back to 22 April,
South Africa’s people spoke, and last Thursday Parliament spoke, and the
opposition dismally failed.

The ANC government steeled its resolve to create a better life for all and
roll back the frontiers of poverty by focusing on the five manifesto
priorities as demonstrated in the equitable division of revenue across all
its spheres. Hon Lees came to the podium and addressed this House regarding
the social welfare of our people - that we create a social welfare system
at the expense of economic development. Sometimes it seems to me people
cannot read, because we dealt with a review of the Budget; we dealt with
the speech of the Minister of Finance, and we dealt with the Budget as a
whole and with the division of revenue.

It is all set in a programme to get South Africa economically viable and to
get jobs for our people. What is the reality in this country? We had
Bantustans - this province where we are now had two - the former Venda and
Lebowa. The then National Party did not spend what it was supposed to spend
on water, sanitation and job creation in the Bantustans. Go and read the
Tomlinson Report, which you can get at the library in Parliament. It will
give you the facts. That is the history and that is why we must deal with
the reality as it is now.

The statement is made that we lied for 15 years and made promises. Memories
are very short. Since 1995, 1 568 new schools were built, 47 771 new
classrooms were erected and 13,6 million people are receiving social grants
and can say tonight that they have got bread on the table. You want to take
it away. If you take it away, what do you put in its place? What answer are
you going to give to the constituency if you take the statement that you
made on this podium? How are you going to do that?

Five hundred new clinics were built, 2 298 were upgraded, 125 mobile
clinics were established, 13 new hospitals were built and 2,9 million
houses were built. That is a reality. Now it is said that we make promises
and we cannot keep the promises. I think we must give the opposition a
political education lecture.

The division of revenue as a developmental tool should be acute in
correcting the past wrongs and past imbalances and create a democratic
society. South Africa is a country in transition, from a past of the
exclusion of the majority from decent services. We admit the challenges are
huge. We also admit we must still do more. We are not running away from our
responsibilities. Many of our provinces are a conglomeration of the
erstwhile South African Development Trust and the former Bantustans. This
led to tension amongst provinces in resource allocation and service
delivery. The provincial equitable share allocations, the local government
equitable share allocations per municipality and all other allocations are
allocations to meet target priority programmes of government.

The ANC supports the objectives of the Division of Revenue Bill as stated
in section 2 of the Bill specifically referring to accountability by
ensuring that all allocations are reflected in the budget of receiving
provinces and municipalities, and by ensuring that expenditure of
additional allocations is reported on by the receiving provinces and
municipalities and its implementation.

The total equitable share to provinces is R260,9 billion, of which R61,8
billion is in conditional grants, totalling R322,8 billion to assist
provinces to see that the circumstances of their people are improved.

The ANC is committed to increasing its oversight and we will do it. We are
starting this weekend during the constituency period to see to it that the
allocated funds towards our spending priority are well spent. I am
referring to expanding employment and safeguarding social security,
improving quality education and skills development, improving health care,
rural development, and creating a built environment to support economic
growth and to combating crime and corruption.

We are serious when we say we want clean governance and co-operative
governance standards that must not be compromised. The division of revenue
in the hands of government, based on the will of the people and the people-
centred and people-driven principle, should be outcomes-based.

My time was cut, but the ANC supports this Division of Revenue Bill. Thank
you. [Time expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Your time has not been cut, hon member. Your
speaking time has expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, let me, again, take this
opportunity to thank all members for supporting this Division of Revenue
Bill. A number of points which show that our democracy is indeed maturing,
particularly when it comes to dealing with issues that relate to addressing
the inequalities of the past, were raised.

The chair of the committee spoke about the need to stretch limited
resources at this trying time. Never in our history has this point been so
relevant. Never in our history has the economic question – that of
satisfying unlimited wants with limited resources - been so glaringly
important.

Members unanimously raised the issue of the importance of oversight once
resources have been deployed. I indicated in my speech earlier that all the
recommendations that the committee has made will be taken seriously. Some
of them will actually be carried forward into the next financial year, as
it was not possible to accommodate all of them during this financial year.

Members have already dealt with Mr Lees’s dilemma of coming from a
different planet to the one we are on. You see, I grew up in a rural area
where people would travel in tractors and sit at the back. Whilst all of
them were facing the front, a few delinquents would be facing backwards;
that is what we experienced. When everybody else is facing in one
direction, in order to build, one of us is facing backwards. So, if anyone
of us was wondering what happened to the perpetrators of the deliberate
exclusion of our people from economic participation, now we know where they
are; they are still in our midst. [Applause.]

We survived the structural adjustments in the past. For an hon member to
come before this House and say that this Budget is skewed towards social
expenditure instead of funding economic infrastructure just shows that we
really represent different constituencies.

If we are blind to the fact that our people are still poor out there, we
are not going to see the need for us to balance the two. Whilst we invest
in the productive capacity of this country in order to build the economy,
we also need to look at how best we can address the plight of the people
who otherwise cannot mitigate the poverty that they live in.

I agree that local government receives a smaller share, but anybody who
understands how government works knows that local government is actually
supposed to rely more on the revenue that it raises. A number of members
raised the issue of how important it is that local government is assisted
in boosting its capacity to be able to collect its own revenue, but also at
the same time to make sure that government departments and all other people
who owe rates to local government pay those on time. If this does not
happen, I want to urge members - as public representatives – to make sure
that those are taken up and necessary steps are taken in order to address
it.

I agree with the MEC from North West with regard to the provincial
equitable share. I have made an offer to the MEC to mediate between North
West and Gauteng, because we have a similar complaint from Gauteng - that
they inherited an influx of functions that came from North West and that
the allocation that we transferred from the North West is not adequate. So,
we have the two to balance.

With regard to the issue of the equitable share review, at both provincial
and local government levels, the support for this review is appreciated and
it came from all members across the board. I would also just like to
indicate that the Financial and Fiscal Commission forms part of the review
team that deals with this.
The issue of inward immigration from rural areas into some of our cities is
also fully appreciated, and the updating of data, in order for us to be
able to deal with this, is under way. I also want to indicate that the
other problem that we are faced with is that in order for us to stop our
people from migrating from the rural areas into towns, we need to develop
the rural areas in order for them to be able to absorb their own people as
well as ensure that they are economically viable, so that people do not
move to the towns in order to search for greener pastures. We still have
this balance that we all need to work towards addressing.

With regard to the issue of unfunded mandates that came up from the member
from KwaZulu-Natal, again we agree. But, I must indicate that National
Treasury has an even bigger unfunded mandate, because in order for us to
finance our borrowing to finance our expenditure, we need to service the
debt. So, we need to balance the two, particularly at this time when we
cannot raise adequate revenue, because we will all suffer as a result of
that. Therefore, the issue of reprioritisation becomes even more critical
than before.

We have identified savings in some of the provinces and departments, and we
request that members assist us in making sure that departments, provinces
and local governments begin to look at their priorities and cut noncore
expenditure in order to spend where our priorities lie.

Every time the budgets are passed at local government level, one of the
things that we should look at is what the priorities of local government
are. Some of the things might be nice to have, but may not be necessary at
this time for us to fund. We, therefore, would like to call upon members to
assist us during their oversight to ensure that that happens.

I cannot overemphasise the point I touched on earlier, that of payments of
accounts to municipalities on time. In fact, it is a provision in the
Public Finance Management Act, PFMA, that that should be the case. If there
are disputes on accounts, provinces and municipalities should agree on how
to resolve them. Again, we offer to mediate if there are any problems.

It is impossible for me to deal with all the issues raised. I have taken
copious notes; my officials are also here. Those that are within our powers
to address, we will, and those that are not, we call on the collective
wisdom of this august House to assist us in addressing. Thank you,
Chairperson, and thank you for supporting the Division of Revenue Bill.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
  TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NALA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY IN FREE
                                    STATE

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THABO MOFUTSANYANA DISTRICT
                                MUNICIPALITY

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, the Chief Whip of NCOP,
provincial leaders and members, in the true spirit of the Freedom Charter,
the ANC has introduced a system of local government as the antithesis to
the previously racially fragmented local council. The 2000 municipal
elections marked a fundamental transformation in municipal governance. The
clause “The people shall govern” gained expression when this sphere was
electively put in place for things to happen where we live.

The select committee, upon receiving the notices from the province of the
Free State, immediately engaged in a trip to find out whether there was
legislative and constitutional compliance in terms of the two
municipalities. This was done to ensure that everyone is given a platform
to express their views in terms of that section. On 24-25 February 2010,
the delegation of the committee had this engagement. Amongst the other
stakeholders that we met there were speakers, executive mayors, chief
whips, administrators, ward committees, organised labour, community forums,
Salga and business communities.

The main objective was the need to solicit an opinion and make to the House
an informed recommendation for approval or disapproval of the
interventions. Having evaluated and assessed various inputs as the
committee, we therefore made recommendations to the House regarding
municipal governance that has been found to be in shackles; service
delivery that does not speak to the integrated development plans, which
lack consultation and public participation and which do not address the
needs of the people, and the national and millennium development targets
which, we fear, might not be met in these two municipalities. It remains to
be seen  whether there will be an improvement or not in the local economic
strategy of these municipalities.

Financial viability and management also constitute a challenge because they
are punctuated by disclaimers of adverse audit opinions. The other issue
that was looked into was the human resource management plans which we found
were not in existence. The recruitment strategy was just haphazard and the
issue of salaries were in disparity. There was a general lack of compliance
in terms of those five key strategic local government agendas.

Therefore, the committee is of the opinion that, in terms of the
recommendations to the Thabo Mofutsanyana District Municipality, Firstly,
this Council should approve the intervention as issued by the provincial
executive, as we found that it complies with the legislative and
constitutional requirements.

Secondly, the administrator should fast-track the process of appointing
section 57 managers as this is one element that will ensure that the
municipality does return to normal.

Thirdly, the administrator should conduct a proper and thorough
investigation and report to the MEC and the NCOP on the possible link
between the resignation of the former municipal manager or any other form
of misconduct that has since contributed to the current crisis in that
municipality.

Fourthly, the administrator should also conduct a proper and meticulous
reconciliation of payments on the litigation and legal costs of its debt
collectors and attorneys so as to enable the municipality to avoid
fruitless and wasteful expenditure.

Fifthly, the Free State MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs should table quarterly reports to the committee of the NCOP, in
particular this committee.

Sixthly, the SA Local Government Association, in co-operation with the
local government sector education and training authority, should facilitate
training and capacity-building for municipal councillors to deepen their
understanding of the oversight role, legal framework and financial issues.

Seventhly, the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs, in co-operation with relevant portfolio committees in the Free
State provincial legislature, should conduct a follow-up visit to this
municipality within three months in order to monitor progress made in
respect of the directives issued in terms of this intervention.

Chairperson, on the Nala local municipality: Firstly, the select committee
recommends to the National Council of Provinces approval of the
intervention as issued by the provincial executive council in terms of
section 139(1) (b) of the Constitution, as we found that there is
compliance in terms of the necessary procedures and constitutional
requirements.

Secondly, the administrator should fast-track the process of appointing
section 57 managers and assist the municipality in developing a labour
retention strategy so as to ensure that social service delivery projects
are not compromised.

Thirdly, the administrator should conduct a proper and thorough
investigation and report to the Free State MEC and the NCOP on the alleged
cases of misappropriation of funds in this municipality.

The MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs has to
immediately reconsider the current appointment of the municipal manager,
since the appointment is surrounded by and shrouded with allegations of
corruption and maladministration. Let me just make a point: When the
committee was busy conducting this engagement, the community nearly stormed
the hall precisely because they did not want to see the municipal manager.
We are not making an implication, but we are saying there are serious
issues that need to be looked into around that position. The administration
should ensure that individually reported cases to the SA Police Service are
changed to municipal cases. There is evidence in this regard of forged
cheques of about R650 000 with signatures of people that need to be
investigated.

The Free State MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
should table a quarterly report to the NCOP and the Free State provincial
legislature on the status of the intervention and the progress thus far.
The SA Local Government Association, in co-operation with the local
government sector education and training authority, should facilitate
training and capacity-building for municipal councillors to deepen their
understanding of the legislative environment. The SA Local Government
Association should further facilitate executive training programmes for
municipal officials.

The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs should
institute an independent forensic investigation into all the financial
affairs of the Nala local municipality, including, amongst others, the
companies that are alleged to be ghost companies, which means they are
doing the work but they do not exist. The committee further proposed that
there should be a mechanism in place that would assist to track the
resolution and decisions taken and table them in the House within three
months. This will ensure that things are done differently – faster, smarter
and harder.

The approved report by the NCOP should be shared amongst both internal and
external stakeholders as there is an outcry that Parliament does visits but
there is no feedback. The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, in conjunction with relevant portfolio committees in
the Free State provincial legislature, should conduct a follow-up visit
within three months after interventions have ended.

The National Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
should introduce legislation to regulate the implementation of section 139.
Chairperson, the emphasis here is that there is no homogeneous application
of this section. We find different applications of the same matter.
Therefore, we sincerely motivate that legislation be put in place that
would help to produce either a manual or guidelines to procedures.

In conclusion, Chairperson, let me take this opportunity to thank members
of the House, hon members of the committee, the Chief Whips for their
guidance, the leadership, the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson, and
the support both directly and sympathetically from this House. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Oversight Visit to Nala Local Municipality
in Free State be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Oversight Visit to Nala Local Municipality in Free State
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Oversight Visit to Thabo Mofutsanyana
District Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report on Oversight visit to Thabo Mofutsanyana District Municipality
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
       AFFAIRS - DEPROCLAMATION OF PORTION OF LOWVELD BOTANICAL GARDEN

Ms B P MABE: Chairperson, I refer to the report of the Select Committee on
Land and Environmental Affairs on the request from the Minister of Water
and Environmental Affairs for the exclusion of a portion of state land from
the Lowveld National Botanical Garden. In terms of section 34(2) of the
National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, Act 10 of 2004, a part
of a national botanical garden on state land may not be excluded from it
except by resolution of both Houses of Parliament. As a result of this, the
Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs was briefed by the
Department of Water and Environmental Affairs on the process followed in
the deproclamation of a portion of the Lowveld Botanical Garden in order to
expand the N7 national road.

Having deliberated on the matter, the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs recommends that the NCOP resolves to approve the
request for the withdrawal of 1,47 hectares of portion 30 and a portion of
portion 14 of the farm Boschrand, No 283-JT of state land, from the Lowveld
National Botanical Garden. The committee further recommends that, for
future developments, the department should ensure that proper consultation
with all relevant stakeholders is undertaken before the implementation of
projects. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                SAFETY AT SPORTS AND RECREATIONAL EVENTS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson and hon members, South Africa is increasingly
becoming a desired destination for major international sporting,
recreational, political and socioeconomic events. It is government’s policy
to attract and support the hosting of such major events in the country.

Our experience in hosting major events has equally brought with it the
occurrences of disasters in sports such as the Ellis Park in Johannesburg
and the Oppenheimer stadium in Orkney. These disasters have taken place
despite the fact that the provincial sports federations were charged with
the responsibility not only to host the events but also to ensure the
safety and security of persons attending the events.

Often event organisers fail to accept or resist accepting their
responsibility to provide adequate security at events, and many events have
been hosted without proper or sufficient public liability being in place.
Government has a duty to ensure the following: The safety and the
protection of the physical wellbeing of both persons attending sports and
recreational events and their property at stadia and other such venues; the
protection of rights of persons who attend sports and recreational events;
and that the planning, management and enforcement of safety and security at
sports and recreational events held at stadia, other venues and at events
in the form of a race, tour or procession along a route are handled by
people that are experienced in the field of safety and security.

The Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill aims to protect the
primary stakeholder at the events, which is the general public, who attend
thousands of sporting and recreational events held across the country each
year. Compared to comparable legislation in other countries, the Bill is
reasonable. An example is the United Kingdom system, which is overreaching
and intrusive, whereas the South African Bill adopts a more reasonable
middle-ground approach, which incorporates the necessary constitutional
safeguards.

The Bill has been created to cater specifically for the needs of South
Africa and its Constitution. Although the Bill is a reasonable piece of
legislation, it still has teeth. For instance, it provides for the issuing
of exclusion notices to deal with hooliganism and provides for sub
prohibition notices and for heavy penalties in respect of noncompliance.

The Bill provides that the powers that the provincial sports federations
have to convene sports events and ensure safety and security is overridden
by the powers of the SA Police Service through their command structures to
take control of any sporting event in any geographical area. In this
regard, the SAPS will make a determination on any event and, where it deems
it necessary, it will take control of that event.

In terms of the Bill, the proper event safety and security measures would
rest with the controlling body, event organiser or stadium or venue owner,
who, if a natural person, must be at least 21 years of age.

Although the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Act, Act 11
of 2006, has been passed and regulations under it were issued, this Act
deals with specific issues. The Act does not deal with key safety and
security areas such as ticketing matters, minimum measures to ensure safety
as opposed to security of the general public and the establishment of
general offences and penalties for antisocial behaviour inside and
immediately in the vicinity of the 2010 stadia.

The Bill provides that a controlling body, an event organiser or stadium or
venue owner must appoint sufficient persons to be responsible for safety
and security at an event, including an event safety officer, security
officers or such other persons as prescribed. Stewards are responsible for
the marshalling and overseeing of the safe general flow of spectators. An
event organiser must ensure that a detailed written safety plan, which
includes the following, is prepared: Event risk assessment; event details,
including duration; stadium, venue or route design; and safe capacity and
compliance with other relevant safety certification.

If the National Commissioner of the SAPS, event safety and security
planning committee, authorised member or venue operations centre, VOC,
commander have reasonable grounds to believe that there is a threat that
the attendance of a person or group of persons may result in the disruption
of the event or cause injury to a person or damage the property, the
authorised member or the VOC commander may issue a spectator exclusion
notice to a person or group of persons.
During our deliberations as the NCOP, we have raised the following
questions: The requirement that the organiser of an event be at least 21
years of age; that there is no obligation on the part of the authority to
issue safety certificates; the attendance of the members in safety
committee meetings; the adequacy of the capacity of security personnel; and
public liability insurance and the meaning of gross negligence.

The Select Committee on Education and Recreation supports the passing of
the Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill and in doing so it
acknowledges that the Bill has been passed by the select committee without
amendments.

The Select Committee on Education and Recreation supports the Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
    DEVELOPMENT - REGULATIONS MADE IN TERMS OF SECTION 97(1) OF THE CHILD
                              JUSTICE ACT 2008


Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Modulasetulo le maloko a Ntlo a hlomphehang, Komiti e
ile ya kopana le lefapha ka di 12 le ka di 24, e le ho tla utlwa tlaleho e
mabapi le diphetoho tse sisintsweng ho ya ka karolwana ya 97 ya molao wa
toka wa bana wa selemo sa 2008.
Tlaleho ena e ne e tsamaya le diphatlalatso tse tlo etswa ke Mokomishenara
wa Sepolesa ka labohlano la hosane. Molao ona o tla kena tshebetsong ka di
1 kgweding e tlang.

Komiti e sisintse hore jwalokaha e ntshetsa pele ditabatabelo tsa
diporofensi, ho be le phetoho moo molawana o buang ka hore, ha ngwana a
lemetse a le tlhokomelong ya sepolesa, ho tsebiswe le Mokomishenara wa
porofensi. Hajwale molawana ona o supa feela hore Motsamaisi wa seteishene
a tsebise Mokomishenara wa naha. Hona ho tla tlisa lenyatso tsamaisong ya
taolo ya sepolesa.

Komiti e supile le ho ngongoreha ka hore melao ena e hloka nako, empa leha
ho le jwalo, lefapha le tla ho se ho setse nako e nyane. Hodima moo le
romela le basebeletsi ba sa kgoneng ho nka diqeto. Kahoo, komiti e etsa
boipiletso hore mafapha a tle ka nako ha ho na le melao e hlokang hore e
lekolwe ka bobatsi. Nakong e tlang, e ke ke ya tshehetsa melao e tliswang
ka lehlaphahlapha ntle le hore e lekolwe hantle. Re kopa Ntlo hore e
amohele tlaleho ena. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson and hon members of the House, the committee
met with the department on the 12th and 14th in order to listen to the
report regarding the changes that have been suggested in accordance with
section 97 of the Child Justice Act of 2008. This report was accompanied by
the pronouncements that will be made by the Commissioner of Police
tomorrow, on Friday. This Act will go into effect on the first of next
month.

The committee has suggested that as it is responsible for the needs of
provinces, there should be some changes where the Act refers to the
instance where a minor sustains injuries while in police custody, such as
that the commissioner of the province should be notified. At present, the
Act only stipulates that the station commander should notify the National
Commissioner of Police. This can lead to disrespect within the police.

The committee indicated as well as expressed the concern that these Acts
need time but, nevertheless, the department came when there was very little
time left. On top of that it sent people who are not able to make
decisions. Therefore, the committee would like to make the request that
departments must come early when there are Acts that need to be discussed
in detail. In future, it will not support Acts that are brought to it in a
hurry without thorough consultation. We would like to ask the House to
accept this report. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Before I close this session, may I request
that all the chairpersons of committees remain behind for five minutes with
me, the Chief Whip and all presiding officers. May I also request that the
following members also remain behind: They are hon Bekker from the DA, hon
De Beer from Cope and hon De Villiers from the DA. That concludes the
business for the day. The House is adjourned until 9 o’clock tomorrow
morning.

The Council adjourned at 20:02.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 12 MARCH 2010

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Public Works dated 11 March 2010,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly requesting for the
        withdrawal of the Department of Public Works Strategic Plan for the
        period 2010 – 2013.

        2010-2013 DEPARTMENTAL STRATEGIC PLAN AND ENTITIES IN PARLIAMENT

        The Department of the Public Works’ strategic plan was tabled in
        Parliament on the 3rd of March 2010. There have been noticeable
        inaccuracies in the tabled document which have to be rectified by
        the Department.

        The amendments made to the departmental strategic plan of the
        department and further undertake to table the amended version to
        Parliament within two (2) weeks. Note that the aligned strategic
        plans of the sector entities, namely, Construction Industry
        Development Board (CIDB), Council for the Built Environment (CBE),
        Independent Development Board (IDB) and Agrément South Africa (ASA)
        will also be tabled within the said two (2) weeks.


        I sincerely apologise to Parliament and its committees for the
        inconvenience caused as a result of these developments.

        Yours sincerely,
        (Signed)
        G Q M DOIDGE (MP)
        MINISTER
        Date:  11/03/2010

        Cc:      Hon G Olifant – Portfolio Committee on Public Works
            Hon Sibande MP – Select Committee on Public Services

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     a) Eskom’s 2010/11 tariff increase and amended pricing structure for
        municipalities with effect from 1 July 2010, in terms of section 42
        of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003
        (Act No 56 of 2003).

                            MONDAY, 15 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
          a) Prevention and Combating of Trafficking in Persons Bill [B 7 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 32906 of 29 January 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
             and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill, 2010, submitted by the
         Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land
         Reform and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

    a) Tariff increase for 2010-11 and amendment to Eskom's pricing
       structure for municipalities, tabled in terms of section 42(4) of
       the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No
       56 of 2003), and supporting documents required in terms of section
       42(3) of the same Act.


2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) Albany Coast Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2010-11,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (b)     Amatola Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (c)     Bloem Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (d)     Botshelo Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (e)     Bushbuckridge Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2010-11,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     f) Lepelle Northern Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
        for 2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     g) Magalies Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     h) Mhlathuze Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (i)     Namakwa Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (j)     Overberg Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (k)     Pelladrift Water Board’s Proposed Water Tariffs for 2010-11,
        tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (l)     Rand Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-
        11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    (m)     Sedibeng Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
        2010-11, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


    n) Umgeni Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2010-11,
       tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government: Municipal
       Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

                           TUESDAY, 16 MARCH 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Tourism

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Tourism for 2010/11 – 2014/15.


2.    The Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities

     (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department for Women, Children and Persons
        with Disabilities for 2009 – 2014.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
   Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill [B7B – 2009], dated 16
   March 2010:


      The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having considered
      the Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill [B7B – 2009],
      (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the JTM
      as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

   Report to be considered.

                          WEDNESDAY, 17 MARCH 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister in The Presidency: National Planning Commission

     (a)    General Notice No 101 published in Government Gazette No 32928
        dated 2 February 2010: Publication of the Revised Green Paper on
        National Planning Commission.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
request for proposed withdrawal of declaration of a portion of land of the
Lowveld National Botanical Garden (LNBG), dated 16 March 2010:

The request from the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs for the
exclusion of a portion of state land from the Lowveld National Botanical
Gardens was referred to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
Affairs on 26 January 2010 for consideration and report.

In terms of section 34(2) of the National Environmental Management Act:
Biodiversity Act (Act 10 of 2004), a part of a national botanical garden on
state land may not be excluded from it except by resolution of both Houses
of Parliament.

Having deliberated on the matter, the Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs recommends that the National Council of Provinces
resolves to approve the request for the withdrawal of 1.47 ha of portion 30
(a portion of portion 14) of the farm Boschrand No.283-JT, of state land
from the Lowveld National Botanical Gardens.
The Committee would like the following to be noted:

The Committee was briefed by the officials of the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs on 16 March 2010 and deliberated on the matter. The
following was raised:

The Committee took exception on two matters. Firstly, the department had
already issued an Environmental Authorisation to proceed with the
construction of the road without the necessary approval from both Houses of
Parliament. The Committee further requested a full list of Interested and
Affected Parties that were consulted during the public participation
process, during the Environmental Impact Assessment as part of the
requirements of the National Environmental Management Act (107 of 1998).

Although the Committee agreed to recommend approval of the request to de-
proclaim the portion of the Lowveld Botanical Garden for construction of
the N4/7 Ring Road, it wishes to record its disapproval in the process that
was followed in this regard.

Report to be considered.

                           THURSDAY, 18 MARCH 2010

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON THE OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THABO MOFUTSANYANE
    DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY – DATED 12 MARCH 2010

1.    Background and Overview
     1.1    The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs, having considered the request by the National Council of
        Provinces (NCOP) on 9th December 2009, to consider and report on
        the intervention notice invoked in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of
        the Constitution at Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality,
        reports as follows:

     1.2    In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or
        does not fulfil an executive obligation in terms of the
        Constitution or legislation, the relevant provincial executive may
        intervene by taking any appropriate steps to ensure fulfilment of
        that obligation, including assuming responsibility for the relevant
        obligation in that municipality.

     1.3    In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of the
        NCOP referred the notice of intervention in the affairs of Thabo
        Mofutsanyane District Municipality to the Select Committee on Co-
        operative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and
        report. On 9th February 2010, the Select Committee took a decision
        during its meeting to conduct an oversight visit to the above-
        mentioned Municipality on 24 February 2010.

2.    Purpose and Objectives of the Oversight Visit

     2.1    The main objectives of the oversight visit was to determine
        whether procedural requirements have been met and to verify whether
        the provincial executive has used its discretion appropriately
        before the Committee can approve/disapprove the interventions.
        Through the deliberations and interaction with internal and
        external stakeholders, the Committee wanted to determine how the
        provincial executive was intending to restore the fulfilment of the
        relevant obligations and ensure fulfilment in the long-term. The
        aim being to ensure intergovernmental checks and balances aimed at
        guarding the integrity and efficiency of the intervention process.
        In terms of section 139 (2)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the
        intervention must end if the NCOP does not positively approve the
        intervention within 180 days, in this case before the end of 06
        June 2010 since the intervention began.

3.    Composition of the Delegation

     3.1    The Delegation of the Committee composed of the following
        members of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi, Limpopo (ANC);
        Hon AG Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon DV Bloem, Free State (COPE); Hon
        A Watson, Mpumalanga (DA), Hon TMH Mofokeng, Free State, (ANC) Mr
        TM Manele, Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku,
        Content Adviser (Committee Section) and Mr V Mfuniselwa,
        Administration Assistant (Committee Section).

4.    Introduction

     4.1    On the 4th December 2009 the Free State MEC for Co-operative
        Governance and Traditional Affairs tabled a notice of intervention
        in Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality to the Office of the
        Chairperson of the NCOP. Subsequent to the tabling, the notice of
        intervention was referred to the Select Committee on Co-operative
        Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and report in
        terms of Council Rule 101. In compliance with the Council referral,
        the Select Committee resolved to undertake a fact-finding visit to
        the Municipality on 24 February 2010.

5.    Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality
     5.1    The main issues identified by the PEC to intervene in the
         affairs of Thabo Mufutsanyane District Municipality related to the
         failure by the Municipality to service its local municipalities due
         to vacant Section 57 positions; failure by the Municipality to
         address current municipal financial and other administrative
         challenges confronting the Municipality and the Municipal Council’s
         inability to perform its executive obligation due to the failure of
         the Municipality to function properly. There is no compliance with
         current legislation; unspent 2008/09 MIG allocation (R13, 5
         million); there is no dedicated Public Participation Officer and
         the District failed to co-operate with local municipalities and
         other stakeholders.

6.    Oversight Visit to Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality

     6.1    On the 24 February 2010 the Delegation of the Committee had
         interactive and robust engagements with the internal and external
         stakeholder of the Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality. The
         main internal stakeholders the Delegation interacted with in the
         Municipality included the Speaker, Mayor, Chief Whip, Ward
         Committee Members, Councillors and the Administrator. The main
         external stakeholders the Delegation interacted with included
         members of the community and business forums and non-governmental
         organizations.

     6.2    For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both
         internal and external stakeholders are structured based on the five
         key performance areas of the local government which are: Municipal
         Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local Economic Development;
         Municipal Financial Viability and Management as well as Good
         Governance and Public Participation.
(A)   Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

     6.3    Municipal Council: The submissions made by the Speaker, Mayor
         and the Chief Whip indicated that the Municipality welcomed the
         intervention in its affairs by the PEC. Some of the major progress
         reported by the Municipal Council since the appointment of the
         Administrator by the Provincial Department of Co-operative
         Governance and Traditional Affairs included the development of a
         turn-around strategy and municipal financial recovery plan; co-
         ordination and scheduling of meetings are done monthly and regular
         executive management meetings are being held fortnightly to
         identify and provide solutions to organisational problems.

     6.4    SALGA: The Association declared that what has happened in the
         past should serve as a lesson. The Municipality should devote its
         energy and resources towards the implementation of the turn-around
         strategy, in order to remedy the Municipality. SALGA registered its
         support to the Administrator, and appreciated the current efforts
         in the filling of vacant positions.

     6.5    Administrator: Some of the organisational development challenges
         indicated in the report of the administrator pertained to poor
         assessment of the recoverability of Regional Service Council (RSC)
         debtors and the lack of management oversight to implement
         procedures to recover outstanding amounts – which led to the
         Municipality handing over the amounts due to debt
         collectors/attorneys. Furthermore, the staff was not performing
         duties in terms of formal job descriptions and standard task lists;
         failure to provide supporting documentation and ineffective
         application of HR processes; lack of performance management system,
         non-implementation of the organisational training plan and
         monitoring of training costs and lack of monthly payroll payment
         reconciliation and review. There were instances of
         maladministration, non-compliance with statutory obligations and
         serious malpractice. This has resulted in poor staff morale.

     6.6    Some of the intervention activities reported by the
         Administrator in assisting the Municipality included: review and
         approval of job descriptions, documenting processes and policies,
         monitoring policy implementation, implementing performance
         management system, conducting skills audit for all posts and
         implementing a capacity-building plan and reconciliation of salary
         and third party payment and sub-system information. It was reported
         that Mr M Makhele of Setsoto Local Municipality has been seconded
         to the Municipality in order to provide capacity in the IDP Unit,
         and support the neighbouring local municipalities with alignment
         and development of credible IDPs. Since the Municipality failed to
         comply with Treasury Regulations, an amount of R5, 8 million of its
         equitable share was withheld. However, the amount was given back
         after numerous deputations to the National Treasury. The Labour
         Forum was inactive, however, it has since been revived and regular
         meetings have been conducted. It was reported that single isolated
         cases of disputes and grievances have been dealt with, whilst
         others have been referred to the CCMA.


     7. Organised Labour:  Some of the major transformation and
        organisational development issues raised by the Independent
        Municipal and Allied Trade Union (IMATU) related to lack of
        environmental health system and services. Since 01 July 2009 there
        environmental health function was not performed by the
        Municipality. It was reported that the allocated R10 million for
        environmental health by National Treasury has been used for other
        functions. Furthermore, there was non-implementation of Council
        decisions by the Municipal Manager; lack of organisational
        structure, lack of tools of trade and procurement of goods and lack
        of professional training. The salary disparity, was being done
        based on the old grading system. There were also serious challenges
        with respect to the filling of vacant positions of health
        professionals, lack of consultation on budget related services,
        lack of by-laws and legislation, non-functioning of the labour
        forum.

     6.8    IMATU expressed appreciation about the placing of the
         Municipality under section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution and the
         subsequent appointment of the Administrator. Some of the progress
         reported by the representatives of the IMATU as a result of the
         intervention and appointment of the Administrator related to the
         resuscitation of the labour forum; training on computer systems;
         appointment of skills development facilitator and development of
         skills development plans.

     6.9    The South African Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) raised major
         concerns related to the prevention of employees to attend skills
         development programmes; forceful resignation of employees; non-
         functionality of the labour forum; low staff morale and trust among
         employees, delay with regard to the appointment of section 57
         managers, and non implementation of the bursary policy. SAMWU
         reported that most of the departmental functions previously resided
         in the Municipal Manager’s office, for example, Finance and Fleet
         Management. Despite the above concerns, SAMWU welcomed the placing
         of the Municipality under section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.
         Some of the progress reported in respect of the intervention and
         the appointment of the Administrator related to the development of
         the organisational structure and management’s open door policy.
         The representative of the union further proposed that the
         Administrator fast-track the appointment of Section 57 Managers.
(B)   Basic Service Delivery

     6.10   Administrator: Some of the basic service delivery problems
         highlighted by the Administrator included lack of reconciliation of
         Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) projects expenditure for
         previous years, inadequate public participation and support of
         local municipalities by the District Municipality and provision of
         service delivery not in accordance with the approved IDP. It was
         further indicated that the MIG balance as at 22 February 2010 of
         R7, 2 million will be spent accordingly and the projects will be
         completed by March 2010.  Other intervention activities reported in
         order to assist the Municipality to deal with service delivery
         problems included improvement of communication between district,
         local municipalities and the community and ensuring that there was
         a dedicated Public Participation Officer to liaise with local
         municipalities.

(C)   Local Economic Development (LED)

     6.11   Administrator: The Administrator declared that previously there
         was an acute shortage of personnel in the LED component, hence it
         was critical to get external support whilst there was a process of
         appointing relevant personnel in this component. Progress is
         anticipated with the assistance of the Independent Development Co-
         operation (IDC) in terms of establishing a Development Agency which
         is likely to be catalytic in LED projects. Furthermore, IDT and
         ABSA have been engaged on the alignment and the review of the
         District LED Strategy.

     6.12   Members of Community Forums: The gist of inputs emanating from
         these stakeholders with respect to LED related to lack of access to
         land and provision of title deeds, in order to participate in LED
         projects.

(D)   Municipal Financial Viability and Management

     6.13   Administrator: It has been identified that there are weak
         procurement controls, non-compliance with procurement policies and
         legislation, lack of reporting regarding procurement and policy
         implementation in the Municipality. The Auditor-General has
         identified fruitless and wasteful expenditure for two consecutive
         financial years. An action plan has since been developed to address
         the issues raised by the Auditor-General and is being implemented.
         The Administrator has also updated policies and installed on-line
         SCM module; enforced compliance reporting and developed additional
         procurement reporting templates for stakeholders. In addition, the
         current budget has been reviewed in order to identify and realise
         cost saving opportunities and develop a financial recovery plan.
         Assistance to address the Auditor-General queries and funding to
         deal with poverty alleviation projects and legal creditors has been
         provided by the Provincial Department of Co-operative Governance
         and Traditional Affairs.

     6.14   The Administrator reported that the Office of the Premier (State
         Law Advisor) has been tirelessly providing support to the
         Municipality regarding the outstanding litigation and legal costs
         with the creditors. This relates to the R50 million that was
         supposed to have been collected by debt collectors on behalf of the
         Municipality, but unceremoniously it has been discovered that the
         Municipality owes the debt collectors more than R9, 8 million and
         more than R15 million has been paid since 2007.
(E)   Good Governance and Public Participation

     6.15   Administrator: Governance problems reported by the Administrator
         related to the non-functionality of Audit Committees since 2008;
         lack of risk assessment; monitoring and control system; poor
         communication of risk management issues through municipal formal
         structures and a lack of fraud prevention plan. In order to improve
         and facilitate good governance and public participation, there is
         an urgent need to appoint and/or transfer a Public Participation
         Officer internally that will also assist the Speaker’s Officer. The
         Officer will be appointed as from 01 March 2010. In addition to
         this, the Administrator was assisting the Municipality to deal with
         governance challenges including the updating of internal audit and
         risk management policies and plans, monitoring of the
         implementation of policy and plans and ensuring the effective
         oversight function of the Audit Committee.

     6.16   Ward Committees: The Ward Committees declared their
         dissatisfaction with regard to poor consultation and communication
         on the application of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution on the
         Municipality, non consultation with other municipalities on the
         application of the intervention in the District. They proposed that
         the community should be provided with regular and deliberate
         feedback on progress made in respect of intervention.

7.    Committee Observations and Opinion
    7.1     The Delegation of the Committee has observed that the
         Municipality has failed to ensure mid year financial review in
         consultation with the district and local municipality, failed to
         ensure the appointment of section 57 managers as indicated in the
         report and  the Council has been unable to collect revenue owed
         since 2006 stoppage of levies. It was observed that the process of
         collecting outstanding RSC levies has been tedious. The amount that
         was suppose to be collected was estimated to be in the region of
         R50 million.

    7.2     Furthermore, the changing of debt collectors with regard to the
         collection of outstanding RSC levies has not assisted the
         Municipality. The amount of R9, 8 million owed to the debt
         collectors was unjustified. The Municipality had failed to comply
         with national legislative requirements and consequently contributed
         to the evoking of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution. There was
         also poor communication with the community on the objectives of
         intervening in the Municipality.

8.    Acknowledgement

    8.1     The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions
         of the parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit
         in their various capacities.  A word of appreciation is also
         extended to all the internal and external stakeholders of the
         municipality who interacted and had robust engagements with the
         delegation of the committee on matters related to the placement of
         the municipality under section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution.

9.    Recommendations

    9.1     Having conducted the oversight visit to the Thabo Mufutsanyane
         District Municipality and interacted with internal and external
         stakeholders, the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
         Traditional Affairs recommends that:
        9.1.1    The National Council of Provinces approves the
             intervention as issued by the Provincial Executive Council in
             terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.


        9.1.2    The Administrator should fast-tract the process of
             appointing Section 57 Managers and assist the Municipality in
             developing a labour retention strategy in order to ensure that
             future service delivery projects have the support of the
             community and are aligned with IDP.


        9.1.3    The Administrator should conduct a proper and thorough
             investigation and report to the Free State MEC of Co-operative
             Governance and Traditional Affairs and the NCOP on the
             possible link between the resignation of the former Municipal
             Manager and any other form of misconduct that has since
             contributed to the current crisis in the Municipality.


        9.1.4    The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
             Traditional Affairs would summon the former Municipal Manager
             of Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality, accompanied by
             the MEC, to appear before it in order to explain and give
             details on the allegations of maladministration and
             misappropriation of funds during his term as Municipal Manager
             of Thabo Mofutsanyane District Municipality.


        9.1.5    The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional
             Affairs should institute an independent forensic investigation
             into all the financial affairs of the Thabo Mofutsanyane
             District Municipality.


        9.1.6    The Administrator should also conduct a proper and
             meticulous reconciliation of payments on the litigation and
             legal costs of its debt collectors and attorneys. This will
             enable the Municipality to avoid fruitless and wasteful
             expenditure.


        9.1.7    The Free State MEC for Co-operative Governance and
             Traditional Affairs should table quarterly progress reports to
             the NCOP and the Free State Provincial Legislature on the
             status of the intervention in the Municipality, including
             challenges encountered.


        9.1.8    The South African Local Government Association in co-
             operation with Local Government Sector Education and Training
             Authority should facilitate training and capacity building for
             Municipal Councillors; to further deepen their understanding
             of the oversight role; legal framework and policies that
             govern the activities of the Municipality from the date the
             recommendations are adopted by the NCOP.


        9.1.9    The South African Local Government Association should also
             facilitate Executive Training Programmes for the municipal
             officials.

        9.1.10   The NCOP should approve the establishment of a Unit in
              Parliament that would track the implementation of resolutions
              adopted by the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance
              and Traditional Affairs.
        9.1.11   The approved report by the NCOP should be shared with all
              the internal and external stakeholders of the Thabo
              Mufutsanyane District Municipality whom the Committee
              Delegation interacted with during the oversight visit.
          12. The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
              Traditional Affairs in co-operation with the relevant
              Portfolio Committee in the Free State Provincial Legislature
              should conduct a follow-up visit to the Municipality, three
              months after the intervention has ended in order to monitor
              through interaction with internal and external stakeholders
              progress made in respect of the intervention in the
              Municipality.


          13. The National Department of Co-operative Governance and
              Traditional Affairs should introduce legislation to regulate
              the implementation of section 100 and 139 of the
              Constitution, including the processes established by these
              sections.

Report to be considered.

2.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON THE OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NALA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY:
    DATED 12 MARCH 2010

1.    Background and Overview

     1.1    The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
         Affairs having considered the request by the National Council of
         Provinces (NCOP) on 11th January 2010, to consider and report on
         the intervention notice in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the
         Constitution at Nala Local Municipality, reports as follows:

     1.2    In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or
         does not fulfil an executive obligation in terms of the
         Constitution or legislation, the relevant provincial executive may
         intervene by taking any appropriate steps to ensure fulfilment of
         that obligation, including assuming responsibility for the relevant
         obligation in that municipality.

     1.3    In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of the
         NCOP referred the notice of intervention in the affairs of the Nala
         Local Municipality to the Select Committee on Co-operative
         Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and report. On
         9th February 2010, the Select Committee took a decision during its
         meeting to conduct an oversight visit to the above-mentioned
         Municipality on the 25th February 2010.

2.    Purpose and Objectives of the Oversight Visit

     2.1    The main objectives of the oversight visit was to determine
        whether procedural requirements have been met and to verify whether
        the provincial executive has used its discretion appropriately
        before the Committee can approve/disapprove the interventions.
        Through the deliberations and interaction with internal and
        external stakeholders, the Committee wanted to determine how the
        provincial executive was intending to restore the fulfilment of the
        relevant obligations and ensure fulfilment in the long-term. The
        aim being to ensure intergovernmental checks and balances aimed at
        guarding the integrity and efficiency of the intervention process.
        In terms of section 139 (2)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the
        intervention must end if the NCOP does not positively approve the
        intervention within 180 days, in this case before the end of 09
        July 2010 since the intervention began.

3.    Composition of the Delegation
     3.1    The Delegation of the Committee composed of the following
         members of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi, Limpopo (ANC);
         Hon AG Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon   DV Bloem,  Free State  (COPE);
         Hon A Watson, Mpumalanga (DA), Mr TM Manele, Committee Secretary
         (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku, Content Adviser (Committee
         Section) and Mr V Mfuniselwa, Administration Assistant (Committee
         Section).

4.    Introduction

     4.1    On the 8th December 2009 the Free State MEC for the Co-operative
         Governance and Traditional Affairs tabled a notice of intervention
         in Nala Local Municipality to the Office of the Chairperson of the
         NCOP. Subsequent to the tabling, a notice of intervention was
         referred to the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
         Traditional Affairs for consideration and reporting in accordance
         with Rule 101. In compliance with the Council referral, the Select
         Committee resolved to undertake a fact-finding visit to the
         Municipality on 25th February 2010.

5.    Problems Identified by the PEC at the Municipality

     5.1    The main thrust of issues identified by the PEC to intervene in
        the administrative affairs of the Nala Local Municipality related
        to the failure to comply with Municipal Systems Act by submitting
        section 46 reports for two consecutive years; failure to adopt and
        submit the annual performance reports for 2005/06, 2006/07 and
        2007/08; failure to develop and adopt a Performance Management
        Framework to regulate staff performance;  absence of performance
        agreement between the Mayor and the Municipal Manager; failure to
        formally approve the performance management system, failure to co-
        ordinate Integrated Development Planning (IDP) processes and
        appoint the IDP manager and the inability to spend Municipal
        Infrastructure Grant (MIG) funds. The overall financial management
        of the Municipality is in disarray, given the inability of the
        Auditor-General to access documentation for audit purposes.


     5.2    In terms of the notice of intervention the final decision taken
        by the Executive Council to intervene in the administrative affairs
        of the Nala Local Municipality was conveyed not only to the
        National Council of Provinces but also to the Minister of Co-
        operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, the Provincial
        Legislature, Municipal Council and the Administrator.

6.    Oversight Visit to Nala Local Municipality

     6.1    On the 25th February 2010 the Delegation of the Committee had
        interactive and robust engagements with the internal and external
        stakeholder of the Nala Local Municipality. The main internal
        stakeholders the Delegation interacted with in the municipality
        included the Speaker, Mayor, Chief Whip, Ward Committee Members and
        Councillors and the Administrator and Organized labour. The main
        external stakeholders the Delegation interacted with included
        members of the community forums and non- governmental
        organizations.

     6.2    For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both
        internal and external stakeholders are structured based on the five
        key performance areas of the local government which are: Municipal
        Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local Economic Development;
        Municipal Financial Viability and Management as well as Good
        Governance and Public Participation.

(A)   Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

     6.3    Municipal Council: The submissions made by the Mayor, Speaker
        and Chief Whip indicated that the Municipality welcomed the
        intervention in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution and
        the subsequent appointment of the Administrator by the MEC for Co-
        operative Governance Traditional Affairs.

     6.4    Administrator: The major transformation and organisational
        development problems reported by the administrator pertained to
        non-compliance with regard to submission of section 46 reports in
        terms of the requirement of the Municipal Systems Act, non-
        adoption and failure to submit the 2005/06 until 2007/08 annual
        performance reports by the Council.  However, the major progress
        reported by the Administrator in respect of municipal
        transformation and organisational development related to
        development and adoption by the Municipal Council of the
        implementation of a turn-around strategic action plan; a financial
        recovery and revenue enhancement strategy; implementation of a
        financial system and finalising the staff placement processes.

     6.5    Organised Labour: The concerns raised by organized labour
        through the representatives of the Independent Municipal and Allied
        Trade Union (IMATU) pertained to non–implementation of municipal
        placement policy; misuse of municipal overtime, inconsistent
        application of disciplinary procedures; failure to re-instate
        employees who have won CCMA  arbitration awards; non-payment of
        13th cheques to some of the junior employees; duplication of posts;
        interviews conducted without consultation and participation of the
        union representatives and delays with regard to the appointment of
        forensic investigations and appointment of security officers with
        criminal records.

     6.6    The South African Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) expressed its
        dissatisfaction regarding the re-appointment of the former CFO Mr D
        Shongwe as the Municipal Manager. It is alleged that he contributed
        to the current crisis of the Municipality. It was brought to the
        attention of the Delegation that there are 40 employees who have
        been previously employed by the previous Municipal Council, but
        currently redundant. Currently those employees have no job
        descriptions and office space.


(B)   Basic Service Delivery

     7. Administrator:  Key service delivery problems reported by the
        Administrator related to non compliance with the Municipal Systems
        Act and failure to adopt the annual performance reports for
        2005/06, 2006/07 and 2007/08 financial years.  The administrator
        indicated that these reports have subsequently been processed and
        discussed at Council as demanded by legislation. The only challenge
        was that these reports did not follow the guidelines of Circular 11
        on Annual Report issued by National Treasury that prescribe that
        the Annual Report should contain the Annual Financial Statements
        (AFS),  the Auditor General’s  Report on AFS, any recommendations
        of the Audit Committee, and a report on the performance of the
        municipality. The Administrator further reported that progress has
        been made with regard to the development and implementation of the
        service delivery plan for the Municipality.

     8. It was reported that the Municipality previously was unable to
        spend its MIG funds, however, the matter is urgently receiving
        attention with the assistance of the Provincial Project Management
        Unit. The Provincial Department has also dispatched a senior
        engineer that will assist the Municipality in fast-tracking
        implementation of infrastructure projects, and providing technical
        advice on corresponding operations and maintenance.

     6.9    Chamber of Commerce: The Chairperson of the Chamber reported
        service delivery problems which started since 2007. The Chamber
        wanted approval to repair the town hall, but received no co-
        operation from the Municipality. However, since the arrival of the
        Administrator, good relations have been observed. Furthermore,
        annual electricity tariffs were discussed with all stakeholders,
        and so far, four meetings were held already this year.

     6.10   Business Forum: The service delivery concerns echoed by the
        representatives of the Maize Capital Ratepayers Association related
        to the collapse of city hall and dumping sites; lack of sewerage
        infrastructure; lack of budget on electrical and water reticulation
        infrastructural maintenance; unlawful implementation of electrical
        tariff increases; shocking state of road-works and maintenance of
        tarred roads; inadequate state of parks and the irregular
        collection of refuse and garden removals.


(C)   Local Economic Development (LED)

     6.11.  Members of Community Forums: The concerns raised by the
         stakeholders pertained to lack of business opportunities, lack  of
         job opportunities, lack of access to land, lack of equity in the
         awarding of municipal tenders, and lack of economic financial
         support to small businesses and non-functionality of Unit in the
         Municipality.
     6.12   Administrator: It was indicated that the LED Manager’s position
         was vacant and the Municipality did not have an LED strategy. Since
         then the matter is receiving the attention of the EXCO
         Representative. However, in the meantime the municipality is
         actively participating in the development of Lejweleputswa District
         Growth and Development Strategy in partnership with the Presidency.
         The economic development intelligence gathered will be used in the
         development of the LED Strategy for the Municipality.

(D)   Municipal Financial Viability and Management

     6.13   Administrator: Some of the Municipality’s financial viability
         and management problems reported by the Administrator pertained to
         the inability to provide quarterly reports in compliance with MFMA,
         and the inability of the Auditor-General to access documentation
         for audit purposes. Progress achieved to date related to the grant
         funding obtained from the Development Bank of Southern Africa
         (DBSA) to develop appropriate systems in order to embed a revenue
         enhancement strategy of the Municipality. A draft Service Level
         Agreement (SLA) has been developed and will be concluded during the
         week of the 26 February 2010.




     6.14   With a financial grant of R1 million, Dinatla Advisory Services
         has been enlisted to provide CFO support at the Nala Local
         Municipality for the next six months and they have developed the
         Mid-Year Budget and Performance Assessment Review Report; Developed
         Budgets Related Policies (Investment, Banking, Internal Controls,
         Adjustment budget, Reconciliation of Government Debts); Auditing of
         current files to lay a solid foundation for the upcoming Audit;
         developed a lay-out of asset register etc. The Municipality has
         specifically developed a draft adjustment budget; monthly reports
         (section 71, MSIG) done and informed by available information; and
         internal control and payment manual that is en-route to the
         Municipal Council for adoption has also been developed.

     6.15   Organized Labour: Some of the major financial viability and
         management concerns raised by the representatives of SAMWU related
         to stealing of computers, electrical appliances, petrol cards,
         misuse of municipal property and cars and fraud.

(E)   Good Governance and Public Participation

     6.16   Administrator: Some of the major progress reported by the
         Administrator in respect of good governance and public
         participation included the recent suspension of the Municipal
         Manager and the appointment of a non-section 56 Manager as the
         Acting Municipal Manager. At an ordinary Council meeting held on 04
         February 2010, the Council resolved to lift the suspension of the
         Municipal Manager with immediate effect. This was done because the
         Council contravened a number of rules on agenda of Council meetings
         and processes to be followed in activating a precautionary
         suspension.

     6.17   Organized Labour: The major institutional governance concern
        raised by the representatives of both IMATU and SAMWU pertained to
        the non-functionality of labour forum, lack of skills development
        plans and capacity building programmes for the employees.
7.    Committee Observations and Opinion

     7.1    The Delegation of the Committee is of the opinion that the
         organisational capacity of the Municipality to perform its
         functions and fulfil its developmental role is of paramount
         importance for service delivery. This key performance area should
         focus on appointment of section 57 managers, development and
         implementation of performance management system and agreements,
         submission of municipal infrastructure grants plans with proper
         cashflows, and development, adoption and implementation of local
         economic development strategy.


   8. Acknowledgement

     8.1    The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions
         of the parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit
         in their various capacities.  A word of appreciation is also
         extended to all the internal and external stakeholders of the
         Municipality who interacted and had robust engagements with the
         Delegation of the Committee on matters related to the placement of
         the municipality under section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.

9.    Recommendations

     9.1    Having conducted the oversight visit to the Nala Local
         Municipality and interacted with internal and external
         stakeholders, the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
         Traditional Affairs recommends that:

         9.1.1   The National Council of Provinces approves the
               intervention as issued by the Provincial Executive Council
               in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.
         9.1.2   The Administrator should fast tract the process of
               appointing section 57 Managers and assist the Municipality
               in developing a labour retention strategy so as to ensure
               that future service delivery projects have the support of
               the community and are aligned with IDP.


         9.1.3   The Administrator should conduct a proper and thorough
               investigation and report to the Free State MEC of Co-
               operative Governance and Traditional Affairs and the NCOP,
               on all alleged cases of misappropriation of funds in the
               Municipality.


         9.1.4   The Free State MEC of Co-operative Governance and
               Traditional Affairs to immediately reconsider the current
               appointment of the Municipal Manager, since the appointment
               is surrounded by serious allegations of corruption and
               maladministration.


         9.1.5   The Administrator should ensure that the individual
               reported case to South African Polices Services is changed
               and made a municipal case.


         9.1.6   The Free State MEC for Co-operative Governance and
               Traditional Affairs should table quarterly progress reports
               to the NCOP and the Free State Provincial Legislature on the
               status of the intervention in the Municipality; including
               challenges encountered.


         9.1.7   The South African Local Government Association in co-
               operation with Local Government Sector Education and
               Training Authority should facilitate training and capacity
               building for Municipal Councillors; to further deepen their
               understanding of the oversight role; legal framework and
               policies that govern the activities of the Municipality from
               the date the recommendations are adopted by the NCOP.


         9.1.8   The South African Local Government Association should also
               facilitate Executive Training Programmes for municipal
               officials.

         9.1.9   The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional
               Affairs should institute an independent forensic
               investigation into all the financial affairs of the Nala
               Local Municipality, including the companies doing business
               with the Municipality in order to detect ghost companies.

        9.1.10   The NCOP should approve the establishment of a Unit in
               Parliament that would track the implementation of
               resolutions adopted by the Select Committee on Co-operative
               Governance and Traditional Affairs.

        9.1.11   The approved report by the NCOP should be shared with all
               the internal and external stakeholders of the Nala Local
               Municipality whom the Committee Delegation interacted with
               during the oversight visit.

           12. The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
               Traditional Affairs in co-operation with the relevant
               Portfolio Committee in Free State Provincial Legislature
               should conduct a follow-up visit to the Municipality, three
               months after the intervention has ended in order to monitor
               through interaction with internal and external stakeholders
               progress made in respect of the intervention in the
               Municipality.


           13. The National Department of Co-operative Governance and
               Traditional Affairs should introduce legislation to regulate
               the implementation of section 100 and 139 of the
               Constitution, including the processes established by these
               sections.

Report to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 23 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Protection of Information Bill [B 6 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).

          b) Prevention and Combating of Trafficking in Persons Bill [B 7 –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Letter from Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development on
    withdrawal of regulations


    (a)     The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces received a
        letter from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development,
        withdrawing the tabling of regulations made in terms of section
        97(1) of the Child Justice Act, 2008 (Act No 75 of 2008).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development for consideration.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     (a)    Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (CAFCOM) for 2008-09.

   2. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Debt
         Collectors for 2008-09, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
         for 2008-09.


     (b)    Register of Debt Collectors in terms of section 12(1)(a) of the
         Debt Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Communications

     a) Strategic Plan of the Independent Communications Authority of South
        Africa (ICASA) for 2010/11.


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     (a)    Regulations relating to child justice in compliance with section
         97(2) of the Child Justice Act, 2008 (Act 75 of 2008).


     Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Development for consideration and report.


                          WEDNESDAY, 24 MARCH 2010
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     General Notice No 40 published in Government Gazette No 32877
        dated 18 January 2010:  Notice of withdrawal in terms of section 12
        (6) (b):  Notice 1762, in terms of the Consumer Affairs (Unfair
        Business Practices) Act, 1988 (Act No 71 of 1988).

    (b)     General Notice No 41 published in Government Gazette No 32878
        dated 18 January 2010:  2010 Soccer World Cup Liquor Policy, in
        terms of the Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special
        Measures Act, 2006 (Act No 12 of 2006).


    (c)     Government Notice No R.16 published in Government Gazette No
        32891 dated 3 February 2010:  Regulations relating to the
        registration of persons in control of any activity with regard to
        controlled goods or who have controlled goods in their possession
        or custody or under their control, in terms of the Non-
        Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No 87
        of 1993).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.17 published in Government Gazette No
        32892 dated 3 February 2010:  Regulations regarding the application
        of provisions of  the Chemical Weapons Convention, in terms of the
        Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No
        87 of 1993).


    (e)     Government Notice No 18 published in Government Gazette No
        32893 dated 3 February 2010:  Declaration of certain chemical goods
        as controlled goods and control measures applicable to such goods,
        in terms of the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction
        Act, 1993 (Act No 87 of 1993).


    (f)     Government Notice No 19 published in Government Gazette No
        32894 dated 3 February 2010:  Declaration of certain biological
        goods and technologies as controlled goods and control measures
        applicable to such goods, in terms of the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No 87 of 1993).


    (g)     Government Notice No 20 published in Government Gazette No
        32895 dated 3 February 2010:  Declaration of certain nuclear-
        related dual-use equipment, material and software and related
        technology as controlled goods, and control measures applicable to
        such goods, in terms of the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
        Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No 87 of 1993).


    (h)     Government Notice No 21 published in Government Gazette No
        32896 dated 03 February 2010:  Additional declaration of certain
        nuclear-related dual-use equipment, materials and software and
        related technology as controlled goods, and control measures
        applicable to such goods, in terms of the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No 87 of 1993).


    (i)     Government Notice No 22 published in Government Gazette No
        32897 dated 3 February 2010:  Declaration of certain missile
        technology and related items as controlled goods and control
        measures applicable to such goods, in terms of the Non-
        Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act, 1993 (Act No 87
        of 1993).


    (j)     General Notice No 95 published in Government Gazette No 32916
        dated 5 February 2010:  Regulations, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).


    (k)     General Notice No 96 published in Government Gazette No 32916
        dated 5 February 2010:  Amendment to the Compulsory Specification
        for Motor Vehicles of Category 03/04, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).


    (l)     General Notice No 97 published in Government Gazette No 32916
        dated 5 February 2010:  Amendment to the Compulsory Specification
        for Motor Vehicles of Category 01/02, in terms of the National
        Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Act, 2008 (Act No 5 of
        2008).


    (m)     General Notice No 167 published in Government Gazette No 32988
        dated 26 February 2010:  Southern African Institute of Government
        Auditors:  Accounting officers–profession whose members qualify in
        terms of section 60of the Act, in terms of the Close Corporations
        Act, 1984 (Act No 69 of 1984).


2.    The Minister of Public Works


    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2010 –
        2013.
    (b)     Strategic Plan of the Agrément South Africa for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT - T100324e-insert1 –PAGES 676 -706

                           THURSDAY, 25 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 25 March 2010:


          a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec
             76).


          b) Safety at Sports and Recreational Events Bill [B 7B – 2009]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Works


     a) Strategic Plan of the Construction Industry Development Board for
        2010/11- 2012/13.

     b) Business Plan of the Council for the Built Environment for 2010-
        2013.

     c) Strategic Plan of the Independent Development Trust for 2010/11-
        2013.


