---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 10 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-03-10
---

WEDNESDAY, 10 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr O DE BEER: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the Council, I shall move:


   That the Council —


   (1)      agrees with Minister Sicelo Shiceka that research surveys
        conducted regarding public perception on spheres of government
        consistently show that the public rating of municipalities is at an
        all-time low;


   (2)      recognises that his department has been assigned the task of co-
        ordinating a system of co-operative governance to help rectify the
        problems; and

   (3)      calls on the governing party to put an end to its squabbles and
        to start addressing the service delivery needs of our people with
        missionary zeal.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the Council, I shall move:


   That the Council —


   (1)      notes with shock that people who subscribe to religious beliefs
        could be capable of the slaughter of innocent women and children as
        happened in Nigeria in the name of the religion they believe in;


   (2)      further notes that religious communities are failing to
        recognise the need for them to come together in order to allow
        humanity to exist better on account of moral conduct and religious
        tolerance; and


   (3)      calls on government to express to the government of Nigeria its
        concern about the brutality of the religious conflict and to take
        all steps necessary to contain it.
Mr D B FELDMAN: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the Council, I shall move:

   That the Council —

     1) notes with astonishment and shock that Eskom had not disclosed to
        the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, a secret
        arrangement to supply 138 companies that consume a staggering 40%
        of the electricity it generated at dirt cheap prices;

   (2)      further notes that such a disclosure was material to the
        determination of the new revised tariff; and


   (3)      calls on Nersa and the government to revoke the tariff hike and
        to start the process of determining the appropriate tariff afresh.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the Council, I will move:

   That the Council —


     1) notes the concern of Cope about revelations of corrupt practices
        within the Department of Public Works;

   (2)      understands that corruption distorts the economy and threatens
        the rule of law; and

   (3)      calls on the Minister of Public Works to explain to Parliament
        how and to what extent he has been able to curb what has been a
        perennial problem in the department.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the Council, I will move:


   That the Council —


   (1)      notes that -

        (a)      to a question asked by Mrs Elza van Lingen, in a committee
              meeting, to the Department of Energy Director-General,
              Neliswa Magubane, about what percentage of electricity was
              sold to the industry at between 6c and 9c per kWh, the answer
              was given that Eskom cannot reveal information due to
              commercial sensitivities around the situation;

        (b)      this is unacceptable and a crime to the South African
              citizens who have to bear the huge costs of electricity
              prices of 80c per kWh;


        (c)      due to Eskom’s bad planning and this uneven price tagging,
              as well as other factors, the huge number of electricity
              consumers now have to absorb the burden laid on them; and


   (2)      therefore calls on the Department of Energy and on Nersa to make
        this information known to the committee and this Council, so that
        the citizens and voters can be informed of which companies and
        other electricity buyers have these privileges to buy electricity
        at such low costs.


                CONGRATULATIONS TO SPORTSMAN PAUL LIEBENBERG

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


     1) congratulates Paul Liebenberg, a young sportsman and medical doctor
        from Jeffrey’s Bay who, as a member of an expedition, climbed the
        highest mountain in the western part of the southern hemisphere,
        Mount Aconcagua;


   (2)      notes that Cerro Aconcagua, at 6 962m above sea level, is the
        highest mountain in the Americas and the highest mountain outside
        Asia in the southern hemisphere and also forms part of the Andes
        mountain range in the Argentine province of Mendoza;


   (3)      further notes that Aconcagua is one of the Seven Summits;

   (4)      recognises that Paul is not just a mountain climber but has a
        couple of brave expeditions to his name already, viz in 2008 he
        became the first man in the world to complete the prestigious 4
        Deserts races, which are spread over seven days, in a calendar year,
        which meant crossing the Atacama, Gobi, Sahara and Antarctica
        deserts;


   (5)      acknowledges that Paul Liebenberg won the Antarctica leg of the
        race; and

   (6)      realises that apart from water and sleeping tents, contestants
        are completely self-reliant.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   CONGRATULATIONS TO AMAZULU SOCCER TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —


     1) notes the well-deserved 3-0 win of the AmaZulu soccer team over the
        champions SuperSport on Saturday, 6 March 2010; and


   (2)      therefore congratulates AmaZulu on their fine performance; and
        wishes them well for the future.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   DEATH OF YOUTHS IN DRAG RACING INCIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes the tragic death of four learners in a callous and
        horrific drag—racing crash involving hip-hop artist Molemo “Jub Jub”
        Maarohanye and his friend Themba Tshabalala in Protea Glen, Soweto;

   (2)      takes this opportunity to pass its profound and heartfelt
        condolences to the families of 17-year-old Thamsanqa Prince Muhobe,
        16-year-old Phumelelo Masimola, 19-year-old Mlungisi Cwaya and 16-
        year-old Andile Mthombeni; and

   (3)      calls on the City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality to
        rigorously wage war against drag racers who are robbing communities
        of their streets and exposing their safety through their reckless
        and irresponsible behaviour.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          DEATH OF CYCLISTS ON R62

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) notes the tragic death of three cyclists, two men and a woman, who
        died on the scene when a bakkie drove into a group of 11 cyclists on
        the R62 between Oudtshoorn and Calitzdorp in the Western Cape;


     2) further notes that a fourth cyclist passed away yesterday, 9 March
        2010;

     3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to the
        families of the deceased; and

     4) calls on motorists to be more vigilant and considerate to cyclists
        and on municipalities to enact legislation that will protect
        cyclists from the daily danger of being maimed by irresponsible and
        reckless motorists.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        CONDOLENCES FOR FLOOD VICTIMS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council -


   (1)      expresses its condolences to the people of the greater Taung,
        Bloemhof and Christiana areas in the North West province, who were
        victims of the recent floods;


   (2)      notes that houses were destroyed in several villages, most of
        which were made of mud; and


   (3)      acknowledges that the situation in these areas is serious and
        calls on the MEC for Human Settlements in the North West province
        for urgent assistance.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             STATEMENTS BY JULIUS MALEMA CONCERNING HELEN ZILLE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Adjunkvoorsitter, ek stel sonder kennis voor:

   Dat die Raad –

     1) kennis neem van die toespraak van mnr Julius Malema, president van
        die ANC-jeugliga, soos uitgesaai op e.tv op 9 Maart, 2010 waarin hy
        verklaar dat die agb Helen Zille, Premier van die Wes-Kaap, asook
        die nasionale leier van die Demokratiese Alliansie, satanisties is;


     2) verder kennis neem dat die Demokratiese Alliansie ten sterkste en
        met misnoeë verklaar dat sy uitlatings verkeerd, onregverdig en
        onaanvaarbaar is; en

     3) derhalwe die gewraakte uitlaatings van mnr Malema ten sterkste
        verwerp.

Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

  (1) notes the speech by Mr Julius  Malema,  president  of  the  ANC  Youth
        League, which was broadcast on e.tv on 9 March 2010, and in which he
        stated that the hon Helen Zille, Premier of the Western Cape as well
        as national leader of the Democratic Alliance, was a satanist;

  (2) further notes that the Democratic Alliance has declared in the
        strongest terms and with displeasure that his utterances are
        incorrect unfair and unacceptable; and

  (3) therefore strongly repudiates Mr Malema’s objectionable remarks.

Thank you.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I object to that motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In light of the
objection, the motion without notice will now become a notice of motion.

     PREMIER OF WESTERN CAPE AND MAYOR OF CAPE TOWN WAGING AN UNHOLY WAR

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

     1) notes that the Premier of the Western Cape, Helen Zille, and the
        Mayor of the DA-led City of Cape Town, Dan Plato, are waging an
        unholy war of dismantling and demolishing churches and mosques
        across the City of Cape Town, particularly in black areas and
        townships;


     2) further notes that churches and mosques that have been given
        permission to conduct their services in public buildings such as
        community halls and schools have also been shut down and hundreds of
        communities left without places of worship;


   (3)      acknowledges that this sacrilegious act is a modified form of
        ethnic cleansing that is driven by the DA’s racist tendencies and is
        intended to cause destruction and instability in these areas; and


   (4)      calls on the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the
        Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities and the SA
        Human Rights Commission to intervene in protecting the religious
        rights of these communities.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Any objection to the
motion? Are you objecting to the motion?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Yes. I am just making sure you see me, Madam.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                              (Point of Order)

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, I rise on a point of order, to ask you to rule on
whether it’s parliamentary for a member of this House, namely the Chief
Whip of the Council, to accuse the premier of the province, who by virtue
of opposition is a leader of a delegation, of ethnic cleansing? Ethnic
cleansing, if I heard the words correctly, is a racist attack on our
premier, a member of this House, and I ask you to rule on that.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, there was
already an objection to the motion.

Mr A WATSON: The objection is to the motion. It now becomes a notice of
motion. It’s still on our papers; I want you to rule on the words that
Helen Zille is accused of racist cleansing, ethnic cleansing.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I say that I’m
going to come back to you, Mr Watson, but can we continue with the work of
today?

                      HON A WATSON TO UNDERGO OPERATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) notes that hon Watson will be unable to attend committee meetings
        and sittings in the House in the coming weeks as he will be admitted
        to hospital for an operation; and


     2) supports him with prayers and wishes him a speedy recovery from the
        operation.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Is there any
objection to that? Hon Watson, we will be praying for you on a daily basis,
because we need you here. Are you objecting, Mr Watson? Let me hear you.

                     ILLNESS OF WIFE OF HON J M G BEKKER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, thank you for that motion, and I hope I’ll be
back to check up on all of you. It’ll be the first Taking Parliament to the
People programme that I will be missing, but I’ll be listening carefully to
what will be happening there. May I move a motion without notice?

Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

     1) notes that the wife of hon Jak Bekker has been diagnosed with what
        looks like serious cancer in the eye, lung and maybe even the brain,
        and that is why he is not present today;


     2) wishes Mrs Bekker a speedy recovery; and

     3) will keep them in our prayers.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Mr Gamede, are you
objecting?

Mr D D GAMEDE: No, Madam Deputy Chair.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       CELEBRATING CENTENARY ANNIVERSARY OF SHEMBE CHURCH OF NAZARETH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

   Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu –

  (1) uhalalisela ibandla elaziwa ngokuthi ngelakwaShembe laseNazaretha
       ngokugubha iminyaka elikhulu labakhona;


  (2) ubonga uhulumeni wesifundazwe saKwaZulu-Natali ngokuxhasa lo mgubho
       kanye nokuthi uwonke usekele leli bandla okuyibandla la lapha
       eNingizimu Afrika nebandla elasungulwa KwaZulu-Natali ekugubheni
       kwalo iminyaka eyikhulu.

Ngiyophakamisa. (Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mr D D Gamede: Chairperson, I move without notice:
    That the Council –


      1) congratulates a church known as the Shembe Nazareth Baptist Church
         on celebrating 100 years of existence;


      2) thanks the government of KwaZulu-Natal for supporting this
         celebration and notes that the whole government supported this
         church, the church that was founded here in South Africa; a church
         that was founded in KwaZulu-Natal — we appreciate its presence in
         that centenary celebration.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

         NOMINATION OF DEPUTY PRESIDENT AS CHANCELLOR OF UNIVERSITY OF VENDA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council congratulates the Deputy President of the Republic of
   South Africa and of the African National Congress, hon Kgalema Motlanthe,
   on being nominated and appointed as the Chancellor of the University of
   Venda.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    STATEMENT BY WINNIE MADIKIZELA-MANDELA ABOUT FORMER PRESIDENT NELSON
                                   MANDELA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –


     1) notes the Cape Times of 10 March 2010 which reveals that Winnie
        Madikizela-Mandela, former wife of former President Nelson Mandela,
        claims that he did nothing for the poor and betrayed the black
        nation;


     2) also notes that she has now gone underground and is hiding from the
        media while they seek answers to why she made such statements;


   (3)      further notes that if this statement is true, it is uncalled for
        and unacceptable in the eyes of the nation and is a deed of no
        respect and injustice to the former President of the ANC, former
        President of the country, the father of our nation, a man who has
        done and is still doing a huge favour to mankind and the world; and


  (4) calls on the ANC and the world to bring Winnie Madikizela-Mandela to
        book for her uncalled-for utterance against the father of our
        nation, Nelson Mandela.

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Hayi! Asikwazi ukuyisekela leyo, Sihlalo. [No! We cannot
support that, Chairperson.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In light of the
objection, the motion without notice will now become a notice of motion.

At this juncture we recognise the presence of the Deputy Minister of
Finance, who is present in the House. Welcome.


  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – FISCAL FRAMEWORK


Mr C J DE BEER: Deputy Chair and hon Deputy Minister of Finance, it is a
historic occasion to table the statement of the fiscal framework and
revenue proposals of the Budget of 2010-11 in this House, also because the
fiscal framework under consideration and the Budget proposals contained in
the Division of Revenue Bill and Appropriation Bill to be deliberated are
the first to be processed under the new Money Bills Amendment Procedures
and Related Matters Act.
After the Budget was presented, the Speaker of the National Assembly and
the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces referred the fiscal
framework and Budget to the different committees on finance and the Select
Committee on Finance, and these committees, in a joint meeting, had public
hearings, deliberated on the report, considered the report and supported
the fiscal framework and revenue proposals.

The release of former President Nelson Mandela in 1990 was a historic
event. Through him, we epitomise the dignity and pride of the heroic and
relentless struggles of the people in the fight for political and economic
liberation. In reality, political freedom will remain meaningless and
incomplete without economic power. Given the current economic challenges,
what we need is a growth path underpinned by a coherent industrial
strategy, with clear sector programmes aimed at the creation and retention
of quality jobs and employment opportunities via a process of retooling
skills.

The proposed fiscal framework and revenue proposals are a base and
foundation on which the Appropriation and the Division of Revenue Bills
will be considered by this House. The new Money Bills Amendment Procedures
and Related Matters Act provides an ideal opportunity for the broader
public and Parliament to engage in long-term trends and economic fiscal
policies.

Compared to the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement presented in October
2009, the first observation we make is that this Budget is premised upon
the backdrop of a slightly positive economic outlook, which remains
fragile, to the projected recovery of the global financial markets and
addresses two main policy challenges.

Firstly, it addresses the transformation of the South African economy to
realise sustainable growth, accompanied by employment creation, and a
responsive public sector to meet the expectations of our population and the
broad objectives of a developmental state. These proposals are borne out of
our experience of the last decade, which justifies a new way of doing
things: to do more with less. We can safely say, without fear of
contradiction, that we now know what has worked and what needs to be
adjusted.

Of critical importance in this Budget Speech is an admission by the
Minister of Finance that the current economic growth path has not
adequately responded to the challenges of growing statistics of
joblessness, and income inequalities, as well as wealth redistribution. In
the same spirit, the Minister has used the public platform to invite all
stakeholders to a national dialogue, particularly between government,
business and labour, to chart a common developmental economic growth path
with practical solutions for the challenges confronting ordinary people on
a daily basis.

Deputy Chair, the fiscal framework recognises that half of our young people
are unemployed. This must be viewed in a very serious light. In fact, we
must treat it as an emergency. Young people need to be exposed to an
environment that will assist them in realising their goals. The proposed
subsidy by the Minister will play a big role in responding to the negative
impact of young persons with no education and entrepreneurial skills. The
onus is on us to act in a responsible manner, cognisant of the fact that
there are capable men and women who, in the past decade, have lost hope of
having any job prospects.

As leaders, as we sit here, irrespective of our political affiliation, we
have a responsibility to engender entrepreneurship and skills development
in young people who, in turn, will be capacitated to restore hope. The
proposed methods to promote youth employment through employer subsidies
should be carefully considered. Just like any other new initiative, there
will always be serious challenges in the implementation of the proposed
employer subsidy. Our response to these challenges will determine the
success or failure of this noble idea. All the parties should view this as
the beginning of a potentially fruitful process. In enriching it, let us
come forward with more ideas, because together we can definitely do more.

The need to encourage the private sector to give young people experience
and meaningful employment should be commended and supported vigorously. For
this initiative to succeed, maximum co-ordination between economic
clusters, Ministries and their departments is paramount and, importantly,
the matter should be thoroughly canvassed with a labour representative.

Taking experience as our best teacher, we must guard against employers
turning this into a scab labour scheme, with real jobs conveniently
replaced by this state intervention of temporary jobs. We need to be
careful of employers who might seek to turn the good intentions of
government into a get-rich-quick scheme to boost their profit margins.

The question is: What are the road map and the growth path ahead? This
brings us to the next point and observations with regard to the national
response to the economic crisis. What carried our economy in these trying
times was largely the government’s countercyclical fiscal policy,
particularly on public and economic infrastructure. It is also evident from
the Budget presentation that our economy is on a recovery path, and this
can be attributed to the partnerships between the private sector, labour
and government.

Notwithstanding the success of this state intervention, there is the
indication that not all sectors of the economy have responded positively to
government’s offer, particularly when we assess the training layoff
programmes in the clothing and textile industries, transport industry and
metal fabrication. We must commend government spending, particularly in the
public and economic infrastructure and the automotive industries, and
commend BMW and Renault, in particular, for taking full advantage of the
layoff programme incentives. This has achieved wide success in mitigating
retrenchments.

Given that not every opportunity given to the private sector has been
maximally utilised, the impact of the economic recession has been more
severe, hence 900 000 jobs have been lost in a period of less than a year.
We urge that the private sector fully participate in the layoff programme.
In fact, there is a need to maximise where the economic recession was not
used, in certain instances, as an excuse to lay off workers. This matter
requires the attention of the National Economic Development and Labour
Council, Nedlac, and other relevant stakeholders.

Depending on the reason for borrowing, a deficit can be bad but can also be
good when properly managed. From the Budget presentation it is clear that
to meet our expenditure priorities, we will have to increase our debt level
over the next three years. What is comforting is that this borrowing is not
meant to sponsor the current account, and there is a clear indication of
the fiscal stability around 2014. Our role, as Parliament, and as members
here, is to ensure that there is value for money.

For us to achieve this, we will have to ensure that our Public Service is
properly geared to deliver on the mandates of a developmental state. We
must further strengthen the efforts by the executive in the fight against
corruption by mobilising all our communities to reject any corrupt
tendencies wherever they are.

We acknowledge that the fiscal statement, as stated before us, is presented
under difficult economic conditions, which indicate positive signs of slow
recovery, and yet it has taken into consideration the five priority areas
as indicative of steps in strengthening the three arms of government.
Therefore, it is a good basis and foundation of the Division of Revenue
Bill and the Appropriation Bill.

The committee recommends, therefore, that the National Council of Provinces
considers the following: that National Treasury should develop a clear
strategy on how it plans to manage the new levels of total debt, if the
economy is recovering as forecasted, including the fiscal stability pact;
that the Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Unit in the Presidency
should consider the effectiveness of the fiscal stimulus package; the SA
Reserve Bank, in consultation with National Treasury, should develop clear
guidelines on how they plan to maintain price stability; that the House
should review the parliamentary programme to allow all committees to engage
fully with future Budget processes; and that the Parliamentary Budget
Office, when it is established, will advise the Select Committee on Finance
on the VAT treatment of essential items, such as books, with a view to the
implementation of a zero rating on these items.

Deputy Chair, I therefore urge the House to support the fiscal framework
and revenue proposals, as presented by the Minister of Finance. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): The question is that
the report be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section
65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation
heads are present in the House. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first
allow provinces an opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they
so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question.

Have all the provinces voted? Thank you. Voting is closed. Could the Table
staff submit the results?

The Northern Cape has abstained, and the rest have voted in favour. If any
province has made a mistake, I now give them a chance to rectify that. We
will give you a form to fill in. [Interjections.] Proceed.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I think what just happened here now is an
indication that there is a serious possibility that Mr Mokgoro, the leader
of the delegation, is considering joining another party. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You are out of order.
[Laughter.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Yes, but Chairperson, on a serious note, the Northern Cape
delegation wasn’t consulted in terms of how to vote, and I just want to put
it on record. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, hon Sinclair is completely out
of order, however jokingly it was said. Mr Mokgoro has a mandate from the
province to vote on its behalf.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Mr Sinclair, please
bear with us. Sit down. [Laughter.] Mr Bloem?

Mr D V BLOEM: This is a serious point of order, Chairperson: I want the
chairperson of the committee to consult me outside, because I have a secret
to tell him, when we are outside, about this voting.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Mr Bloem, can you sit
down and let us proceed, please? The mistake has been corrected, so nine
provinces voted in favour. [Applause.] I therefore declare the question
agreed to and the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.
IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEES ON FINANCE AND APPROPRIATIONS
               – OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MPUMALANGA MUNICIPALITIES


Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, Minister and hon members, members of the
Select Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Appropriations
undertook an oversight visit to Mpumalanga from 21 to 23 September 2009,
where public hearings were held in Ermelo and Nelspruit.

The visit formed part of the committees’ ongoing interaction with
municipalities to monitor collaboration and co-ordination pertaining to the
provision of municipal services and the support given to municipalities by
provincial and national departments.

The municipalities that were visited in Mpumalanga are: Thaba Chweu Local
Municipality, Mkhondo Local Municipality, Pixley Ka Seme
Local Municipality, Govan Mbeki Local Municipality, Emalahleni Local
Municipality, Lekwa Local Municipality, and Nkomazi Local Municipality.

The stakeholders that accompanied the committee on these visits were: the
provincial department of co-operative governance and traditional affairs;
Mpumalanga’s provincial Treasury; the SA Local Government Association; the
Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs; the
Department of Water and Environmental Affairs; National Treasury; the
Auditor-General; the Development Bank of Southern Africa, and Eskom.

The purpose of the oversight visit was to engage with the above-mentioned
municipalities, along with national and provincial departments, on the
following areas: firstly, to check the development and implementation of
municipal budgets; secondly, to check municipalities’ compliance with the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, Act 56 of 2003;
thirdly, to check the spending and performance of the municipalities with
regard to conditional grants; fourthly, to monitor the municipalities’
relations and collaboration with various national and provincial
departments and entities; fifthly, to determine capacity constraints of the
municipalities; sixthly, to check the extent to which municipal services
are provided; and lastly, to check the alignment of municipalities’
integrated development plans with the provincial growth and development
strategy.

The following were the findings of the committee. Municipalities experience
a lack of capacity. This impacted negatively on budgeting, budget spending,
financial reporting, project management and the technical field. Negative
audit opinions were issued to all the municipalities whose financial
statements were analysed for the financial year 2007-08. Three
municipalities received disclaimers, seven municipalities received
qualified opinions and nine municipalities received unqualified opinions
with other matters of emphasis. Most municipalities had ineffective and
dysfunctional audit committees. There were also dysfunctional ward
committees. This impacted on effective community participation.

We found poor participation of sector departments in municipal integrated
development planning processes, leading to incorrect budget mechanisms. We
found incidences of some farmers who do not want to allow a municipality
access to their properties so that people living there could be provided
with basic services such as water and electricity. In some instances, we
have situations where farmers created dams in rivers. As a result, the
river’s water flow becomes very erratic. Community members are unable to
access the water despite the fact that it is an artificial dam that has
been erected by the farmer. We found there to be a lack of clarity on the
role of community development workers. This creates unnecessary tensions.
We found there to be a lack of proper road maintenance in most areas.

We found that there was ineffective engagement or too much reliance by most
municipalities on consultants. What we actually discovered was that most of
the municipalities used the services of consultants. In these instances,
most of the consultants seemed to be doing the work of the municipal
officials. As a result, more resources were poured into the pockets of
those consultants, thereby depleting resources for service delivery. A
large number of state departments that owe municipalities money cause cash
flow problems within such municipalities. This impacts negatively on
service delivery.

After extensive consideration and analysis of the reports and submissions
from the above-mentioned municipalities in Mpumalanga, sector departments
and other stakeholders, the committee recommends that the NCOP considers
the following. The Select Committee on Finance is mindful of the
partnership that it wants to create with the committee on Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs. It also wishes to indicate to the NCOP
and most particularly to the committee that, if the committee is able to,
it should complement the work that has been done by Finance in Mpumalanga,
and lead a delegation consisting of the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs and also comprising of Treasury, the
Auditor-General and other relevant stakeholders in their own programme, in
order to discuss and report on the minimum job requirements for management
positions in a municipality. We discovered that chief financial officers,
financial managers, and municipal managers were, in most cases, individuals
who were not qualified and therefore not astute enough to execute their
tasks.

The committee also recommends an evaluation of the advantages and
disadvantages of shared internal audit committees for municipalities.  The
committee recommends that ways be developed and strategies evaluated for
improving the effectiveness of ward committees. The ward committees are not
functional, and these are instruments that are expected to interact with
communities. The committee also recommends monitoring and evaluating the
assistance of sector departments to municipalities when they develop
integrated development plans.

The committee recommends working together with the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development, the Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform, the SA Human Rights Commission, the SA Local Government
Association, and any other relevant stakeholders in order to develop
strategies on how to manage farmers who refuse municipalities access to
their farms.

The committee recommends working together with the structures of community
development workers and other relevant stakeholders in order to develop
strategies aimed at increasing the effectiveness of community development
workers. The committee recommends expediting the process of road
reclassification, with the aim of finalising the process within six months
from the adoption of this report by the Council, to ensure that road
maintenance responsibilities are clearly assigned. The committee recommends
leading a team to be tasked with the development of strategies aimed at
ensuring that municipalities recruit, train and retain key personnel.

The committee recommends that municipalities work together in a co-
ordinated programme with National Treasury, provincial Treasuries, the
Development Bank of Southern Africa, and any other relevant stakeholders in
order to develop their own skills competencies, limit the outsourcing of
their core functions to consultants and develop policies and guidelines for
appointing outside consultants.

We request that these recommendations be considered by the Council. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEES ON FINANCE AND APPROPRIATIONS
  – FIRST QUARTER SPENDING ON CAPITAL EXPENDITURE, NON-CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
         AND CONDITIONAL GRANTS BY PROVINCIAL DEPARTMENTS OF HEALTH

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEES ON FINANCE AND APPROPRIATIONS
  – FIRST QUARTER SPENDING ON CAPITAL EXPENDITURE, NON-CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
        AND CONDITIONAL GRANTS BY PROVINCIAL DEPARTMENTS OF EDUCATION

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEES ON FINANCE AND APPROPRIATIONS
  – FIRST QUARTER SPENDING ON CAPITAL EXPENDITURE, NON-CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
    AND CONDITIONAL GRANTS BY PROVINCIAL DEPARTMENTS OF ARTS AND CULTURE

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEES ON FINANCE AND APPROPRIATIONS
  – FIRST QUARTER SPENDING ON CAPITAL EXPENDITURE, NON-CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
      AND CONDITIONAL GRANTS BY PROVINCIAL DEPARTMENTS OF PUBLIC WORKS

Mr T E CHAANE: Chairperson, hon members, I present to you the statement on
the first quarter report on the nine provincial departments of health,
education, arts and culture, as well as public works. The members of the
Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations had public hearings with
selected national and provincial departments during the period 2 September
2009 to 4 September 2009. The hearings were based on the first quarter
provincial budget statements of receipts and payments as published in the
relevant sections of the Public Finance Management Act. The focus of the
hearings was on conditional grant spending during the first quarter of 2009-
10.

The presentation by National Treasury showed the following: the total
conditional grant allocation is R49,03 billion, including Schedule 4
grants, with health taking up the bulk of R5,6 billion. The Treasury report
reflected further spending on conditional grant allocation, as at 30 June
2009 for all provinces. It excluded expected conditional grant rollovers
from the 2008-09 financial year and spending on general purpose conditional
grants like national tertiary services grants, health professions training
grants, training and development grants and the municipal infrastructure
grant to provinces, as reporting against these grants cannot be separated
from the provinces’ health and capital budgets.

In the LandCare Programme, which is an agricultural grant, six provinces,
which are the Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and
Western Cape, showed an underspending of below 15%.

All nine provincial departments showed low spending of below 15% in the
community library service grant. In education, five provincial departments,
namely Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the Northern Cape,
showed underspending of below 15% in HIV/Aids life skills education grants.
Mpumalanga was the only provincial education department that showed poor
spending of below 15% in the national school nutrition programme grant,
while six provincial departments, namely Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-
Natal, Limpopo, Northern Cape and Western Cape, showed spending that ranges
between 15% and 25%.
Within health, two provincial departments, the Eastern Cape and Gauteng,
showed an underspending of below 15% in comprehensive HIV/Aids grants. One
provincial department, the Eastern Cape, showed an underspending of below
15% in the forensic pathology services grant, while KwaZulu-Natal and
Limpopo showed an underspending of below 15% in the hospital revitalisation
grant.

The Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, North West and
Western Cape showed an underspending in the devolution of property rates
fund grant. The Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and North
West showed low spending of below 15% in the mass sport and recreation
participation programme grant. Seven provincial departments, the Eastern
Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and Northern
Cape, showed low spending of below 15% in the public transport operations
grant.

After listening to the presentations by all invited provincial departments
on reasons for low spending, the committee came to the following
conclusions and recommendations. Firstly, low spending, in some cases, is
due to poor planning and there is therefore a need for support to
provincial departments by National Treasury, applicable national
departments and provincial Treasuries.

Secondly, poor project management and reliance, in some cases, on
implementing agencies was also found to be the cause for underspending. The
committee recommended that the use of implementing agencies and consultants
be reviewed. Thirdly, noncompliance with reporting requirements causes a
delay in correct capturing of the accurate data by the relevant
stakeholders. The committee recommended that provincial Treasuries,
National Treasury and national departments provide assistance where there
is a lack of capacity. Fourthly, some departments engage service providers
who undercost their services in order to be awarded tenders but terminate
their contracts when they experience losses. The committee recommended that
the lowest price should not be the only factor but the viability of the
service at that price should also be taken into account.

Fifthly, service providers collude to stop their services because of the
delay in payments. The committee recommended that departments must observe
the 30-day payment rule and also make sure that their business plans ensure
that funds are available until the end of the financial year. On the other
hand, departments should avoid reliance on few service providers. Again,
provincial departments should also use part of their equitable share to
topup the conditional grant, as was the case with the provincial department
of education in KwaZulu-Natal. Sixthly, noncompliance with procedures for
rollover leads to situations where departments lose their unspent
conditional grants. The committee recommended that provincial departments
should be proactive while other departments should also provide support
where there is a need.

Seventhly, with regard to a delay in developing business plans that are
inappropriate for effective spending, the committee recommended that
departments should take advantage of the multiyear planning as provided for
in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

Eighthly, with regard to spending on the library conditional grant and
HIV/Aids grant, the committee observed that poor spending is due to
nonprioritisation of such services by provincial departments of arts and
culture and education. The committee reminded departments that these are
amongst the national priorities and should be attended to as such. In some
cases, payments that are regarded as spending are transfers to implementing
agencies and municipalities. The committee therefore reminded departments,
as transferring authorities, to ensure that such transfers translate into
spending.

In conclusion, the committee emphasises the fact that poor spending of the
allocated funds compromises and causes unnecessary delays in the roll-out
of these much-needed services to our deserving people. The committee will
continue to monitor the quarterly spending of the conditional grants and,
where necessary, do follow-ups on the reported spending to assess the
quality of service rendered and ensure that there is value for money spent.
I so move, Chair. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital
Expenditure, Non-Capital Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial
Departments Of Health be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital Expenditure, Non-Capital
Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial Departments Of Health
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital
Expenditure, Non-Capital Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial
Departments Of Education be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital Expenditure, Non-Capital
Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial Departments Of Education
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital
Expenditure, Non-Capital Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial
Departments Of Arts and Culture be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital Expenditure, Non-Capital
Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial Departments Of Arts and
Culture accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital
Expenditure, Non-Capital Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial
Departments Of Public Works be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on First Quarter Spending On Capital Expenditure, Non-Capital
Expenditure And Conditional Grants By Provincial Departments Of Public
Works accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE — ANNUAL REPORT FOR
                 2008-09 OF FINANCIAL AND FISCAL COMMISSION

Mr C J DE BEER: Deputy Chairperson, on 24 February 2010, the Financial and
Fiscal Commission, FFC, presented its annual reports for the period of 2007-
08 and 2008-09 to the Select Committee on Finance and Appropriations. The
2007-08 FFC Annual Report could not be finalised by the previous Select
Committee on Finance before the end of the committee members’ term of
office. The FFC delegation comprised of Dr Setai, the Chairperson of the
FFC, Mr Khumalo, the deputy chairperson, and Mr Vokwana, the chief
financial officer of the commission. The previous committee could not adopt
the 2007-08 commission report because the format of the report did not
contain certain items.

Another outstanding issue raised by the previous committee on the 2007-08
annual report was the position of the audit committee chairperson who was
also a part-time commissioner with the FFC. Although the Financial and
Fiscal Commission Act provides that the chairperson of the audit committee
should be a commissioner, the previous committee raised a concern that such
an arrangement would compromise the independence of the audit committee
chairperson. In its presentation to the commission, the committee indicated
that the audit committee chairperson had since stepped down and an
independent person was appointed to the position of the audit committee
chairperson.

The 2007-2008 annual report of the commission showed that the financial
statements of the commission received an unqualified audit opinion from the
Auditor-General. The commission, however, incurred a net loss of R3,1
million in the year ended 31 March 2007. Furthermore, the commission’s
liabilities exceeded its assets as of that date by R733 549. This showed
the fact that the commission’s ability to continue as a going concern
depends largely on the continued support of government by means of an
annual grant.

The major contributors to the commission’s deficit were reportedly rental
amounting to R1 million on premises which were previously paid for by the
Department of Public Works, increased remuneration for the executive
commissioners that accounted for the increase of up to 51% in staff-related
costs, increased commissioned research, an upgraded security system and an
increase in audit fees. The 2008-09 annual report showed that the
commission received an unqualified audit opinion on its financial
statements for the year reviewed.

Both the 2007-08 and 2008-09 annual reports showed that, due to financial
constraints, certain key performance measurements and indicators were
partially achieved while others were not achieved at all. The 2008-09
report further indicated that financial constraints during the financial
year impacted on key aspects of the commission’s human resource management.
The staff vacancy rate stood at 48,4%. This means that out of 64 posts,
only 33 were filled. A major impact in this regard is reportedly evidenced
in the area of recruiting for key aspects of the commission’s
constitutional mandate.

The commission highlighted the following challenges. Firstly, the
commission’s information technology infrastructure — on which it is highly
dependent — needs to be replaced. Secondly, the Money Bills Amendment
Procedures and Related Matters Act has introduced an additional
responsibility on the budget process of the commission. Thirdly, the cost
of compliance continues to rise with audit fees constituting more than 5%
of the commission’s budget. Finally, the cost of travel necessitated by the
need for stakeholder engagement remains a major constraint. All of the
above have required constant reprioritisation and the implementation of
austerity measures in order for the commission to at least not default in
the discharge of its mandate. This has the potential to undermine the
effectiveness of the commission in the delivery of its mandate.

The select committee made the following findings. Firstly, the committee
observed a need for the adjustment of the commission’s budget. Secondly,
provinces were not making use of the commission as it was there to assist
them. Since 2005, only three out of the nine provinces interacted with the
FFC. In this regard, the chairperson of the Select Committee on Finance
wrote a letter to the Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Mahlangu, who in return
wrote a letter to all the Speakers of the provincial legislatures,
sensitising them to interact with the FFC. That was done.

The matter of the high staff turnover and high vacancy rate will negatively
impact on the work of the commission. There was a need for the commission
to have relationships with the Human Sciences Research Council and
Statistics South Africa.

The committee recommends that the National Treasury should consider
increasing the budget of the commission as they were now unable to fulfil
the mandate as required by section 220 of the Constitution. The committee
recommends that all provinces should make use of the commission as the
commission is playing a meaningful role in the Division of Revenue Bill.
The committee moves that the House support the report. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
 AFFAIRS — PRESIDENTIAL LAUNCH OF COMPREHENSIVE RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME:
           MUYEXE, GIYANI DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY, LIMPOPO PROVINCE

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Deputy Chairperson and hon members, I wish to present the
report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
presidential launch of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, CRDP,
at Muyexe, Giyani District Municipality in Limpopo province.

The following words were spoken by our President at the launch of the
programme in Giyani, Limpopo, on 17 August 2009:

   The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme is our national collective
   strategy in our joint fight against poverty, hunger, unemployment and
   lack of development in our rural areas. It is an embodiment of our
   unshaken commitment that we shall not rest in our drive to eradicate
   poverty.

In responding to the call to address poverty, the emancipation of all our
people and ensuring basic access to services to the rural poor, the ruling
party has given its full support to the Comprehensive Rural Development
Strategy that is being spearheaded by the Minister of Rural Development and
Land Reform. This strategy is viewed as the answer that many rural people
have been waiting for. It promises access to health care facilities, water,
food and jobs, which are all part of the bigger picture that is envisioned
for the rural poor.

On 17 August 2009, the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
was invited by the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform to
attend the official launch of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme
at the pilot site in Muyexe, in the Greater Giyani municipality in Limpopo
province. A delegation was selected to represent the Select Committee on
Land and Environmental Affairs, which included hon Mokgoro of the ANC and
hon Worth of the DA.

Muyexe village was selected for the pilot project due to the high levels of
poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment. The Greater Giyani District
Municipality is classified as a rural municipality, with the main challenge
being access to water. The area is characterised by a dry and hot climate.
Basic services like access to safe drinking water, sanitation, health
services and transportation are unavailable. Since the selection of the
site for piloting the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, there has
been an increase in economic activity and interest from developmental
agencies.

Several projects within Muyexe village have been initiated by the
department together with their partner, the Independent Development Trust,
IDT. The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, therefore,
presents to the House its report for adoption. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
AFFAIRS — COMMISSION ON RESTITUTION OF LAND RIGHTS — ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2008-
                                     09

Mr G G MOKGORO: Deputy Chairperson of the House, thank you very much for
giving me this opportunity to read this short report, the report of the
Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the Annual Report for
2008-09 of the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights.

On 11 August 2009, the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
met with the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights to discuss its annual
report and financial statement for 2008-09. The commission presented the
select committee with the following: the strategic objectives of the
purpose of the restitution, complex claims, the business process for
strategic partnerships, the business process for support for struggling
projects, finalisation of outstanding claims, challenges and strategies,
and the budget breakdown for the years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13.

In the review of the annual report of the commission, the Select Committee
on Land and Environmental Affairs engaged the commission on the two main
issues that were highlighted by the Auditor-General. These included the
high vacancy rate in the Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal offices
and parcels of land that were not yet identified by the Department of
Public Works as state assets. The committee was briefed on the strategies
in place in addressing these issues.

It also requested the commission to forward its staff retention strategy
and the impact on land claims. The main challenges of the commission
included a lack of funding for the outstanding complex claims, which
included claims on commercial farms and protected areas, and the lack of
staff in some offices to assist with complex claims.

The committee resolved that the commission should within 14 days forward to
the committee a report with a breakdown of the 200 struggling projects per
province and the amounts of funds allocated to the projects. The commission
should forward a report on its human resource retention strategy to the
committee.

The select committee therefore commends the resolution contained in the
report as considered for adoption by the House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:46.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec 77).

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec
             76).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

       (a)  Proclamations in terms of section 25 of the Protection of
          Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and Related Activities
          Act, 2004 (Act No. 33 of 2004)


    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for consideration and
        report:


          a) Draft Disaster Management Volunteer Regulations.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum On The Objects Of The Regulations.



                            TUESDAY, 2 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Social Development


          a) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 32986 of 1 March 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Social
             Development of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Finance

           a) Estimates of National Expenditure 2010 [RP3/2010]



                           WEDNESDAY, 3 MARCH 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Human Rights Commission
        (SAHRC) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the Independent Electoral Commission for
        2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (c)     Medium Term Strategic Plan of  the  Public  Service  Commission
        (PSC) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (d)     Letter from the Acting Minister of Finance dated 03 March 2010,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of  the
        National  Council  of  Provinces  explaining  the  delay   in   the
        submission of the Update of the National Treasury Strategic Plan.

        REQUEST FOR LATE SUBMISSION OF THE UPDATE OF THE NATIONAL  TREASURY
        STRATEGIC PLAN

        The National Treasury is in compliance with section 10 (1)  (c)  of
        the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act  (No  9
        of 2009). This requires  each  national  department  to  submit  an
        annual Strategic Plan to the Legislature.

        Since we operate  in  a  dynamic  environment  it  is  critical  to
        periodically update  the  Strategic  Plan  to  ensure  that  it  is
        relevant and that it covers the strategic areas which would  enable
        a department to reach its strategic objectives.
        The Minister of Finance has recently presented the National  Budget
        to the National Assembly. The majority  of  the  National  Treasury
        staff was engaged in this process. Hence it  was  not  possible  to
        meet the deadline as set by the Deputy President for the submission
        of our Strategic Plan. Accordingly, I hereby  wish  to  request  an
        extension for the submission of the National  Treasury’s  Strategic
        Plan update.

        Kind regards

        (Signed)
        Mr. G Nkwinti, MP
        Acting:  MINISTER OF FINANCE
        Date:  03/03/2010


    (e)     Letter from the Minister of Economic Development dated 03 March
        2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly and  the  Chairperson
        of the National Council of Provinces explaining the  delay  in  the
        submission of the tabling of Strategic Plans in terms of the  Money
        Bills Amendment procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009.

        TABLING OF STRATEGIC PLANS IN TERMS OF THE  MONEY  BILLS  AMENDMENT
        PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS ACT, 2009.

        The Office of the Leader of Government Business requested two weeks
        ago that, in terms of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
        Related Matters Act, 2009, strategic plans must be tabled after the
        fiscal framework is passed on 2 March 2010.
        Six agencies report to the Minister of  Economic  Development  with
        effect  from  1  April  2010  (the  Competition   Commission,   the
        Competition  Tribunal,  the  International   Trade   Administration
        Commission (ITAC), Khula Enterprise Finance  Limited  (Khula),  the
        South African Micro-Finance Apex Fund (SAMAF)  and  the  Industrial
        Development Corporation (IDC).

        In terms of the PFMA and Treasury  Regulations,  only  SAMAF  as  a
        trading entity was required in the  past  to  table  its  strategic
        plan.

        The new Act,  however,  requires  that  all  entities  table  their
        strategic plans. We have taken immediate steps to have all agencies
        comply fully with the requirements.  I  am  happy  to  report  that
        significant progress has been made and that draft plans  have  been
        submitted to the department.

        Some of the entities  have  requested  an  opportunity  to  further
        engage their Boards regarding the Strategic Plans. In addition,  it
        will be necessary for the Economic Development Department to engage
        the entities on  their  Strategic  Plans  prior  to  submission  to
        Parliament.

        I would therefore request permission to postpone tabling in respect
        of the abovementioned agencies until the end  of  June  2010.  This
        would allow time for the necessary engagements  with  the  agencies
        and finalisation of plans by their respective boards.

        Thank you for considering my request.

        Kind regards

         (Signed)
        MR EBRAHIM PATEL
        MINISTER
        Date:  03/03/2010


    (f)     Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 03 March 2010,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of  the
        National  Council  of  Provinces  explaining  the  delay   in   the
        submission of the Strategic Plan of Sentech.

        TABLING OF CORPORATE AND STRATEGIC OF PUBLIC ENTITIES

        In compliance with the requirements  of  section  10(1)(c)  of  the
        Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009  (Act
        No 9 of 2009), Sentech has submitted its  Corporate  and  Strategic
        Plan to me. However, their  Plan  represents  the  entire  business
        strategy which they  regard  as  highly  confidential  due  to  the
        competitive nature of the market in which Sentech operates.  It  is
        therefore requested that Sentech’s Corporate Plan not be circulated
        to Parliament. I propose that Sentech be requested  to  remove  the
        market sensitive information and resubmit their Plan  that  can  be
        made public.


        Your kind consideration of my proposal will be appreciated.


        Kind sincerely

        (Signed)
        GEN (Ret) SIPHIWE NYANDA
        MINISTER
        Date:  03/03/2010


   2. The Presidency

     a) Strategic Plan of the Presidency for 2010/11 – 2012/13.

3.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation

    (a)     Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Government Communication  and
        Information System (GCIS) for 2010 – 2013.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2010 – 2013.


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the Media Development  and  Diversity  Agency
        (MDDA) for 2010 – 2013.


   4. The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
        Administration for 2010 – 2014.

   5. The Acting Minister of Mining

               a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Mineral Resources for
                  2010/11 – 2012/13.
 6. The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
        Fisheries for 2010 – 2011, including the Strategic Plan of the
        Marine Living Resources Fund for 2010 – 2011.


     b) Strategic Plan of the Agriculture Research Council for 2010/11 –
        2014/15 [RP 20-2010].


     c) Business Plan of the Agriculture Research Council for 2010/11 –
        2014/15 [RP 32-2010].


   7. The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs
        for 2010/11 – 2012/13 [RP 70-2010].


               b) Strategic Plan of the South African Weather Service for
                  2010 – 2013.


               c) Strategic Plan of the South African National Parks for
                  2010/11 – 2012/13.


     d) Strategic Plan of the South African National Biodiversity Institute
        (SANBI) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


     e) Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the iSimangaliso Wetland
        Park Authority for 2011 – 2015.


   8. The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for 2009 – 2014.


               b) Addendum to Strategic Plan: Deliverables to be completed
                  by 31 March 2011.


   9. The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Medium Term Strategic Framework of the Department of Trade and
        Industry for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


     b) Medium Term Strategic Framework of the Companies and Intellectual
        Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.

  10. The Minister of Home Affairs

               a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for
                  2010/11 – 2012/13.

     b) Strategic Plan of the Government Printing Works (GPW) for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

               c) Strategic Plan of the Film and Publication Board (FPB)
                  for 2009 – 2014.


11. The Minister of Labour

               a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2010 –
                  2015.


     b) Strategic Plan of the National Economic Development and Labour
        Council (NEDLAC) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


               c) Strategic Plan and Business Plan of Productivity SA for
                  2010 – 2015.


     d) Strategic Plan of the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) for 2010/11
        – 2013/14.


     e) Strategic Plan of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and
        Arbitration (CCMA) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


               f) Strategic Plan of the Compensation Fund for 2010 – 2015.


12.   The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Rural Development and Land
        Reform for 2010 – 2013.


    (b)     Strategic Plan and Budget of the Ingonyama Trust Board for 2010
        – 2011.


13.   The Minister of Police

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service for 2010 –
        2014 [RP 08-2010].


    (b)     Annual Performance Plan of the South African Police Service for
        2010 – 2011 [RP 09-2010].


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate for
        2010 – 2013.

14.   The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2010 –
        2013.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the National Electronic Media Institute of
        South Africa (NEMISA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (c)     Strategic and Business Plan of the Universal Service and Access
        Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (d)     Strategic Corporate Plan of the South African Post Office for
        2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (e)     Strategic Plan of the South African Broadcasting Corporation
        Post Office for 2010 – 2013.


15.   The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2010
        – 2013.


16.   The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of International Relations and
        Cooperation for 2010 – 2013.


17.   The Minister of Higher Education and Training

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Higher Education and
        Training for 2010 – 2015 and Operational Plans for 2010 – 2011 [RP
        17-2010].

    (b)     Strategic Plan of the National Skills Fund (NSF) for 2010 –
        2013.


    (c)     Strategic Plan of Safety and Security Sector Education and
        Training Authority (SAS SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (d)     Strategic Plan of the South African Qualifications Authority
        (SAQA) for 2010 – 2013.


    (e)     Strategic Plan of the Tourism and Hospitality Sector Education
        and Training Authority (THETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (f)     Strategic Plan of Agricultural Sector Education and Training
        Authority (AGRI-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (g)     Strategic Plan of the Council on Higher Education (CHE) for
        2010 – 2013.


    (h)     Strategic Plan of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
        (NSFAS) for 2010 – 2013.


    (i)     Strategic Plan of the Media, Advertising, Publishing, Printing
        and Packaging Sector Education and Training Authority (MAPPP) for
        2010 – 2011.


    (j)     Strategic Plan of the Mining and Minerals Sector Education and
        Training Authority (MQA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (k)     Strategic Plan of the Health and Welfare Sector Education and
        Training Authority (HW-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (l)     Strategic Plan of the Chemical Industries Sector Education and
        Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (m)     Strategic Plan of the Clothing, Textiles, Footwear and Leather
        Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-SETA) for 2010 –
        2011.


    (n)     Strategic Plan of the Energy Sector Education and Training
        Authority (ESETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (o)     Strategic Plan of the Insurance Sector Education and Training
        Authority (INSETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (p)     Strategic Plan of the Food and Beverage Manufacturing Industry
        Sector Education and Training Authority (FOODBEV-SETA) for 2010 –
        2011.


    (q)     Strategic Plan of the Transport Sector Education and Training
        Authority (TETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (r)     Strategic Plan of the Banking Sector Education and Training
        Authority (BANK-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (s)     Strategic Plan of the Wholesale and Retail Sector Education and
        Training Authority (W&R-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (t)     Strategic Plan of the Local Government Sector Education and
        Training Authority (LG-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (u)     Strategic Plan of the Public Service Sector Education and
        Training Authority (PSETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (v)     Strategic Plan of the Manufacturing, Engineering and Related
        Services Sector Education and Training Authority (MER-SETA) for
        2010 – 2011.


    (w)     Strategic Plan of the Construction Education and Training
        Sector Education and Training Authority (CETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (x)     Strategic Plan of the Education Training and Development
        Practices Sector Education and Training Authority (ETDP) for 2010 –
        2011.


    (y)     Strategic Plan of the Financial and Accounting Services Sector
        Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2010 – 2011.


    (z)     Strategic Plan of the Information Systems, Electronics and
        Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education and Training
        Authority (ISETT-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (aa)    Strategic Plan of the Forest Industry Sector Education and
        Training Authority (FIETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (bb)    Strategic Plan of the Services Sector Education and Training
        Authority for 2010 – 2011.


18.   The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service (SARS) for
        2010/11 – 2013/13 [RP 206-2009].


19.   The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for
        2010/11 – 2014/15 [RP 25-2010].


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
        (SASSA) for 2010/11 – 2012/13 [RP 1414-2010].


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency for 2010 –
        2013 [RP 18-2010].


20.   The Minister of Tourism

    (a)     Strategic Plan of South African Tourism for 2010/11 – 2014/15.


21.   The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Council for Educators
        (SACE) for 2010 – 2013.

    (b)     Strategic Plan of the Council for Quality Assurance in General
        and Further Education and Training (Umalusi) for 2010 – 2013.


22.   The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
        2010/11 – 2014/15.

23.   The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Defence and Military
        Veterans for 2010/11 – 2012/13 [RP 27-2010].

24.   The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

25.   The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Energy for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

26.   The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the Department of
        Science and Technology for the Medium Term 2010 – 2013.

    (b)     Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the Technology
        Innovation Agency for the Medium Term 2010 – 2013.

    (c)     Strategic Plan for the Africa Institute of South Africa (AISA)
        for 2010-2012.


    (d)     Strategic Plan for the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC)
        for 2010/11-2012/13.


    (e)     Strategic Plan for the Council for Scientific and Industrial
        Research (CSIR) 2010/11-2012/13.


    (f)     Strategic Plan for the National Research Foundation (NRF)
        2008/15.

27.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation South
        Africa for 2010 – 2014.

28.   The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

29.   The Minister of Health

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the National Department of Health for 2010/11
        – 2012/13.

                           THURSDAY, 4 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 4 March 2010:


        (a)      Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
             Appropriations of the National Council of Provinces.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Office of the Public Protector for  April
        2010 – March 2013 and Annual Performance  Plan  for  April  2010  –
        March 2011.

    (b)     Letter from the Minister of Trade and Industry dated 27 February
        2010 (received 4 March  2010),  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National
        Assembly explaining the delay in the submission of the  tabling  of
        Strategic Plans in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
        Related Matters Act, 2009.

        TABLING OF STRATEGIC PLANS IN TERMS OF THE  MONEY  BILLS  AMENDMENT
        PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS ACT, 2009.


        The Office of the Leader of Government Business requested two weeks
        ago that, in terms of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
        Related Matters Act, 2009 (hereafter referred  to  as  “the  Act”),
        strategic plans must be tabled after the fiscal framework is passed
        on 2 March 2010. The Department of Trade and Industry has  reviewed
        the Act and  noted  that  entities  are  also  required  to  table.
        However, the Act does not define  “entities”.  According  to  legal
        advice provided to the dti, “entities” are defined in the PFMA, and
        therefore departments  are  required  to  table  strategic  of  all
        entities listed in Schedule 2 and 3 of the PFMA by 03 March 2010.

        Previously, in terms of the PFMA and Treasury Regulations only  the
        dti, CIPRO and SAMAF were required to table. As you would note, the
        implementation of the new Act poses a significant challenge  as  15
        dti entities who were previously not  required  to  table  are  now
        compelled to do so without sufficient notice. The  dti  is  in  the
        process of informing all 15 entities of this legal requirement  and
        will ensure that all strategic plans are tabled by the end of  June
        2010. However, to  facilitate  the  process,  the  department  will
        ensure that, entities that are required  to  brief  the  Trade  and
        Industry  Parliamentary   Committees,   will   provide   sufficient
        information  to  the  relevant  Committees   in   preparation   for
        discussion.

        Should you wish to discuss the matter further, please contact me.

        Kind regards



        (Signed)
        Dr Rob Davies, MP
        Minister of Trade and Industry
        Date:  27/02/2010


        cc:      Ms J Fubbs, Chairperson  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Trade and   Industry
             Mr D Gamede, Chairperson of the Select Committee on  Trade  and
             International Relations


    (c)     Letter from the Minister of  Science  and  Technology  dated  4
        March 2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining  the
        delay in the submission of the tabling of Strategic Plans in  terms
        of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure  and  Related  Matters  Act,
        2009.

        TABLING OF THE STRATEGIC PLAN FOR THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCE  OF  SOUTH
        AFRICA

        The Department of Science and Technology (DST)  received  a  letter
        from the office of  the  Deputy-President,  Mr  Kgalema  Motlanthe,
        regarding the tabling of strategic plans by  departments,  entities
        or institutions on or before 3 March 2010. The request is  in  line
        with the requirements of section  10(1)(b&c)  of  the  Money  Bills
        Amendment Procedure and Related Matters  Act  of  2009,  which  was
        assented by the President on the 16 April 2009.


        The letter from the Deputy-President was received by the DST on the
        9 February 2010 and all the DST based entities were informed  about
        this request. All DST based entities have managed to  submit  their
        strategic plans for tabling, except for the Academy of  Science  of
        South Africa (ASSAF).


        ASSAF was established by an Act  of  Parliament.  ASSAF  has  since
        updated their strategic  plan  in  May  2006.  Although  the  ASSAF
        strategic plan is still in action, the  ASSAF  Council  is  in  the
        process of reviewing and updating this current strategic plan  with
        the aim of presenting it later to Parliament. The Academy has  also
        prepared copies on  the  current  strategic  plan  and  if  granted
        permission could table to Parliament.

        The problem  is  that  previously  entities  used  to  present,  on
        request, their  strategic  plans  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
        Science  and  Technology.  In  future,  the  DST  will   take   the
        responsibility that all DST based entities submit  their  strategic
        plans as required  by  section  10(1)  (b&c)  of  the  Money  Bills
        Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act. The ASSAF Council will
        also  be  required  to  finalise  the  process  of  updating  their
        strategic plan and submit to Parliament.


        Should the Speaker require additional information on  this  matter,
        please feel free to contact my office or  the  Director-General  of
        the DST, Dr Phil Mjwara.


        Warm regards

        (Signed)
      G N M PANDOR, MP
        MINISTER
      Date:  4-03-2010


    (d)     Letter from the Minister in the Presidency:  National  Planning
        Commission dated 4 March 2010,  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National
        Assembly and the Chairperson of the National Council  of  Provinces
        explaining the delay in the submission of the tabling of  Strategic
        Plans in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure  and  Related
        Matters Act, 2009.



        Late Tabling of Statistics South Africa Strategic  Plan



        I have been informed by the Leader of Government Business  that  in
        terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure  and  Related  Matters
        Act, Parliament required all strategic plans  to  be  tabled  by  3
        March 2010.  This  is  obviously  a  departure  from  the  previous
        guidelines in the form of Chapter 5  of  the  Treasury  regulations
        that prescribed that strategic plans be tabled at  least  ten  days
        before the discussion of the Budget vote in the relevant committee.





        The Leader of Government Business’ correspondence (dated 8 February
        2010) brought this change to my attention at a somewhat late  stage
        as departments were still working on the basis  of  the  timeframes
        set out in the Treasury regulations. As the correspondence received
        referred to a letter received from  the  Speaker  to  the  National
        Assembly, we therefore wish to indicate that the strategic plan  of
        Statistics South Africa will unfortunately not be  able  meet  this
        deadline.



        While I am aware that  the  Money  Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
        Related Matters Act does not require a  written  apology  for  late
        tabling of strategic plans, I take our responsibility to account to
        Parliament very seriously and therefore feel compelled  to  explain
        our late tabling. I have made the requisite arrangements  with  the
        parliamentary committee to ensure that  the  documents  are  tabled
        with sufficient time for them to interrogate the information.



        I  trust  that  this  explanation  will  be   given   the   desired
        consideration.



        Yours sincerely



            (Signed)

        Trevor A Manuel, MP

        Minister in the Presidency: National Planning Commission

        Date: 4 March 2010




2.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Broadcasting Corporation
        for 2010 – 2013.


        Correction: The above entry replaces item 14(e) published under the
                  name  of  the   Minister   of   Communications   in   the
                  Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 3  March
                  2010, page 317.


3.    The Minister of Economic Development


    (a)     Medium Term Strategic Plan for the Department of Economic
        Development for 2010/11 - 2012/13.


4.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation


    (a)     Strategic Plan of the National Youth Development Agency  (NYDA)
        for 2010 – 2011.


                            FRIDAY, 5 MARCH 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Calling of Joint Sitting


CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT



    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the
    Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
    terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Tuesday, 9 March 2010 at 14:00 to conduct a debate in
    celebration of International Women’s Day.




    M V SISULU, MP                      M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                      CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY             NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Auditor-General on the status of climate change
        initiatives in South Africa [RP 12-2010].

2.    The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Education Labour Relations Council for
        2010 – 2013 and one-year Service Delivery Plan for 2010 - 11.


                            MONDAY, 8 MARCH 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Protection of Information Bill, 2010, submitted by the Acting
         Minister of State Security.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)     Strategic Corporate Plan of Sentech for 2010 – 2013.


2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Public Administration Leadership and
        Management Academy (Palama) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.

3.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Service Licensing
        Council (ASLC) for 2008-09.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Air
        Services Council (IASC) for 2008-09.


4. The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
        Government Association (SALGA) for 2008-09, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2008-09 [RP 44-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT T100308e-insert - - PAGES 434-465


                            TUESDAY, 9 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of State Security


           a) Protection of Information Bill [B 6 – 2010] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 32999 of 5 March 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
             for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Calling of Joint Sitting


CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT


    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr M V Sisulu, and the
    Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in
    terms of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Tuesday, 16 March 2010 at 14:00 to conduct a debate in
    celebration of Human Rights Day.



    M V SISULU, MP                      M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                      CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY             NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Long-term
        Insurance for 2007 [RP 272-2009].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Registrar of Short-term
        Insurance for 2007 [RP 202-2009].


    (c)     Government Notice No R.1085 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Correction Notice:  Imposition of
        Provisional Payment (PP/135), in terms of the Customs and Excise
        Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.1086 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1389), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).
    (e)     Government Notice No R.1087 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1390), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.1088 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1391), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R.1089 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1392), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R.1090 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/652), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (i)     Government Notice No R.1091 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
        2/323), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (j)     Government Notice No R.1092 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/324), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (k)     Government Notice No R.1093 published in Government Gazette No
        32732 dated 27 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/325), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


2.    The Minister of Basic Education

     a) Strategic Plan and Operational Plans of the Department of Basic
        Education for 2010/11 – 2012/13.

                          WEDNESDAY, 10 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

                 a) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5 - 2010] (National
                    Assembly – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No R.1048 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1388), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (b)     Government Notice No R.1049 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
        2/321), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R.1050 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/651), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R.1051 published in Government Gazette No
        32606 dated 06 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/323), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (e)     Proclamation No 74 published in Government Gazette No 32724
        dated 26 November 2009: Amendment of Schedule 1, in terms of the
        South African Revenue Service Act , 1997 (Act No 34 of 1997).


    (f)     Government Notice No R.1146 published in Government Gazette No
        32785 dated 04 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1393), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R.1186 published in Government Gazette No
        32806 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 Part 2B
        (No 1/2/151), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
        91 of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R.1187 published in Government Gazette No
        32806 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/326), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (i)     Government Notice No R.1221 published in Government Gazette No
        32825 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1395), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (j)     Government Notice No R.1222 published in Government Gazette No
        32825 dated 18 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1394), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (k)     Government Notice No R.1232 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1398), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (l)     Government Notice No R.1233 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1396), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (m)     Government Notice No R.1234 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1397), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (n)     Government Notice No R.1235 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/653), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (o)     Government Notice No R.1236 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        6/654), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (p)     Government Notice No R.1237 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
        3/655), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (q)     Government Notice No R.1238 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/327), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (r)     Government Notice No R.1239 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No 5/90),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (s)     Government Notice No R.1240 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Rules (DAR/67), in terms
        of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (t)     Government Notice No R.1241 published in Government Gazette No
        32838 dated 31 December 2009: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
        4/328), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).


    (u)     Government Notice No R.32 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1399), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (v)     Government Notice No R.33 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1400), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (w)     Government Notice No R.34 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/656),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (x)     Government Notice No R.35 published in Government Gazette No
        32899 dated 29 January 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/329),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (y)     Government Notice No R.126 published in Government Gazette No
        32966 dated 26 February 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1401), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

