---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-10
---

WEDNESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS –see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates how to improve the representation of women in the
   judiciary.

Thank you.

Mrs M WENGER: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates how municipal income grants are used and whether
   there are measures by which the use of a municipal infrastructure grant,
   Mig, can be improved.

Thank you.

Ms M C DUBE: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the establishment of a state-owned pharmaceutical
   company.

Thank you.

Mr D C SMILES: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the effect that leaks of matric exam papers have
   on the credibility of matric exams in some provinces and come up with
   solutions to eradicate leaks.

Thank you.

Ms P MADUNA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the creation of a low-cost retirement fund.


Thank you.

           CAPTURE OF TWO SOUTH AFRICAN CITIZENS BY SOMALI PIRATES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -


     1) notes that two South African citizens, Bruno and Debbie Pelizzari,
        were taken hostage by pirates whilst sailing off the Somali coast
        on Sunday and that a third South African, Peter Eldridge, who
        accompanied the couple, managed to evade capture;


     2) further notes that no news is currently available as to where and
        why the couple is being held;


     3) extends its sympathy and support to the family and friends of the
        Pelizzaris;


     4) acknowledges the responsibility of the Government to assist all
        South African citizens abroad who may be in distress; and
     5) urges the Department of International Relations and Co-operation to
        take the necessary steps to investigate not only the whereabouts of
        the couple but also to ensure their safe release and swift return
        to South Africa.

Agreed to.

         CELEBRATION OF WORLD SCIENCE DAY FOR PEACE AND DEVELOPMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move without notice:


   That the House -


     1) notes that World Science Day for Peace and Development (WSDPD) is
        celebrated on 10 November each year as an occasion to remind the
        world of UNESCO’s mandate and commitment to science and since its
        inception in 2001, the day has proved to be a great opportunity to
        reflect on the latest advances in science and the challenges
        science has yet to overcome;


     2) further notes that the objectives of World Science Day for Peace
        and Development are to –


           a) strengthen public awareness on the role of science for
              peaceful and sustainable societies;


           b) promote national and international solidarity for shared
              science between countries;


           c) renew national and international commitment for the use of
              science to the benefit of societies; and


           d) draw attention to the challenges faced by science and raise
              support for scientific endeavour; and


     3) supports this initiative to draw attention to the ways in which
        science and technology can help to reduce poverty, protect the
        environment and improve the quality of life for all.


Agreed to.

      HASHIM AMLA’S ACHIEVEMENT IN ICC PLAYER RANKINGS FOR ODI BATSMEN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –
     1) notes that Hashim Amla has been ranked the Number 1 batsman on the
        latest ICC Player Rankings for ODI batsmen;


     2) acknowledges his outstanding performance in South Africa’s series
        victory against Pakistan where he was the leading run scorer,
        amassing 291 runs;


     3) further notes that this success follows his winning Cricket South
        Africa’s Player of the Year for 2010; and


     4) congratulates Hashim Amla on this wonderful achievement and wishes
        him the best of luck for the upcoming home series against India.


Agreed to.

 PRESTIGIOUS JAPANESE AWARD RECEIVED BY FORMER SOUTH AFRICAN AMBASSADOR, DR
                            BALDWIN SIPHO NGUBANE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, hon Deputy President, I move
without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that the former South African ambassador to Japan, Dr Baldwin
        Sipho Ngubane, was honoured with a prestigious Japanese award, the
        Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun, by the Emperor of
        Japan on Friday, 5 November 2010, at the imperial palace in Tokyo;


     2) recognises that this award is conferred on him in honour and
        recognition of his contribution to promoting relations between
        South Africa and Japan during his term as South African ambassador
        to Japan between 2004 and 2008;


     3) congratulates Dr Ngubane on receiving this prestigious Japanese
        award; and


      4) wishes him well in his future endeavours.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                  (The late Ms Alina Machejane Rantsolase)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, I
move without notice:


    That the House -
     1) notes with great sadness the passing on of the Chairperson of the
        African National Congress (ANC) Parliamentary Caucus, Alina
        Machejane Rantsolase, MP, on Wednesday, 3 November 2010, after a
        short illness;


     2) further notes that hon Rantsolase became a Member of Parliament for
        the ANC in 2009 and has served on the Portfolio Committees on Home
        Affairs and the Portfolio Committee on Labour, where she played a
        significant role with regard to labour brokering;


     3) remembers that, like many fellow young compatriots born during the
        period of political repression, she was compelled by material
        conditions of that time to join the youth anti-apartheid movement
        in the 1970s to fight against the minority regime’s Bantu education
        and its exploitative labour system;


     4) believes that Ms Rantsolase was one of the hardest-working MPs, who
        managed to juggle her time prudently in discharging her
        responsibilities in the co-ordination of caucus political and
        administrative business, and political management of her committee
        as a Whip, as well as finding time for her organisational
        responsibilities in the ANC provincial structures in Gauteng;


     5) acknowledges that the death of Ms Rantsolase has robbed Parliament,
        her organisation, the ANC, and its alliance partners of a hard
        worker and outstanding leader who has spent her life serving the
        people, particularly the vulnerable and less fortunate, and who
        never shied away from any task, no matter how challenging it was;
        and


     6) conveys its heartfelt condolences to the African National Congress,
        its Alliance partners and her family.


Agreed to.

Ms S V KALYAN: Hon Speaker, bidding farewell to a member of this House is
not a pleasant task, more so when the member, although relatively new to
Parliament, has made such a huge impact in the short time she was here. The
late hon Rantsolase became a Member of Parliament in 2009 and served on the
Home Affairs and Labour portfolio committees. I had the privilege of
working with her on the parliamentary grouping in international relations
and members’ facilities committees, and her input was always positive and
in the interests of Members of Parliament.

The confidence her colleagues had in her when they nominated her Chair of
the ANC caucus speaks volumes of her leadership qualities. She was
instrumental in calming the waters of her caucus and charting a clear
vision for them as a whole. Her track record as a proponent for better
working conditions and a living wage in her early days as shop steward is
perhaps the legacy she will be best remembered for. By all accounts, her
willingness to be first in the picket line and advocacy of gender equality
endeared her to many. She was desperately ill in the past month of her
life, resulting in the untimely death at the relatively young age of 56. I
am certain that her loss will be deeply felt by her colleagues in the ANC,
her mom, six siblings, her daughter Puleng and her three grandchildren.

The tragedy of life is not in death, but what we let die inside of us while
we live. It is clear she lived a life filled with passion and energy. Her
life was not in vain. Therefore, you can be proud of all her achievements,
even though she has passed on. We, in the DA, sympathise with you in this
moment of grief and pray that, as the hon Rantsolase is laid to rest, her
soul is at peace.

Mr W M MADISHA: Hon Speaker and members present, we are rising on behalf of
Cope and the people we represent to give our sincere condolences to the
family of the late Comrade Alina Rantsolase. Our condolences also go to the
party and South Africans she represented in this Parliament. Her early
departure is, to many of us in this House and the country as a whole, not
only sad, but also the end of her excellent contribution to the survival of
millions of South Africans.

If she was lying here before us today, I would say to her that I am one of
the few people who feel extremely saddened by her early departure. I would
also remind her that her contribution was not only in South Africa, but
beyond our seas, where she did not attend international meetings to enjoy
herself; she became part of a leadership that built true workers’
organisations. I would also remind her that, although she had not gone
through basic financial training at an education institution, but through
her practise as a shop steward, she developed an extreme level of capacity
to lead hundreds of unions’ treasurers in years of her being a national
treasurer for a workers’ federation.

I would further remind her that her contribution and commitment assisted in
the creation of jobs in the country, because members will remember that in
1998, when President Mandela convened a conference of the workers’
government and the civics in South Africa, more than R89 million was
collected because of her contribution. Today workers can rise and say that
39 000 jobs have been established because of her contribution. We are also
deeply saddened by the fact that we will miss the contributions made by
this leader. Indeed, I must say that is extremely painful. Therefore, as
Cope, we say “sepela gabotse [farewell], comrade”. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Ngiyathokoza, Somlomo, mhlonishwa Sekela Mongameli neNdlu
ehloniphekile. [Thank you, Speaker, hon Deputy President and this august
House.]

The IFP offers its deepest and most sincere condolences on behalf of the
entire party to the family and friends of Alina Rantsolase on her untimely
and very sad passing. Alina was a true leader of the people, a leader who
walked her talk, no matter the political consequences, and a leader who, by
so doing, gained the admiration and respect of all who knew her. Her
untimely passing will leave a vacuum which, we can only hope, will be
filled by another rising star of the same ilk as Alina.

Alina rose to the stellar heights of the parliamentary service of her
nation and people from humble beginnings as a shop steward at Checkers. Her
exemplary work ethic and relentless pursuit, not only self-betterment but
also betterment, of the people, led Alina onto a sure path in politics, a
path which, in her case, rewarded her hard work and ethical behaviour with
greater responsibilities and duties which, I might add, she never shirked.

Alina was one of this Parliament’s unsung heroes, a daughter to the family
of the Parliament of South Africa, and we will miss her a lot.

Umphefumulo wakhe ulale ngokuthula, izihlobo zakhe ziduduzeke. INkosi ibe
nani. Ngiyabonga. [May her soul rest in peace, and may her relatives find
comfort. May God be with you. Thank you.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Speaker, hon members, the UDM would like to extend its
condolences to the family and friends of the late hon member of the ANC, as
well as to her party and colleagues. By all accounts, as caucus chairperson
of the ANC, the late hon member played an important role in supporting her
colleagues.

The UDM also confirms what has been alluded to by previous speakers. Aside
from her service as a member of this House, she committed her adult life to
the cause of workers. Starting as a shop steward, she progressed through
the ranks of the labour movement, culminating eventually in her election to
the position of national treasurer of Cosatu in 1999. She occupied this
position for a decade. Hers was a life lived in service to others. May she
rest in peace. Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Speaker, agb lede van die Parlement, dit is vir my ’n
voorreg en ’n eer om namens die VF Plus ons opregte meelewing en simpatie
te betuig met die familie en naasbestaandes van ons kollega, die agb Alina
Rantsolase, wat verlede week oorlede is.

Soos wat ons gehoor het, is sy op ’n baie jeugdige ouderdom oorlede. Sy was
ook nie lank in die Parlement nie. Sy het ’n kort kans gehad om hier te
dien, maar sy was ’n lewende voorbeeld van iemand wat nie noodwendig die
geleentheid gehad het vir formele opvoeding en onderrig nie, maar wat tog
die hoogste sport bereik het en haarself uitgeleef het, ook hier in die
Parlement. Dit is bekend dat sy ’n besondere belangstelling gehad het as
tesourier en ook omgesien het na die finansies van almal betrokke waar sy
was. Sy het ’n groot verskil gemaak, nie net in Cosatu wat die finansies
betref nie, maar ook in die ANC.

Ek wil graag namens die VF Plus ons meelewing betuig met haar party wat ’n
kollega verloor het. Ons eer haar gedagtenis. Ons het ’n kollega verloor,
maar haar familie het ’n geliefde verloor, en ons dink aan hulle. Baie
dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Speaker, on behalf of the FF Plus it is a privilege and
an honour for me to convey our sincere condolences and sympathy with the
family and next of kin of our colleague, the hon Alina Rantsolase, who
passed away last week.

As we have heard, she passed away at a very young age. She also had not
been at Parliament for long. She had a brief opportunity to serve here, but
she was a living example of someone who did not necessarily get the
opportunity for formal education and tuition, but who still attained the
highest step and lived her own free life, also here at Parliament. It is
known that she had a particular interest as treasurer and also looked after
the finances of everyone around her. She made a big difference regarding
finance, not only with Cosatu, but also with the ANC.

On behalf of the FF Plus I would like to sympathise with her party for
having lost a colleague. We honour her memory. We have lost a colleague,
but her family have lost a loved one, and we think of them. Thank you very
much.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Speaker, I rise on behalf of the ACDP to convey our
sincere condolences to the family of the hon Alina Machejane Rantsolase,
her friends, relatives, Cosatu and the ANC.

We note with interest that she was brought to Parliament as an ANC Member
of Parliament last year as a reward for her contribution to the trade union
movement. Her work ethic and impressive self-taught accounting skills made
such an impact on her fellow MPs that she was quickly appointed chairperson
of the ANC parliamentary caucus, and given the job of sorting out the
finances in the party.

In addition to sorting out her party’s finances, Rantsolase served on the
Home Affairs and Labour portfolio committees where her hard work and
refusal to play cheap party politics won her the respect of opposition
parties. While her reported “no fear, no favours” approach and unflinching
insistence that the rules be followed to the letter did not endear her to
some in the party hierarchy, it earned her respect among many other people.
Her status as an MP did not change her. She remained down-to-earth,
friendly and approachable, and never forgot that she was there to represent
the interests of the people struggling to earn their daily living.

The ACDP honours her for these much-needed attributes and qualities that
all Members of Parliament should aspire to. May the God of peace bring
comfort to her family, friends and members of the tripartite alliance.
Thank you.

Mrs M N MATLADI: Hon Speaker, the UCDP would like to pass on its heartfelt
condolences to the family and friends of Alina Rantsolase. She will be
sadly missed for her contribution in the trade unions and her service in
our Parliament. Her contribution to this democracy will also be missed.

Fa ke bua le ba lelapa la ga Mme Alina ba ba leng mo gare ga rona gompieno,
ke rata gore moriti wa setlhare se le ntseng le tshabela letsatsi mo go
sona o wele. Fa go ntse jaana ka Setswana ra re:
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[To the family of the late Alina who are with us here today, I would like
to say that their provider is no more. In Setswana, in difficult times like
this, we normally say:]

When everything fails, there is only one answer ...
... mme karabo e mo go Rara yo o kwa magodimong. [... and that is the
Heavenly Father.]

The only answer is in God.

O tla le fodisa. Puleng, bana le ba losika, Alina o ne a le rata, o ne a le
direla. Le lona le ne le mo rata le mo direla, mme ka metlha le nne le mo
gopola. Se le neng le se dira mmogo le dumela mo go sona, le sale go se
sala morago.

Fa e le rona re le Palamente re latlhegetswe, mme se segolo se ke tla se
gopolang ka Mme Alina ke matlhagatlhaga a gagwe mo tirong, a re ithutileng
go le gontsi mo go ona. Ka re go rona Maloko a Palamente ya Bosetšhaba, re
ka mo gakologelwa sentle ka go tswelela go direla setšhaba. Robala ka
kagiso Alina. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.]
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[He will heal you. To Puleng, children and relatives, Alina loved and
served you. You too loved and served her; always remember her. May you
continue to do what you believed in and used to do together with her.

Parliament also feels this loss. Mrs Alina will be remembered for her
determination to serve, from which we learned a lot. To the Members of the
national Parliament, we will remember her for her eagerness to serve the
nation. Rest in peace, Alina. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mna L M MPHAHLELE: Mohlomphegi Sepikara, letsogo la Mopresidente, re le ba
mokgatlo wa PAC ya Azania, re tšea sebaka se go fetišetša mantšu a hlobošo
go mokgatlo wa ANC le go lapa la Mme Alina Rantsolase.

Re le MaAfika Borwa re paletšwe ke go diša. Phiri e dikologile Mokhomoreiti
Alina ya ba ya mo tšea re le gona, ra šala re kitla sa masetlapelo sello.
Lehu re hwile la pitšana, la segwana nkabe re roka.

Mohlomphegi Sepikara, ke tšama ke tswaka maleme. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, as members of the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania, we are conveying our condolences to the ANC
and the bereaved family of the late Alina Rantsolase.

Death robbed us of Comrade Alina Rantsolase, and all we are left with now
is pain. We as South Africans could not save her from death. This is a
great loss to us. Hon Speaker, I will code switch from one language to
another.]

To the bereaved Rantsolase family, the PAC understands the pain you are
going through, the pain of questioning what should not be questioned and
the pain of denying pain. This pain too shall be healed by Mother Time,
beat by beat of the heart.

To Comrade Alina, I’ll forever treasure the memory of travelling with you
on a few occasions from Johannesburg to Cape Town; how we used to burst
into laughter whenever we would realise that the airline did not upgrade us
from the economy to the business class. You shuttled between the economy
and business classes with aplomb. You taught me a great lesson: that true
leaders are never status-conscious. A leader will lead even from a donkey
cart.

Today we hear your voice in our voices, see your wishes in our wishes, and
dare say you are still with us. Standing here breathing, part of us is
dead. Lying there, about to be buried, part of you is breathing. Long live
Comrade Alina!

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Speaker, it is undoubtedly a sad moment for anyone to
experience the sorrow of death.

On behalf of the MF, I convey heartfelt condolences and messages of
strength, courage and fortitude to Alina’s family, comrades and friends for
their irreplaceable loss.

Our condolences also go out to the ANC for the loss of an impeccable leader
who devoted most of her time working with the broad suffering masses. That
is precisely why she has earned the title of “the people’s champion”.

She pulled no punches and acted without fear or favour when it came to
executing her duties as a public representative. She was greatly respected
for her organisational skills and lean and clean administration expertise.

With her amazing characteristic love and humility, she leaves a legacy of
beautiful thoughts and admiration. She had the passion, courage and
persistence to create change.

As we all live through the grace of God Almighty, let us continue to pray
that God bestows strength to her family and friends during their time of
bereavement.

May peace be granted unto her and may her soul, through the grace of God
Almighty, rest in peace. I thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO: Mr Speaker, Deputy President, the family of the late Alina
Rantsolase, we have learnt with sadness about the passing away of Alina
Rantsolase.

As somebody who worked in the trade union movement, I have had some
interaction with Comrade Alina, albeit minimal. She had a certain presence
and dignity, and it was difficult not to notice her.

I read somewhere that she had no formal qualifications in finance. I must
say that there was no way of telling that from her performance. If this is
indeed true, then she was a self-taught treasurer, and a good steward of
the hard-earned resources of the workers.

Azapo lowers its banner for this gallant fighter and salutes her for the
contribution that she made in the struggle for the advancement of the
workers of our land. And we express our condolences to her family, the
entire trade union movement and her political organisation, the ANC.

Long live the fighting spirit of Comrade Alina, long live! May her soul
rest in peace! Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon Speaker,
hon colleagues in the House ...

... boo Rantsolase, ditsala le ba losika, kwa tshimologolong fela ke rata
gore... [... the Rantsolases, friends and family, I would like to start off
by saying ...]

... we are gathered here today to celebrate a life and mourn the passing
away of the late Comrade Alina Rantsolase, who was called to glory on 2
November 2010. Our presence here today is testament to a life lived
righteously, a life that lifted others, a life lived selflessly in order to
improve the living conditions of the majority of our people in this
country.

It is with a heavy heart indeed that I stand here to address this august
House and pay tribute to someone who has been a friend, a comrade, a mentor
and a colleague for almost 37 years. We celebrate Comrade Alina
Rantsolase’s life, mindful that words cannot even begin to express our
sorrow, nor illustrate the large and eventful life that she led.

This Parliament’s discussion here today pays tribute to her and it also
provides us with an opportunity to reflect on the significant contributions
that Comrade Alina Rantsolase has made in this country. All of us who are
present here today will enjoy our individual and collective memories of
Comrade Alina Rantsolase. As we depart from here we will also always
remember her, as she was indeed a truly great South African.

Today we feel weak and helpless because death has robbed us of a true
revolutionary and an exemplary leader. On this day, we feel a deep sense of
loss because a caring heart has ceased to beat. The late Comrade Alina
Rantsolase made immense contributions to the establishment of a new
democratic South Africa.

Because of her fruitful life and many years of service devoted to the
liberation cause, she became the embodiment of the progressive woman that
we often speak of. Her body has left this material world, but her soul will
shine forever in our midst.

Like most of us, our liberation heroes and heroines, Comrade Alina
Rantsolase, as we have heard, was born in a rural village in the Free State
on March 1954, during the height of the oppressive apartheid regime. Her
mother was an ordinary domestic worker.

Born into a poor family and confronted by the socioeconomic realities of
the then apartheid regime, Comrade Alina Rantsolase became involved in the
anti-apartheid movement struggles while she was still studying. At that
time, she was still very young. From a very young and tender age, the late
Comrade Alina Rantsolase’s sharp intellectual power stood out and she
showed great promise as a leader with an extremely keen mind and a profound
sense of perseverance.

Due to her involvement in politics, her schooling was naturally disrupted,
like that of many others. She was subsequently employed at the Checkers
store where we worked together. Following that, she was, not surprisingly,
elected as a shop steward. Also, she played a pivotal role in negotiations
at the time. She ensured that our trade union and the rights of workers are
also recognised, and fiercely fought for a living wage, as well as better
working conditions for all workers.

Like all other activists, she fought the apartheid government through
serving in the civic structures, and also served at the lower ranks of our
women structures. She didn’t just rise overnight. She worked hard. She rose
from the lower ranks of our movement and also became a leader. She became a
national leader as early as the late 80s and she devoted her life to the
service of the workers and the national liberation movement.

It was during her tenure as a shop steward and later as the national
treasurer of the SA Commercial, Catering and Allied Workers Union, Saccawu,
her own trade union – because she didn’t start by becoming the treasurer of
the Congress of SA Trade Unions, Cosatu; she became the national treasurer
of Saccawu and later the national treasurer of Cosatu – that Comrade Alina
Rantsolase made her mark in national politics.

She served as the national treasurer of Saccawu from 1993 to 1999, where we
served together. She was then elected to the Cosatu national treasury, a
position she held until 2009. She was then elected to this Parliament as a
Member of Parliament, as we know.

Given the fact that she was a disciplined cadre, she was in her lifetime
also appointed to serve as the chairperson of the disciplinary committee of
the ANC in the Vaal region from 1998 to 2000. She was also the chairperson
of the Human Rights Committee from 2008 to 2009. She served as a member of
the National Economic Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, executive
committee and the Presidential Working Group from 1999 to 2000.

She also represented workers at the global level in the International Trade
Union Confederation on the International Labour Organisation committee of
labour standards and the Southern African Development Community Labour
Social Commission and African Union Labour and Social Commission from 2003
to 2009. She was also a representative of Africa in the executive
committee, which later became feared as the largest trade union secretariat
there.

Comrade Alina Rantsolase remained down-to-earth, friendly and never forgot
that she was a servant of our people. Her selfless and staunch commitment
to the working class is codified in her illustrious career as a trade
unionist. Hon Rantsolase was a woman of principle, soft-spoken but very
profound. She could disagree without being disagreeable. She shunned
superfluous and over-versed posturing and always focused on the broader
national picture and national agenda. Above all, she was a woman of her
word who called a spade a spade and not an agricultural tool. She was a
woman who always carried herself with dignity and right to the end of her
life sustained her integrity, which was beyond reproach.

Hee batho, o ne a rata diaparo. Lesela o ne a le ja, a le montle ka dinako
tse tsotlhe. [People, she loved clothes. She was stylish and she always
looked beautiful.]

Comrade Alina Rantsolase also served on a number of committees here in
Parliament, including the Home Affairs and Labour portfolio committees, as
has been said. She was also a member of the provincial executive committee
of Gauteng province.

At the time of her death, Comrade Alina Rantsolase was the chairperson of
the parliamentary caucus, as we know. Her untimely death comes as a great
shock to all of us. We will forever remember her as a beacon of inspiration
to all of us. She was a guiding light and a pillar of strength to all of
us. In Shakespeare’s words:

  You will never see so much, nor live so long.

Despite the fact that she was held in high regard among her comrades,
including members of the opposition parties, she never had problems in the
organisation, as was said earlier on, even with the opposition. Comrade
Alina Rantsolase never became conceited or arrogant. She never lost touch
with her origins and remained committed to the poor and to the vulnerable
until her last breath. She stood out as an irreproachable character.

The Good Book tells us that God works in mysterious ways in performing his
wonders. I’m talking about God because Comrade Alina was a Christian. She
was a believer. Comrade Alina Rantsolase was a wonder that God called to
glory. If we believe Matthew’s Gospel that the degree of our final reward
is dependent on the extent to which we, as individuals, responded to the
needs of our brothers and sisters, then we can take solace that Comrade
Alina Rantsolase has earned a place at the right-hand side of God, and our
loss, our grief, is heaven’s gain.

Fellow comrades, let us recommit ourselves to continuing her struggle for a
just and caring South Africa. Let us rededicate ourselves to her dream of a
better world and a better South Africa, free of poverty, free of
illiteracy, free of abuse of women and children, and free of crime. Let us
rededicate ourselves to the building of that South Africa that Comrade
Alina Rantsolase dreamt of and worked so hard for.

To the family, brothers and sisters and ...

... Puleng, ngwanake, yo o seyong fa ka maswabi... [... Puleng, my child,
who unfortunately couldn’t be here ...]

... stay strong during this difficult time. You stood by her, side by side,
up to the end. We are deeply saddened by your loss. We will cherish the
memories of the times we spend together with her. We are with you during
this time of grief. May the peace which comes from the memories of shared
love comfort you now and also in the days ahead. Be strong in the knowledge
that in your veins runs the blood of a true cadre, a woman among women, a
real woman of substance who will always live in our hearts and minds.

Long live the memory of our comrade, friend and sister. On behalf of the
ANC, I would like to say, may her soul rest in peace.

Ka Setswana ga twe, lalang ka ntho, madi a tshologa. Ke a leboga. A mowa wa
gagwe o robale ka kagiso. [Legofi.] [In Setswana, we convey our deepest
condolences. Thank you. May her soul rest in peace. [Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: I would also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the
family of Alina Rantsolase in the Speaker’s Bay. The condolences of the
House will be conveyed to the Rantsolase family, the ANC and its alliance
partners. A book of condolence has been opened just outside the Chamber.
Members are encouraged to sign it. Sorry, hon members, we are not rising,
because we did rise when we announced the passing away of hon Rantsolase.
Thank you.

Debate concluded.
Agreed to.
                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY
                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 4

MINISTERS:

 Position regarding effect of financial guarantee on financial stability in
                                    SABC

272.  Mr K M Zondi (IFP) asked the Minister of Communications:

      Whether, in light of the current problems affecting the SA
      Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) Board and management, the financial
      guarantee that has been provided to the SABC has brought about
      financial stability in the SABC; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                       NO3881E

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Speaker, I was going to say that this
is my maiden reply to questions.

The SPEAKER: You do look like a maiden today, sir. [Laughter]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Speaker, to respond to the hon Zondi’s
question, the reply to the question is as follows. Yes, the financial
guarantee was used to raise a loan to the value of R1 billion to pay
outstanding debts to local and foreign creditors. The money from the loan
was used to prevent a major crisis at the SABC, and to assist in getting
its outstanding debts paid. The loan unfortunately did not resolve the
SABC’s financial challenges as a turnaround plan is still to be
implemented, which is currently being developed by the corporation. Should
the SABC continue to incur high expenses on certain costs items, it will
certainly find itself in a limited cash flow position again.

The number of issues will need to be addressed as per the corporate plan
that was submitted with the guarantee application. I’m informed that in
dealing with this turnaround plan that the corporation is currently seized
with, the corporation is investigating measures to bring down the operating
costs of the corporation. It is certainly looking at restructuring the
organisation so that it could become a fitter organisation. It is looking
at ways in which it could improve its efficiency.

Unfortunately, the details are not available to us yet. I’m informed by the
corporation that these are being looked at quite thoroughly, and are being
discussed by the corporation, as well as the formulation of its turnaround
strategy. They are to present their thinking on the turnaround strategy to
the department this coming week, whereupon this strategy will be presented
to Parliament. Thank you.

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Mr Speaker, hon Minister, firstly, allow me to
congratulate you on your appointment. I want to assure you that I’m looking
forward to working with you. As you know, the SABC should have appeared
before Parliament’s Communications portfolio committee today. However, the
committee was sent a letter by the SABC, informing us that they would first
confer with you, and appear before us then only.

At the last meeting with the SABC, the committee sent them away in a less
than friendly fashion as they had not produced the required turnaround
strategy. Could you please tell us if the SABC has in fact presented to
you, for your information, a turnaround strategy, or did they in fact just
miss the 10 November deadline?

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon member, the SABC is having a meeting
with me on Thursday. One of the items on that agenda is the presentation of
their turnaround strategy. I have been informed that they have done a
considerable amount of work on the turnaround strategy. However, we advised
them that we would like to see it before it comes to Parliament. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: The system is not working. If there are any members who might
wish to ask supplementary questions, please raise your hands and I will
recognise you.

Ms S R TSEBE: Hon Speaker, hon Minister, in your response you indicated
that a number of issues need to be addressed regarding the corporate plan
which was submitted with the guaranteed application. My follow-up question
is: What are these issues? Are there any measures or systems in place to
address them? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS Hon member, I’ve mentioned that some of the
issues relate to the reduction of costs, the restructuring of the
organisation and the improvement of efficiency in a number of areas in the
corporation.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Minister, also from our side, congratulations to you.
However, we have very serious concerns about the governance issues at the
SABC, specifically within the board, which recently led to a spate of
resignations, and this is very unfortunate for high calibre board members,
largely due to the publicly expressed frustration with the role of the
chairperson. Are you aware of the tensions within the board? How do you
intend to assist the board to come to grips, because board members contend
that the chairperson actually transgressed the statutes which govern the
SABC? They are very unhappy that they were called in to endorse an illegal
appointment. How do you intend to take the process forward? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon member, I think it is common knowledge
now that four board members of the corporation have resigned. You have
heard that those resignations have been accepted by the President, and
Parliament is seized with the responsibility to consider the replacement of
those members.

It is clear from what has happened that there are issues pertaining to the
leadership within the corporation, at the level of the members who
constitute the board that Parliament has appointed, as well as at the level
of the kind of contradictions within pertaining to the executive
management. So, the problem that we are seized with is giving support to
the remaining members of the board and finding a mechanism that works in a
way in which they can address the issues that are causing this instability.

We are currently in discussions with members of the board. I’m about to see
them on Thursday to discuss this and to ascertain what kind of support they
would require to resolve the issues that they are plagued with currently.

So, I would appeal that you give us the time to engage on this matter.
We’ve been on the job for a few days only. We’ve come to understand
precisely what the nature of the problem is. It will not help this House or
the corporation if we went into those details just yet. Thank you.

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Mr Minister, Phil Molofe’s appointment prior to the
board rectifying such appointment created a situation of irregular
expenditure, according to sections of the Public Finance Management Act,
PFMA. In your financial deliberations with the SABC, will this be discussed
and what action will be taken?

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon member, my information tells me that
the board has now formally ratified the appointment of the executive member
that you are concerned about, but the details that you raised will be
provided in the meeting on Thursday, and you will get a response regarding
that from the board.

The SPEAKER: Question 3, which has been asked by the hon P J Groenewald to
the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform, falls away in terms of
Rule 117(2), as a reply was submitted yesterday.

Question 239 has been asked by the hon B Tinto to the Minister of Energy.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Speaker, seeing that the Minister responded yesterday to
my question, is it not possible that I can respond today to his question?
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Well, there seems to be a change. The Minister is not
available. We’ll come back to that question. Let’s move on. Question 237
has been asked by the hon S N Swart to the Minister of Trade and Industry.

      Company registration and zoning and new laws to regulatory impact
                                 assessments

237.  Mr S N Swart (ACDP) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      Whether he intends introducing steps to (a) amend regulations
      regarding company registration and zoning of small businesses and (b)
      subject all new laws to regulatory impact assessments to review their
      effect on small businesses; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      further relevant details?               NO3830E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Speaker, of the issues that were
mentioned in the question, the issue of company registration falls under
the Department of Trade and Industry. Company registration will be
considerably simplified and the regulatory burden accordingly greatly
reduced when the new Companies Act comes into force. The target date that
we have set for this is April next year.

The process of drafting regulations which will give effect to the new
Companies Act of 2008 has been finalised and they will be published during
the course of this month. A rectified Bill to deal with a few errors and
omissions in the original Act is also being presented to Parliament.

The new Act, as I said, will considerably simplify company registration
processes, reduce the cost of registering companies, and this will benefit
small businesses, among others. Furthermore, there is a process to create
an integrated business register to reduce the regulatory burden and
facilitate efficient registration of businesses. The question of zoning
business activity is a matter that falls under the responsibility of
municipalities. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Speaker. Minister, the issue of the cost of
regulatory compliance has been raised in the past. It was again raised in
the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement where it was stated that, “a
successful job creation strategy needs to address constraints that make it
more difficult to open and expand small businesses”.


I thank you, Minister, for your indication that the new Companies Act and
regulations will address this issue. Clearly, small businesses face onerous
regulatory burdens with the cost of regulatory compliance at about 8% of
total turnover compared with less than 1% for large businesses.

Minister, the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement also recommends that all
new laws should be subject to regulatory impact assessment to review their
effect on small businesses. The ACDP agrees with this view and wishes to
know whether the economic cluster will consider this proposal, given the
very important role that small business plays in job creation in the
country. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Speaker, I thank the hon Swart for
recognising that the Companies Act is trying to do exactly what the Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement says, which is to reduce the regulatory burden
on small businesses. We hope that we will end the situation where small
businesses have to fill out forms, memoranda and articles of association,
get a name, and things like that - which won’t be a requirement any longer
to get limited liability - while too often companies are prepared to buy
shelf companies from people who register thousands and thousands of
companies because they think that’s a cheaper and easier way to go. So, we
think that that’s going to be a major reduction.

Obviously, if the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement says what it says,
and you are correct in saying what it says, this is a matter that will
seize the cluster. We are constantly looking to reduce the regulatory
burden and red tape with regard to small business. Thank you very much.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Thank you, Speaker. Minister Davies, the efforts by the
Department of Trade and Industry to reduce the burden and red tape for
small businesses is quite admirable. Of course, in the context of such
efforts, the government has also been earnestly and meaningfully trying to
reduce the cost of doing business. Now, the question is: To what extent and
in what way will the Companies Act impact on the efforts of reducing the
costs of doing business? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Speaker, in addition to the company
registration process that I already mentioned - which will be much easier,
much cheaper, much simpler, with less forms and online facilities, and all
of that - when the new Companies Act comes in, there will be a reduction in
terms of the requirement of small businesses to produce audited financial
statements. At the moment that is something which close corporations don’t
have to do, but other small businesses do. They will be able to produce
financial statements, but not through auditors and expensive processes of
that sort.

There will be an important provision of business rescue in the Companies
Act. This means that when otherwise viable companies find themselves in
trouble, instead of going into judicial management, which is just a step
away from liquidation at the moment, they will be able to go through a
meaningful process in which the possibility of that company surviving can
be entertained and exercised in a way which we think is very significant.
So I think that the Companies Act is a major, major piece of reform. It
will bring our company law well into the 21st century and the realm of best
practice. I think that it will undoubtedly have major benefits for small
businesses. Thank you very much.

Mr T D HARRIS: Deputy Speaker, we welcome the Minister’s commitment to
lessen the regulatory burden, but I have here a leaked copy of the
regulatory impact assessment commissioned by the DTI into the Intellectual
Property Laws Amendment Bill last year. I want to ask the Minister why this
document hasn’t been released to the committee or released publicly,
considering that it has very important things to say about this very
important Bill that our committee is considering? And I want to ask the
Minister when will this report be released to the committee?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Deputy Speaker, I am not aware of the
report that the hon Harris is referring to. If he got hold of a leaked
document, it may well be a document that has no currency with any of us. I
will have to see what document you are referring to. [Interjections.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Thank you for the responses that you have already given this
House, Minister. However, there are aspects around the regulatory impact
assessments, etc, which don’t necessarily relate to the new company
registration, but to a number of pieces of legislation. When do you expect
to complete such a review? I heard you saying it is being considered.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: The regulatory impact work was actually
not done by the DTI, it was done by the Presidency, and I’m not quite sure
what the timeframe is for that. However, as I said earlier, the issue of
regulatory impact and the reduction of pure red tape – I think we must
distinguish between red tape and other kinds of requirements and
regulations which do make some sense – is a policy objective which we have
repeated on a number of occasions.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: Were all the
supplementary questions asked last time? You didn’t give parties the
opportunity for a second follow-up. Were they all asked?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

Mr M J ELLIS: Alright, thank you very much.

               Application of energy mix policy by Government

239.  Mrs B Tinto (ANC) asked the Minister of Energy:


      To what extent has the Government applied the energy mix policy since
      the adoption of the 1998 White Paper on the Energy Policy, especially
      with regard to energy diversification through the utilisation of clean
      energy means?          NO3833E

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, in relation to question 239,
as asked by the hon member B Tinto, the reply is that government has
diversified the energy mix in respect of both supply and demand sides.

With regard to the demand-side option, various energy efficiency
interventions have been introduced, including the introduction of solar
water heating in the residential and industrial sector, cogeneration from
industrial processes in order to substitute the demand that would otherwise
have been supplied by Eskom and introduction of energy efficiency lighting,
which is the compact fluorescent lamps, CFLs.

The demand side is complemented by clean energy options on the supply-side
programmes, including the introduction of renewable energy feed-in tariff
programmes pursuant to the 10 000 gigawatt of wind, solar, biomass, small
hydro and land field gas generation options; the development of the
liquefied petroleum gas pilot programme for space heating and cooking in
the residential sector; and the introduction of the integrated resource
plan with a long-term objective of introducing nuclear energy, imported
hydro and imported gas for power generation.

It is anticipated that the South African energy mix will be diversified
from 97% coal domination to what the Integrated Resource Plan, IRP 2010,
will specify. Thank you.

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, it is quite admirable that
government is making these attempts with regard to diversification,
particularly in view of the attempts by the government to reverse the
devastating effects of climate change. That is one of the areas where an
energy mix helps to move away from fossil-based energy supply.

However, another interesting area is the extent to which such
diversification will benefit the poor and the disadvantaged. I assume,
amongst other things, any effort that is done by government to ensure that
there is adequate energy supply should take into account the plight of the
poor and the disadvantaged. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Deputy Speaker, thank you, hon Sisa Njikelana. Hon
member, you would remember that late last year we introduced the
regulations of Liquefied Petroleum Gas, which make it possible for us to
reduce the price of gas, which is actually one of those energy carriers
that is used predominantly by the rural people and the poorest of the poor
as a clean energy source.

I want to indicate that already the calculations indicate that that
reduction has brought almost R500 million back into the pockets of
consumers. It is important to note that the reduction of gas was intended
to create an uptake.

What we have done also is to make sure that with the metros we could engage
on the waste to energy programme. We look forward to making sure that
within the year we would be able to introduce that particular programme
where we are going to use waste to be able to generate energy. That is one
of the interventions that we are going to use for poverty relief and,
working together with environmental affairs and social development, we
believe that it is also one of the programmes that can ensure that we get
money into the hands of the poorest of the poor.

There are quite a number of interesting programmes within the Working for
Energy Programme that we will be bringing to the portfolio committee in
particular. Thank you very much.

Mr P D DEXTER: Deputy Speaker, over the past few years, government has
floundered in terms of the energy policy mix. It’s never been right. We’ve
had the failed pebble bed reactors, the missing coal stockpiles, now the
declining coal deposits, and the results for consumers have been blackouts,
brownouts and white elephants. Can the Minister state whether, in allowing
for this proposed energy policy mix, a level playing field has been created
for all investors to have an equal opportunity to invest?

Secondly, can she give us any assurance that individuals and businesses
connected to the ruling party will not be the only ones that benefit from
this policy?
The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Deputy Speaker, thank you, hon Dexter, for your
question. The one important thing that we have realised in the process of
developing the Integrated Resource Plan, IRP 1 and IRP 2, is that power
generation and power supply don’t seem to see colour. I don’t know about
the brownouts, blackouts and white elephants you are talking about.

What we are doing with the IRP 2010 is to make sure that we will be able to
allow for maximum input from the various stakeholders. As we speak, we have
been requested by business as well as labour and the other stakeholders
within the National Economic Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, to
extend the period for public comments so as to allow for maximum
participation on this particular plan. For once we want to make sure that
South Africans have a comprehensive consolidated energy plan that can help
those who want to invest – irrespective of the party they belong to – in
the 30% power generation going forward, and that would be able to project
their inputs. However, the most important thing is for us to be able to
afford South Africans an opportunity to benefit from the new growth path in
terms of making sure that the number of jobs that we said we were going to
create, in terms of the stipulations of the new growth path, can be
realised.

One of the key pillars of the IRP would be to ensure that all the energy
carriers or technologies that would be utilised in the next 20 years
emphasise localisation. That is why, with the support of the Deputy
President, we could agree to the extension of the period for public
comments so that even business as well as labour could help us to do the
proper calculations in terms of which energy carrier would afford us decent
and sustainable jobs, which energy carrier would make it possible for us to
emphasise and realise localisation. I just want to assure you that this is
one plan that, including our National Stakeholder Advisory Council on
Electricity, role-players indicated that we wanted to make sure that we can
all agree as South Africa that this is a plan that would help us to
generate jobs.

This is a first attempt, and we want to make sure, like I said, that there
is diversification, and we have also insisted that in the plan we need to
create space for all the energy carriers. South Africans are also very much
alive to the fact that we are being called on to reduce the percentage of
coal in our IRP. We are saying that we are conscious of the fact that we
need to protect the environment for the next generations. We are not going
to be careless and avoid utilising the only reliable source of energy,
coal, or alternatively another big base load being uranium. We are going to
make it possible that we invest in the different scientific interventions
to make sure that the particular energy carrier becomes clean.

That is why we say that we are not going to stop using coal. We are not
going to say no to nuclear energy and we say, as government, that we need a
plan that is going to be technology-neutral. We are looking at making sure
that early in January, when we table the IRP 20, the different role-players
have already made their maximum inputs.

I’m happy that today the Minister of Science and Technology can indicate
that there is a big conference of the scientific academic role-players
where some of them are speaking about the importance of changing the
picture of the world at night, when it is still only the continent of
Africa that is dark.

We are looking at the different atlases. In terms of wind we’ve got the
solar radiation indicators. We also have what is called the carbon capture
and storage, atlas so that whatever project we are looking at should be
designed in such a way that it can capture, transport and store carbon
going forward. As government we are saying that we want to make sure that
we have a consolidated and comprehensive energy plan for South Africa.
Thank you.

Mrs P C DUNCAN: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, we set ourselves a country
target of 10 000 gigawatt hours of renewable energy generation by 2013, but
it is clear that at this stage we have not even reached 10% of that target.
We are also aware that the department has commissioned a review of the
White Paper on Renewable Energy and that certain findings have been
generated as a result of this review. We would like to know why these
findings have not yet been released to the public. This is particularly
important, given that we are currently finalising the Integrated Resource
Plan. These findings should surely be used to inform consultation around
this 20-year energy plan. Therefore, we would like to know from the
Minister when these findings would be released. Would it be before the
integrated resource plan is finalised? If they won’t be, then how does the
Minister intend integrating the review of the renewable energy White Paper
into the country’s 20-year energy plan?

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Deputy Speaker, I want to assure the hon member
that she is correct that by 2010 we have reached about 4%. I just want to
indicate that the 29 September call for Request for Information, by the
Department of Energy and National Energy Regulator of South Africa, was
actually a way of making sure that we accelerate the participation of
Independent Power Producers, in this particular programme so as to be able
to make sure that we reach the target.

By 2013 we should have reached the 10 000 gigawatt hours. You will realise
that it is central to the IRP 1, which is the document that we promulgated
in December, so as to be able to say how far we should be by 2013. It is
still located within 2013.

The ruling party emphasises an energy mix. I want to say that the
Integrated Resource Plan brings everything together that makes it possible
for us to generate power. We say, from waste to nuclear. That is why we are
talking about everything that is usable. To generate power we will be able
to utilise that. That is why I specifically raised earlier on the
indicators that include using waste to generate power.

Together with Environmental Affairs, we are looking at making sure that we
can separate waste from source. In that way, whatever is not reusable or
recyclable can go into power generation because it would be useless
material that can be burnt and combusted in order to generate power.

I want to reassure you that the anchor of our IRP is going to be the
importation of clean energy sources, especially hydro from our neighbours
through the Southern African power pull, but also gas. We believe that we
are going to be able to do that. There are already projects in the region
of the Southern African Development Community, SADC, that would make it
possible for us to achieve the targets that we set for ourselves in the IRP
2010.

I also want to say that Cabinet took a decision to pursue the Wesco
initiatives, which have the potential to generate more than 100 000
megawatt from the hydro schemes in the Great Lakes. Working together with
Lesotho, Botswana, Namibia and South Africa, we were looking at hydro
schemes within or on the Orange River so as to be able to utilise the power
of water to generate power.

We are doing everything in our power to assure South Africans that the
lights will be on and that industries and machineries will continue
running. That is why we say that the IRP is a response to IPP 2 and a
response to the New Growth Path. Thank you very much.

Mr L W GREYLING: Deputy Speaker, I listened very carefully to the recent
announcement by the Minister at the launch of the solar park that we were
going to get 5 000 megawatt of energy from solar power over the next 10
years. Certainly, I welcomed that initiative and also welcomed that
announcement. Unfortunately, there have been many announcements by the
government over the past five years with regard to renewable energy and we
haven’t reached those targets: one million solar water heaters, and the
10 000 gigawatt hours by 2013. As you said, we’ve only reached 4%.

What we’ve also seen is that, in fact, we are not issuing Power Purchase
Agreements to independent power producers with regard to the Renewable
Energy Feed – in Tariff, Refit. Refit isn’t even bringing out stream
renewable energy. What are you going to do to address those particular
problems, including the 5 000 megawatt that you announced from solar
energy? I don’t see it in the present IRP 2. It’s not in there. In fact,
what we allocated to solar heat is only 600 megawatt. Where does the 5 000
megawatt fit in, in terms of this current Integrated Resource Plan? Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Hon member, I think the point that you have just
made is also a very important point that you could make in the public
comment processes for the IRP.

I indicated that business, labour and other stakeholders have requested for
an extension. The extension allows until 15 December for inputs. I would
call on you to do that.

I also want to indicate to you that what we did in Upington the other day
with the Concentrated Solar Power, and Photovoltaics, investor conference
is market-sounding, to hear from the investors who have been saying to us
we can produce this amount of megawatt from solar. If they have an interest
in honouring the requirements, policies and directives of South Africa in
terms of localisation and job creation, we want to grow local manufacturing
with those initiatives.

We are also saying that the IRP is a dynamic document. We all know that the
different utilities, as well as the IPPs submit applications to Nersa every
three years in terms of the Multi-year Price Determination, process for
applications. We want to allow South Africa the space. When technologies
improve, the price goes down. If we lock ourselves into a 5 000 megawatt
plant, it means we will have to be able to acquire whatever is required for
that solar power station at today’s prices. This technology is changing
almost like you change your cellphones. I want to say to you that it is
important for us that we also become responsible and allow you to know that
developed countries have started scaling down in terms of the wind power as
well as the solar power. They are all flocking to the developing countries.
We don’t want to be guinea pigs or dumping grounds for obsolete or
redundant technology. We also want to create space for the entry point of
new technologies.

If we start, as I’ve indicated in the speech I delivered yesterday, we are
committed to the first 1 100 megawatt of solar in the first year, so we
believe that we are going to achieve it with those companies that want to
invest with South Africa or in line with the South African terms.

I just want to say to you with regard to the Power Purchase Agreements,
PPAs, that it’s a purely commercial transaction. We can’t determine for the
utility or the systems and market operator what the price should be. Every
investor, every IPP must negotiate and be able to get a commercial
transaction that would be in line with what the tariff is. If we determine
it at this level, who is going to be the ultimate payer of that tariff? It
would mean that the consumers will have to pay even if we say that the
solar power or wind power or whatever power must be sold at R10 or however
many thousands of rands per kilowatt hour.

We need to allow operators, which would be Eskom and the systems operator,
to determine tariffs because it would be a commercial arrangement and
commercial transaction that they engage in.

I want to say that we are also very wary as South Africa to lock ourselves
into that long-term contract for Concentrated Solar Power whilst we are
busy investing in Research and Development on initiatives with regard to
clean coal and clean technology. What if tomorrow there is a way of using
coal in a better way and we’ve got so much coal reserves here?

I think it is also important that we create those loops for South Africa to
be able to use whatever new technology is presented. In September we
launched the CCS atlas. We will soon be doing a demonstration and we also
believe that very soon, with the support of Australia and Norway, we would
be able to start the injection of carbon into the disused gas fields. I
think it is important that we remember that we are doing it in the best
interests of South Africans. Thank you.

    Effect of settlement of outstanding rural land restitution claims on
                       meeting black ownership targets

261.  Ms L D Mazibuko (DA) asked the Minister of Rural Development and Land
      Reform:

      Whether the settlement of the 3 852 outstanding rural land restitution
      claims will contribute to meeting the 30% target set by his department
      for black ownership of productive agricultural land; if not, why not;
      if so, what are the relevant details?
            NO3865E

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, once
the determination has been made on how many of the outstanding claims are
on agricultural land, the department will be in a position to specify how
much of the land will contribute to the 30% target. Thank you.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, with regard to government’s target
of 30% for productive farmland to be transferred to black owners by 2014,
surely the most important central plan of this policy should be an urgent
and comprehensive audit of state land or land which is owned by the state,
especially given the fact that the department is now engaged in the process
of aggressively acquiring more farmland as part of the Land Reform
Programme, which at this stage is, of course, all but stillborn. What is
the Minister going to do to ensure that this crucial audit process begins
and that it is completed as soon as possible so that at the very least, the
people of this country can finally know just how much land is in the hands
of the government, especially given some of the unsubstantiated and,
frankly, irresponsible remarks which have emerged from the leadership of
the ANC with regard to the issue of foreign land ownership. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Deputy Speaker, firstly,
there is already a joint task team between Public Works and our department
working on this question. Secondly, I think it is not correct for the hon
member to say that statements which are made by the ANC are irresponsible
with regard to foreign land ownership. I think all of us as South Africans
have a duty and responsibility to ensure that we look after the assets that
belong to this nation, whether you are in the opposition or in the
governing party. Thank you. [Applause.]

Nkosi Z M D MANDELA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. We as the ANC undertook to
push back the frontiers of poverty in the Polokwane Resolution by enabling
our people to have access to productive agricultural land. Policies such as
the willing buyer, willing seller have slowed down the achievement of that
target. My question is: What are the department’s plans to address policy
constraints that have negatively affected the achievement of the 30%
target, on the one hand? On the other hand, how will we as government give
effect to the Polokwane Resolution in finding a new approach to land
reform? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, the
Polokwane Resolution is very extensive. However, with regard to the willing
buyer, willing seller model, it is clear. It says that it doesn’t work. It
is not the first one to say this. The Land Summit of 2005 made the same
determination, that the willing buyer, willing seller model doesn’t work.
That is why we have reduced the three-tier system that we are proposing. On
24 March this year we spoke here in the House and proposed this as a
substitute. However this will not be done entirely because we can’t do away
entirely with the willing buyer, willing seller model. We have to find a
mechanism of tempering its effect because its effect is to raise the price
of land. This is because there is one government that has a social
responsibility and there are sellers of land that have a profit
responsibility. So, these two don’t mix. We have to find a way of tempering
this relationship. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker and the Minister. Minister,
arising from your reply, I just want to get absolute clarity on the issue
of land, particularly the restitution claims. We were informed the last
time that there were about 4 000 outstanding claims. I see that on the
Order Paper it is indicated that there are 3 852 outstanding claims. I just
want to get clarity on whether there are 4 000 outstanding claims, and if
it is so, what is the programme that is in place to complete this and at
what cost? What is the estimation, or guesstimate, if you like, in terms of
the budget that we can begin to look at, and when can we get those figures?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon member, there is a
big challenge with regard to the details of the actual number of
outstanding claims. The 4 000 figure is a figure which we found in the
department. We then set up a task team to look at the actual figure across
provinces. We have five teams now that are working through the provinces.
They are led by directors-general to make sure that when we make this
statement in future, we are sure that this is the correct figure because
the figures that come out tend to change – the next time we will have 4 000
and another time we will have something even as high as 7 000. So, we are
not very, very sure.

This relates to the second part of the question, with regard to how much is
really outstanding. In due course, we think over the next two months or so,
we will be able to have a clear determination on both questions because of
the task teams which are working in the various provinces. Thank you, hon
Deputy Speaker.

Mrs A STEYN: Hon Minister, there is something I have been struggling to
understand. You have just mentioned that you don’t have the exact number of
land claims outstanding. If I look at the question that was asked by the
hon Groenewald on the number of projects, land and hectares, this is the
question we have been asking in the portfolio committee since last year.
So, basically you don’t know anything. You don’t know how much land was
transferred; you don’t know how much it cost; and you don’t know much is
outstanding. However, you know one thing. The thing that you do know is
that the willing buyer, willing seller doesn’t work.

So, hon Minister, can you please tell me – you yourself, sir – whether the
departmental staff are inflating prices. Farmers ask for R3 000 per
hectare, but when it comes to your office, the price is R30 000 per
hectare. So, the price was inflated somewhere in between. What method did
you use to establish that the willing buyer, willing seller is not working?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Deputy Speaker, firstly,
I just want to know whether the hon member got the information that she is
giving from us. It is not as if that R35 000 ... [Interjections.] We
actually did the work. Secondly, it is not the department’s officials that
are involved in this. Yes, we said there could be elements that led to
this, for example, fraud.

However, there is also the problem of valuation. This is because here in
South Africa we don’t have a curb on the price of land in terms of
valuations, and that is a problem. If we could get a valuation price that
says R35 000 per hectare and then go to a farmer who says the price is
R4 750 per hectare, that should tell us that there is a problem between the
valuation and the farmer, who would not have gained anything between the
R4 750 and the R35 000. That then means that there is something wrong here.
That is why we are proposing and introducing ... [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please!

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: They should be worried
about this one, hon Deputy Speaker, because they own the land.

That is why we are proposing a land valuer-general for the country to make
sure that we set norms and standards with regard to the price of land. That
is what is going to come before the House. That is because we can’t have a
situation in our country where the vast majority of our people do not own
land. Their own government cannot access land because prices get inflated
by valuers who are not controlled whatsoever. Thank you, hon Deputy
Speaker. [Applause.]

    Progress of training lay-off scheme and jobs saved and created under
                      departmental Framework Agreement

242.  Mr Z C Ntuli (ANC) asked the Minister of Economic Development:

      With reference to the implementation of his department’s Framework
      Agreement, (a) what has been the progress of the training lay-off
      scheme and (b) how many jobs have been (i) saved and (ii) created?
                                   NO3836E

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, the framework for
South Africa’s response to the international economic crisis was concluded
between government, organised business, the labour movement and community
representatives in February 2009.

One of the measures in this framework was provision for a training lay-off
scheme. During the second half of last year, we sat down with our social
partners, concluded a set of rules that should apply to the training lay-
off scheme, identified where we could get money for the scheme and
announced it publicly.

The scheme provides for up to half of the wage of a worker to be paid,
during periods they otherwise would have been retrenched or placed on short
time. Instead, through this fund they can be trained. It was piloted in the
last three months of last year and we officially launched it in January
this year.

No comprehensive analysis has been made of the total jobs impact of the
Framework Agreement as a whole, given that the measures vary from counter
cyclical fiscal policies, support for the infrastructure development
programme, to specified industrial and trade interventions.

Perhaps, I can illustrate the impact of the framework by referring to
specific employment and industrial initiatives. The training lay-off
scheme, for example, was reported to have saved 6 375 jobs up to the end of
September this year. The smallest company covered by the scheme had 10
workers and the largest company had 1 500 workers.

In addition to that, we set up a fund for distressed companies,
administered by the Industrial Development Company, IDC, that saved or
created a further 18 073 jobs. The IDC and the Unemployment Insurance Fund,
UIF, also launched a development bond aimed at job creation and an
additional 19 031 jobs, excluding companies that were on any other scheme,
were saved or created through this.

In addition to this, the CCMA itself strengthened its efforts to save its
jobs through better facilitation and mediation in cases where companies
used section 189 of the Labour Relations Act. The CCMA has reported to us
that between October last year and the end of September this year, 8 350
additional jobs were saved in large-scale retrenchment processes. This
excludes all the other numbers that I have given. It’s not people who are
on training lay-offs or any of the other schemes.

We have also launched an effort to combat illegal imports and customs
fraud, and Sars seized 750 tons of goods by December last year in one
sector alone, which translates to the number of 1 400 jobs saved. The
Expanded Public Works Programme of government that the Minister of Public
Works previously reported on gives an indication of the kinds of measures
that are in place and the impact that it has. Thank you.

Mr Z C NTULI: Deputy Speaker, thank you, Minister, for your comprehensive
response. Minister, with regard to the training lay-off scheme, I want to
know whether there are any disadvantages for those companies who do not
have organised labour, those who do not have unions. What type of training
is being offered regarding this scheme? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, let me answer the
first part of the question. Companies with trade unions have the
opportunity to access the scheme because unions can publicise it to
workers. They can propose it to companies during retrenchment negotiations.
They can ensure that the training programmes are customised to the needs of
workers at a particular workplace and, importantly, they can help to
negotiate the package of social benefits, like medical aid and so on, that
should apply during the training period.

With regard to the training that is offered, it varies greatly because it
is demand-driven. It is largely determined at the workplace level. Some of
these do, however, indicate specialised skills courses on welding;
electrical and refrigerator operations; rigging; charcoal manufacturing;
health and safety, including HIV and Aids management; supervision courses
and courses on entrepreneurship.

This just gives a flavour of the range of activities. Some companies have
introduced Adult Basic Education and Training courses. We are encouraging
companies to use the opportunity now to strengthen information
communications technology skills at the workplace. As the economy and
employment recovers, workers also have a much greater skills set that they
bring to the productive process. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the question of training is
quite broad. If people are not given specific qualifications, it can have a
negative impact. It is like investing in a situation where you do not have
any future gains. Is there any specific qualification that these people are
given after this training, and what duration of training is needed for
people to qualify for that specific qualification?

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, I think I would agree
on the importance of qualifications in instances of training, but it is
important to distinguish what this does. Typically, before we had the
training lay-off scheme. When there is a slack demand in a company, the
option that was often used was simply to lay off workers through
retrenchments. They then permanently lost their jobs.

Through the training lay-off scheme, we have created a facility that a
company can access. Instead of retrenching a worker, they place them on
short-term training. The duration of the training could be up to three
months, full-time equivalent. It does not need to be taken in one period;
it could be spread out. You could have two days’ training a week, stretched
over a period longer than three months, but equivalent to three months full-
time.

The types of training is determined by the discussion between business and
labour at plant level, but the sector education and training authorities,
Setas, at industry level helped to co-ordinate some of the training. So the
facility is certainly available for all skills that workers have obtained
to be certified through the Setas. Thank you.

Dr P J RABIE: Deputy Speaker, in his state of the nation address last year,
the President mentioned the possibility of a wage subsidy for youth, and
this particular topic was also mentioned by the Minister of Finance in his
Budget Speech earlier this year.

South Africa is experiencing job losses, and it is estimated that almost a
million South Africans have lost their jobs. It is also estimated that more
than three million South Africans between the ages of 18 and 35 are
unemployed. Is government considering the imposition of a youth wage
subsidy, in light of our alarming rates of unemployment? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, let me start by
confirming the importance we assign to dealing with the crisis of youth
employment or unemployment. If you look at the data, it is quite revealing.
More than half of our young people are without jobs; more than three
quarters of the unemployed are young people. This is a crisis that we have
to deal with.

In government’s view, it will require a multiplicity of interventions.
We’ll have to do many things and we’ll have to do them smartly to address
the issues of unemployment. We are now busy putting together a
comprehensive response to youth employment, which will include targeted
measures for companies. It will also include measures in the Public Service
through using public works programmes, more aggressively targeted at young
people.

In the Growth Path, we have identified sectors of the economy where, in
fact, young people can and ought to be employed in large numbers.
Government is looking at all those options, putting them together in a
coherent package and will announce them as soon as the work is concluded.
Thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that the implementation of
these schemes have a positive social impact.
With the implementation of these schemes, is there a cost-benefit analysis
being done so that, at the end of the day, we know that if we have spent
R50, it was well spent, but if we had spent R500 you might as well have
given the person R200? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, I think the view we
have taken during the recession we experienced last year is that we need to
bring in new tools to manage job losses. As we gain experience in this, one
of the critical issues would be to do the cost-benefit analysis

The first thing that we are doing now through the work of the IDC is to
measure the cost per job for all the interventions that we undertake. That
figure is monitored constantly to see whether, in fact, through our
interventions, we are increasing the number of jobs per million rand
utilised. I thought I should also indicate that these are not passive
subsidies. In a number of cases, they are a bridging means to get companies
back into viability.

On the website of one company that utilised the public resources, Bell
Equipment, they say the following, and I quote:


  After the very tough 2009, due to the global recession, Bell Equipment
  has announced a profit for the first six months of 2010.


Bell was one of the earliest in the industry to be hit, in view of their
make-to-stock requirement, but now it is one of the first to recover. They
then go on to say, and I quote Gary Bell:


  We appreciate the support received from government and the IDC loans. We
  look forward to further engagement on ways in which we can further
  increase local employment and develop the local supply base. So far this
  year, Bell has been able to re-employ 250 people at the Richards Bay
  plant and this number will increase as demand improves further.


 The point is that these interventions are intended to bring companies back
 to viability, and to the extent that we achieve that and that we keep the
 cost of support for each job as low as possible, they constitute an
 effective and good intervention. Thank you.

  Adequacy of steps taken by cellular phone operators to extend coverage to
                                 rural areas

273.  Mr K M Zondi (IFP) asked the Minister of Communications:


      Whether he has found that the steps taken by cellular phone operators
      to extend coverage of their services to rural areas have proved to be
      adequate; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                   NO3882E

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Deputy Speaker, when the mobile
cellular telecommunications service companies, which are mobile operators
that are commonly known as Vodacom, MTN and Cell C, were licensed by the
regulator, part of the license conditions for all of them was to submit a
roll-out plan and a timetable to cover the South African population,
including rural areas.

Furthermore, it is a requirement that these mobile operators report on the
roll-out plans annually to the regulator so that there could be
measurements with regard to the progress made against the timelines that
these mobile operators committed themselves to in their business plans.

One of the priorities in terms of these roll-out plans is to cover areas
which previously did not have cellular coverage, specifically the rural
areas or the underserviced areas, as we call them.

The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa, Icasa, regulates
and makes an analysis of the roll-out reports that these companies provide,
and any cellphone coverage gaps that are identified for that particular
period under review by the regulator is brought to the attention of these
specific companies by the regulator.

Sometimes, of course, when consumers from these companies have trouble with
this cellular reception they will complain to the regulator through a
special complaints section, and the regulator would then raise these
matters with the relevant cellular companies.

Icasa will then make the respective operators aware of these shortcomings
and request them to expand the networks accordingly, so that those areas,
which are normally in rural areas, can in fact get the kind of cellphone
coverage that they require. Operators are then expected to report on
progress separately on such specific cases, over and above their respective
annual reports.

Mr K M ZONDI: Hon Deputy Speaker, the IFP congratulates the hon Minister on
his appointment to this important portfolio. Arising from of the Minister’s
reply, this morning we had a presentation at the portfolio committee by the
Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa, Usaasa, and we were
startled to learn that they are still struggling to grapple with the
definition of universal service access. There is also confusion as to who
is responsible for the implementation of universal service access to
information and communication technology, ICT, services between them and
Icasa because of the lacuna that exists in the Electronic Communications
Act. Now, will the hon Minister’s department be taking steps to sort out
this confusion, as it impedes delivery in this nature? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Deputy Speaker, the hon Zondi raises an
important issue. It is true that there is a lacuna in the Act, which the
department is currently looking at. The Usaasa is also quite right in that
up until now, there hasn’t been any agreement on the definition of what
standards of service provision should exist from area to area. The notion
of defining what is called an “underserviced area” is still a problem to be
resolved and that is a task that Usaasa has to address because it is part
of its mission, and it has to deal with this matter in conjunction with the
regulator. So, we will be keeping a very close eye on this particular
matter.

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, I just want to
know, do we have checks and balances in place in the country to ensure the
progressive realisation of network coverage so that we can ensure 100%
coverage in the rural areas? If yes, how far have we come to achieve this
objective; and if no, what measures are in place for the development of
such a framework? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon member, that’s precisely one of the
matters that is on our agenda right now. We are about to implement serious
engagements with different sectors within the ICT community, and one of
them is the companies that are responsible for the provision of mobile
cellular coverage.

We have been convening a series of round tables to discuss with them this
particular point and to establish what their plans are to assist the
country to obtain the kind of coverage that we want better than what they
are able to provide just here. So, that’s the first step in developing the
kind of plan to get the outcome that the hon member is talking about.

Mr M SWART: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon Minister, as you all know, it is the
right of all South Africans to have access to information. Does the
Minister feel that 3G and broadband access is efficient; if not, what plans
are being put in place to ensure that rural areas, specifically, have
access to the information network, thus improving economic opportunity and
equality of education? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Deputy Speaker, hon member, I can only
support you on that by saying that it is a desired outcome that we are
working towards to try and get much better 3G coverage for all consumers in
our country. It is central to the department’s strategic plan and this is
the matter that I, as a new Minister, am busy engaging in with the
department to see exactly what is on the table. If there isn’t any, we are
certainly going to get there. Thank you.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Deputy Speaker, Minister, actually, you have a wonderful
opportunity to create a new vision for this Communications portfolio. What
is your vision of government’s role concerning the improvement of access to
communication networks in the rural areas? World surveys have found that in
most cases where there was a lack of access in the further afield
communities, it was as a result of regulations and lack of government
actually putting forward funds for infrastructure roll-out because 47% is a
lack of funding by the government. Does government, or you, see that we
should invest, as South Africa, in the rural communities, to improve access
to cellular and broadband facilities also in those areas? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Deputy Speaker, hon member, it is a
commitment in terms of government’s programme that we have to ensure that
our rural areas, which are underserviced, receive the kind of
infrastructure that we think they should have. So, it is a priority
commitment of this government to ensure that in any way possible we develop
the underdeveloped areas in our country. And certainly the establishment of
an effective communications infrastructure is very much a part of that
particular plan.

The reality is that we have to do this within the context in which we bring
various parties to the table to collaborate with the government. Government
on its own is not going to be able to do this. Therefore, we will have to
engage the private sector, which has the intellectual capital and the
investment resources to come to the party. These series of round tables
that we intend to have over the coming weeks will also have that particular
item on the agenda for discussion with the private sector. We would invite
the top 30 companies in the ICT sector, to discuss with them whether they
are open to such an invitation to come into partnership with the department
in the reconstruction of this particular sector.

We would also like to establish from them precisely what the nature of the
issues are that they would like us to tackle as government to construct
this agenda for engagement. One of the matters is precisely what they can
provide to assist us in meeting the infrastructure backlogs in our country.
Thank you.

     Gains made by agricultural sector in relation to jobs shed in 2010

275.  Mr L S Ngonyama (Cope) asked the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry
      and Fisheries:


      Whether the agricultural sector has made any meaningful gains in
      dealing with the problems of 86 000 jobs shed in the third quarter of
      2010; if not, why not; if so, (a) what has been the net increase in
      jobs since 1 January 2010 and (b) what is her department's outlook in
      this regard for the near future?NO3886E

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Madam Deputy Speaker,
hon Minister, yes, the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sector,
including hunting, has had severe job losses between the first and third
quarters of 2010. We are estimating that over 100 000 jobs have been shed
in the third quarter of 2010. This can be seen in the context of the
continuation of long-term declining trends in employment within primary
economic sectors.

However, the agriculture value chain is one of the priority sectors of the
current programme of government, both in terms of economic growth and
employment creation. With the implementation of agro-processing initiatives
proposed under the Industrial Policy Action Plan, as well as plans to
elevate agriculture as one of the priority sectors under the New Growth
Path, there is potential for the decline in employment trends to be
reversed, over the medium to long term.

In conjunction with this, the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries has made inroads in the marketing of South African products in
the Middle East, Far East and on the African continent. We have,
furthermore, expanded our access to cheaper finance for both smallholder
and commercial farmers. Our development of skills research and development
has seen an additional development of the sector, and we hope that this
will contribute towards job creation in the future. I thank you.

Mrs N M TWALA: Deputy Speaker, has the Minister held any discussions or
workshops with agriculture value-chain organisations, organised
agricultural organisations like the National African Farmers Union, Nafu,
AgriSA, and the Transvaal Agricultural Union, with a view to increasing the
number of job opportunities in the sector? If so, what are the outcomes of
such discussions or workshops?

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Hon Deputy Speaker,
the question is very valid indeed, and we’d like to inform the hon member
that we have signed delivery agreements with the various unions in our
sector, in agriculture, forestry, as well as in fisheries. Our different
commodity groups have also been consulted.

We are particularly working with Grain South Africa to address the
unintended consequences of the surplus maize we have in our country. We
have also consulted and are working with different commodity groups to look
at job losses and the future potential of stemming the tide of job losses
in the industry.

We would like to say that with the National Agricultural Farmers Union we
are developing a package for the development of smallholder as well as
subsistence farmers. Instead of black farmers being part of the informal
industry or informal job creation sector of agriculture, we wish to
graduate them from subsistence farming to smallholder farmers, and then,
eventually, to commercial farmers. Thank you for that very good question,
hon member.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Deputy Speaker, let me come back to the Minister, as
the originator of this question, and say to the Minister that if we talk
empirically, currently, I share the hopes and the wishes that the Minister
is referring to. However, if we look at what we now have in terms of
Statistics SA and of the graph in front of us, the decline of the
contribution by agriculture to the GDP of the country has reached crisis
point, from 11,5% to 4,5%.

Yet, in 2006 the then Minister of Agriculture, Thoko Didiza, said that for
every R100 we invested in the agricultural sector, we would be able to
generate more jobs than in any other sector. However, currently we have a
situation that is reported to us by Statistics SA. I hear the Minister, and
I would like to say that I share the wish and the hope of the Minister, but
we need extraordinary measures to turn around the situation in the
agricultural sector.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Madam Deputy Speaker,
I do not think that what the hon member Ngonyama just said was a question;
it was a statement, which I agree with. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr N D DU TOIT: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, has the department
established whether a link or correlation exists between job losses in
agriculture and provinces where a high number of land claims have been
completed? What combined strategy does the Department of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries and the Department of Land Reform and Rural
Development follow to address these job losses? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Madam Deputy Speaker,
no such investigation or research exists. So I would be purely thumb
sucking if I would respond to the member. And yes, we do have a very good
working relationship with the Department of Rural Development and Land
Reform, and together we are working on addressing the job losses in the
sector. Thank you very much.

 Number, location and status of irrigation schemes in the country and their
        contribution to ensuring food security and empowering people

247.  Mrs M E Pilusa-Mosoane (ANC) asked the Minister of Agriculture,
      Forestry and Fisheries:

      (a) How many irrigation schemes are there in the country, (b) where is
      each scheme located, (c) what is its status and (d) in what way does
      each contribute to ensuring (i) food security and (ii) empowering
      people?                                      NO3841E

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, there are
453 irrigation schemes in the country, totalling 490 787 hectares. There
are 51 irrigation schemes in the Eastern Cape, covering 81 076 hectares.
The Free State province has 12 irrigation schemes; Gauteng has 6; KwaZulu-
Natal has 44; Limpopo has 180; Mpumalanga has 35; the Northern Cape has 26,
covering 131 434 hectares; whilst the North West province has 24 irrigation
schemes, which cover 45 000 hectares. The Western Cape has 75 irrigation
schemes, covering 126 000 hectares.

The irrigation schemes are functional to various levels of operation.
Unfortunately, a large number of the smallholder irrigation schemes are
suffering reduced efficiency or have collapsed. In some instances some of
the commercial irrigation schemes have been underutilised and are in need
of upgrading and re-establishment. The collapsed or reduced efficiency of
these irrigation schemes is due to various reasons, including conflict,
lack of farmer participation, lack of markets, as well as a need for the
upgrading of infrastructure and equipment. Those that are being brought to
increase operation include those that are being addressed by initiatives
undertaken by provinces as well as the department.

In KwaZulu-Natal, an allocation of R30 million has been made to the
Makhathini Irrigation Scheme. This will be used for the replacing of
pipelines and fittings, maintenance of the roads, as well as repairs. The
irrigation-related projects which were identified by the KwaZulu-Natal
provincial Department of Agriculture also related to the R13 million of the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme budget, which was used mainly
to address vegetable production, broilers and the refurbishment of
irrigation.

We also have the Limpopo business plans of R29 million. Mpumalanga has
allocated R2,7 million for the development of irrigation infrastructure, as
well as R4 million for the installation of irrigation infrastructure ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): What is the point of order, Mr
Ellis?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I am led to believe that questions of an oral
nature should not be questions that require enormous numbers of statistics
and details to be given. [Interjections.] If you note, Mr Chairman, this is
an ANC question. However, Mr Chairman, an oral question is something where
you are seeking information, and a written question is one where the
statistics and many details are given. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, the Minister has
already finished.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I do not think she has finished. It looks like
she has quite a few pages to go.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I take note of your point, but the
Minister has already finished.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, you are
correct, I am just about reading my last sentence. All of the former
homeland irrigation schemes had a food plot section, and many of the food
plots suffered the same collapse as the commercial sections of the former
homeland schemes after 1994. They need to be revitalised. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Ministers, I think hon Ellis is
correct. Next time you ought to bear that in mind. Is there a supplementary
question, hon Mosoane?

Mrs M E PILUSA-MOSOANE: Yes, Chairperson, and thank you, hon Minister.
Arising from the Minister’s response, it is clear that we have
approximately 5 700 hectares of listed irrigable land which, if all
utilised, can make a major contribution to food security and the
empowerment of new irrigation farmers, as well as the creation of
employment. What measures does the Minister’s department plan to put in
place to get all schemes functional so that we can lessen our dependency on
imports, and possibly even produce enough wheat, which can bring down the
price of bread for the poor? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, thank you
very much, hon member. The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries has an interministerial committee which works on on-farm and off-
farm infrastructure. This infrastructure includes infrastructure
development programmes, as well as the Expanded Public Works Programme,
which is investing in infrastructure for irrigation schemes. We are
convinced that, as you have correctly said, these irrigation schemes would
lead to better food security, particularly in the rural areas. Thank you.

Mr N D DU TOIT: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, now that we are talking
about irrigation schemes, how is it possible that a former HOD of the
Department of Agriculture in Limpopo can be appointed in a senior position
in the department at national level, while at that time, on the
recommendations of Limpopo’s Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa,
the MEC, Mrs Letsatsi-Duba, launched an investigation into what the Auditor-
General described as irregularities in three tenders worth R45 million
awarded to the company Floppy Irrigations ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, there is a point of
order, please.

Mr C T FROLICK: With all due respect Chairperson, that is a completely new
question with new details that are required. The hon member cannot honestly
expect the Minister to have the details available. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order, please!

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, may I respond to that?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): May I just make a ruling here, hon
Ellis.

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes, thank you, Mr Chairman.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Even if it is an entirely new
question, I am going to ask the Minister whether or not she wants to reply
to it.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: It is a simple answer,
the member ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: The truth of the matter is
that the hon member has not yet finished asking the question. He has not
yet put the question. He is simply making a statement leading up to a
question being asked. I would urge you, sir, to allow him to finish.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Ellis, I think that hon Frolick
heard the member, which is why he objected. However, I did say that I was
going to ask the Minister whether or not she would be prepared to answer
the question. You are saying that the member had not finished.

Mr M J ELLIS: He has not finished, Mr Chairman.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Would you finish your question, hon
member?

Mr N D DU TOIT: Thank you, hon Chair. Three tenders worth R45 million have
been awarded to the company Floppy Irrigations, which allegedly implicate
the involvement of the same HOD. My question was: How is that possible?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: The particular
official referred to has not been appointed in the national Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries; he is simply completing his contract,
which ends at the end of November.

Mr R N CEBEKHULU: With regard to the answer that the Minister has given on
the number of irrigation schemes that there are in the provinces, may I
ask, in relation to the farms that the state bought for emerging farmers -
more especially those that are in KwaZulu-Natal - that are currently not
productive and whose pipes were vandalised, what are the department’s plans
to revive those farms? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: The Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries is working with the Land Bank on a
development strategy for smallholder farmers whose farms are currently in
distress. Thank you.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, arising from your confirmation
in your reply to the hon member that indeed the said official continues to
work in the department, but only because he is finishing a contract, does
it mean that the issue of corruption and the misdemeanours that officials
from time to time get involved in, is not taken seriously by the
department, but rather it just continues to keep them under its employment,
instead of dealing with the particular official?

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, thank you
very much, hon member. The said official was removed from the province so
that the investigation could be completed unhindered. Thank you.

 Penalty clauses in contracts signed by arms deal contractors, and recourse
                      in relation to these contractors

269.  Mr T D Harris (DA) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      Whether the contracts signed with the arms deal contractors who
      committed to offset their deals with investments through the National
      Industrial Participation Programme contained penalty clauses related
      to direct job creation; if not, what recourse does his department have
      over contractors who, according to the NIPP Performance Review 2009,
      failed to produce the 65 000 jobs originally promised; if so, (a) what
      performance guarantees are contained in these contracts, (b) which
      contractors have incurred any penalties and (c) how much do these
      penalties amount to?                         NO3878E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I thank you, Chairperson. The answer is
that there were no penalty clauses written into the contractual agreement
signed between the South African government and arms deal companies
relating to job creation, direct or otherwise.

The penalties are applicable to obligations that were defined in terms of
investments and sales, both locally and for exports. The job creation
targets were estimates based on the expected outcomes, from the fulfilment
of contractual obligations defined in these terms. Moreover, the estimated
jobs include direct and indirect jobs and are cumulative in nature.

There is no contractual recourse available to the department should the
65 000 job target not be realised. The reality, however, is that this
number has been exceeded. To repeat, the 65 000 jobs expected from the
implementation of the National Industrial Participation Programme, NIPP,
obligation, are both direct and indirect and cumulative in nature. The
latest assessment conducted in 2009 on the NIPP reports that 26 442 direct
jobs were created, compared to a target for direct jobs of 19 000, and that
the total number of jobs – direct and indirect and cumulative in nature –
since the NIPP started was 85 000 jobs of which 73 000 were attributable to
the arms deal, compared to the 65 000 target. Thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, thank you. the Minister is correct in pointing
out that the NIPP performance review claims that 26 000 jobs were created
by arms deal offsets, but on 9 March 1999 the Minister of Defence, Joe
Modise, stood before this House and promised the creation of 65 000 jobs
from the arms deal offsets. He did not stand here and promise that the
offsets would create 26 000 jobs, which would then stimulate further
economic activity and which would then encourage additional job creation.

Will the Minister admit, therefore, that the arms deal was sold to the
South African public on the strength of a promise that has not been kept?
If so, what steps will he take against defaulting contractors?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, there were a number of
reports that emerged from the investigation that was conducted some years
ago. One on the trade and industry looked at this matter in some detail,
and the fact of the matter, as I said before, is that the job target totals
were both direct and indirect and were cumulative. So, they included the
jobs in the construction of the plant and the jobs created in the plants
thereafter. That is how they were constructed. The total, then, of all that
together was 65 000 jobs, as I said.

When we used the same methodology again, to see what was achieved, we have
achieved it. And I think that is to say simply that part of the value for
money of the arms deal was that we should achieve the obligations of the
obligors, and I think we have done that. Whether the NIPP programme needs
to be refined and made much more explicit in terms of job targets, I think,
is something to work towards in the future. It certainly would be a focus
for the refinement and the improvement of the National Industrial
Participation Programme. Thank you.

Mrs F HAJAIG: Chairperson, thank you, Minister, for your comprehensive
reply. So our new industrial policy programme seeks different ways to grow
our economic base. Hon Minister, what could be done through the NIPP to
indeed build the required capacity? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, member, thank you very
much for that question. That is exactly the point I was trying to make at
the end of my response to Mr Harris.

What we are doing is part of our comprehensive review of procurement in
making sure that procurement becomes a tool for industrial development and
to review the NIPP. At the moment, what is happening is that you import $10
million and you are supposed to negotiate an offset to the value of about
one third of it.

The problem has been that it is not clear whether it is applicable to
municipal government in the provinces or just the national government. I
think that, in so far as an arms deal is concerned, we have achieved,
broadly speaking, what was required at that particular point. However, we
need to be able to achieve much more from procurement by way of encouraging
local industrial development and the reform of the NIPP as part of
procurement to get much more local industrial development. This is one of
the major objectives of the Industrial Policy Action Plan, and the work on
that has proceeded to a quite advanced stage. Thank you.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, my question is: Does the government have a
standard approach to measure a number of jobs they intend to create, or can
we simply inflate any real job target they have announced by around 3,5% to
come up with this indirect job target, which somehow approximates a number
of jobs created? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I think that the indirect jobs do
reflect the reality that if you create a job through a project it also
spends our purchasing power, which creates other jobs so that that
multiplier has a real effect. However, I do think from now onwards we are
going to be much more explicit instead of, as in the past, defining
obligations simply in terms of investments, exports and things of that sort
so that we get a foreground of what we expect to achieve in terms of job
creation. And I think that direct job creation is where we should really be
focusing our attention. So far, if people would pay attention to the way it
was constructed in the past and did not look at the detail, well, I am
afraid that’s their fault.

Mr P M MATHEBE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, one of the strategic
objectives of this government is to create decent work, and one of the
pillars of the National Industrial Participation Programme is the transfer
of skills and technology from the countries where procurement of more US
dollars has been done. So, in the past 10 years of the NIPP, was there any
significant transfer of skills or technology to this country? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, yes, there was a transfer,
there were investments. I think that one of the issues we want to address
in refining the NIPP was the obligations that were required in virtually
every sector. So, if you were an arms manufacturer, your obligations could
be in virtually any other industry, and that is what happened. And I think
what we want to do is to make the obligations much closer to the area of
expertise of the company which is incurring the obligations and in that
way, by also refining, as I said, to bring the job targets to the fore. We
want to make this NIPP part of our overall attempts to get the industrial
development of procurement programme. Thank you.

      Distribution of agricultural machinery, equipment and other items

248.  Mrs R E Nyalungu (ANC) asked the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry
      and Fisheries:

      Whether her department distributed any (a) tractors, (b) agricultural
      machinery and equipment, (c) seeds, (d) fertiliser and (e) diesel to
      (i) persons or (ii) groups engaged in agricultural activities; if not,
      why not, in each case; if so, in each case, what (aa) were the
      criteria used to determine the beneficiary and (bb) are the further
      relevant details?      NO3842E

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Hon Chairperson, the
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries distributed tractors and
agricultural machinery and equipment to the Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal
provinces to increase the capacity of the various projects and programmes
implemented in these provinces to address the mechanisation needs of
household food security and household food produces for subsistence
farming.

The department has not distributed seeds, fertilisers and diesel because
this is covered and budgeted for through the various support programmes
implemented by provinces. So, items like seeds, fertilisers and diesel have
been provided for by the provincial departments of agriculture.

The equipment will be deployed to target areas identified by the President
where medium to high-potential agricultural land is available and where
available land allocated to households is not cultivated. The tractors and
implements will be available to groups on common land and to individuals
with small land areas.

Operation and maintenance costs will be budgeted for through provincial
budgets, as well as through the national budget. The equipment targets
those that are not able to afford mechanisation equipment and do not have
the ability to pay for contractors to cultivate their land. Due to the
small size of plots, the mechanisation cost is considerably higher than at
commercial farms. The other seven provinces will receive equipment during
the following financial year.

The criteria used to allocate equipment are determined by various
programmes in each province. The aim of all these programmes is to develop
rural communities and to improve household food security locally. I thank
you.

Mrs R E NYALUNGU: Chairperson, arising from the reply of the hon Minister,
is there any liaison with provincial departments regarding the distribution
of seeds, diesel and fertiliser? Without the two tiers of the department
working together, tilling land will not be meaningful if these ingredients
have not been supplied. When exactly, Minister, does the department hope to
make equipment available in the other seven provinces?

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, hon
member Nyalunga, yes, we are working with provincial departments to supply
seeds, fertiliser, as well as diesel. We are also working with the
Department of Higher Education, as well as the sector education and
training authorities, Setas, in particular, to look at the licensing of
farmers so that they have the necessary licenses to operate tractors.

The development of programmes in the remaining seven provinces will happen,
as we are consistently evaluating what is happening in the first two
provinces that we have supplied with these things. Before we do a roll-out
or unfold this programme to the rest of the country, we have to correct the
mistakes we made in the first two provinces. All of the mistakes we made
were on the co-ordination of the supply of equipment versus that of the
seeds and fertiliser, as you have correctly stated. I thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, thank you, Minister, we just hope that these were
not expensive mistakes that were made, when the seeds and things were
distributed. I am aware that about R15 million was spent in KwaZulu-Natal
in the acquisition of seeds and fertiliser. In most of the areas, these
were given to beneficiaries who are not agriculturally productive areas.
So, this was really a waste of money, largely a waste of taxpayers’ money.

What I would like to know, hon Minister, is the following: Can you, at some
stage, provide us with information on where in KwaZulu-Natal these tractors
were distributed and whether there is a contractual arrangement between the
recipients and government? Are the recipients individuals or co-operatives?
What kind of maintenance plan is there to ensure that this equipment can be
handed down over generations? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson, I do
appreciate that the hon member does not expect me to give that information
immediately and that the question will be for a written response. I thank
you.

Mr J R B LORIMER: Chairperson, hon Minister, does the department have an
idea as to how many of the tractors delivered are replacements for previous
issues and what the total cost was? Could you elaborate on the measures
that are in place to monitor these sufficiently trained operators and to
ensure that the process is sustainable? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Thank you very much,
hon Chairperson. I do appreciate the questions, but these are statistics
which I do not have at hand. I shall provide them in written form. Thank
you.

         Guided tourism planning in local government and rural areas

252.  Mrs J M Maluleke (ANC) asked the Minister of Tourism:

      Whether his department has guided tourism planning in the local
      government and rural areas (details furnished); if not, why not; if
      so, (a) which municipalities have been reached and (b) what are the
      further relevant details?                    NO3852E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, yes, the department has
developed a toolkit for tourism planning in the local government. Workshops
were held in all provinces, where district municipalities were invited and
participated. It must be pointed out that the document received
overwhelming support from various municipalities.

The interactive workshops focused on the following toolkit themes: the
importance of prioritising tourism in the local government sphere;
clarifying municipalities’ role in tourism at the local government level;
success factors; how to do strategic planning; and, by extension, where to
start when planning for tourism.

Based on the lessons learned during our interactions, the department
intends to focus on provinces and municipalities that are predominantly
rural in nature. These future inductions will include dissecting the
toolkit and practically highlighting possible first steps in planning for
tourism. Interestingly, the department has been invited by the Eastern Cape
municipalities in late November this year to kick-start this process. Thank
you.

Mrs J M MALULEKE: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, Deputy Minister,
for your informative response. As you said in your response, you have
interacted with provinces and district municipalities. Do you have plans to
interact with local travel authorities, as they are the custodians of the
land in rural areas? Thanks.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Thank you, Chairperson. As the hon member
would recall, traditional leaders form part of municipalities. So, they
participated in the process of consultation. They did this, of course, with
the understanding of their role in rural development. This consideration
will be prioritised in the upcoming interactions.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, with all due respect, Minister, if that was a
comprehensive response, I am not sure I would like to hear an evasive one.
You are making reference to toolkits, dissecting the toolkits and
workshops, yet there is very low support for rural tourism and local
development.

In the capital city of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg, there is a pitiful
amount of R800 000 to promote the city, difficult as it is. We know that
you have cut up to R165 million from SA Tourism over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework period, and that constitutes 60% of the budget. In
fact, your department is critically underfunded. It cannot compete with our
long-haul competitors, and we are losing ground.

Is it not true, Deputy Minister, that you actually cannot do enough to
support local government and rural tourism because so much money is spent
propping up state-owned enterprises and parastatals? We are going to take a
very long time before we can actually do what we should do: support tourism
in these areas and start alleviating poverty where it is needed most.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Mr
Krumbock has been asking this question in various ways throughout the time
I have been in this Parliament. However, it is important to say that this
is a process in which we seek to assist the local government in their
planning. The process so far has reached a situation where we have
interacted with all the relevant stakeholders.

Moving forward, the plan that assists municipalities is under way. In
subsequent questions, perhaps as part of the questions that have been
asked, we will be highlighting exactly what our programme and strategy is,
as the department, in enhancing domestic tourism. This would then focus on
rural areas or rural municipalities in assisting them, as the department –
aside from what SA Tourism is doing, which is also tackling issues of
domestic tourism. Thank you.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, it is a well-known fact
that most municipalities lack critical skills and capacity. My question,
therefore, is whether municipalities will manage with the new functions
bestowed on them by the department. And again, what role will the
department play to close the gap with regard to the capability levels
between national, provincial and local government? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, may I start by saying that
these are not new functions that are being given to municipalities, but
part of the functions of municipalities. What the national department is
doing is to work with municipalities and assist them in the capacities that
are not necessarily available to plan and develop programmes around
tourism. Our department is also setting up a unit within itself that is
going to focus on assisting municipalities around this matter. Thank you.

            Ability of Sentech to meet its financial obligations

259.  Mrs N W A Michael (DA) asked the Minister of Communications:


      (1)   Whether any measures have been put in place to ensure that
           Sentech is able to meet its financial obligations; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether any application has been made to the National Treasury
           for bail-out funding for Sentech; if not, what is the position
           in this regard; if so, what is the anticipated amount for which
           Sentech will apply;


      (3)   whether any application has been made to the National Treasury
           for a government loan for Sentech; if not, what is the position
           in this regard; if so, what is the anticipated amount for which
           Sentech will apply? NO3863E

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, I want to respond to hon
Michael’s question. The first part is whether there were any measures: The
answer is yes. Measures have been put in place to ensure that Sensor
technology, Sentech, is able to meet its financial obligations. Sentech’s
business plan for 2010-11 was revised by its new board of directors during
the first quarter of the current financial year. The business plan was
approved by the Department of Communications in June 2010 and was presented
to Parliament in October 2010.

This plan recognises that unless specific cash management measures were
introduced the company would not be in a position to meet its operational
financial obligations by November 2010. The business plan was founded on
the urgent need to restore the sustainability of the company, in order to
avoid any reliance on the shareholder to provide additional funding for the
company’s operational expenditure.

In order to restore the sustainability of the company and to avoid any
reliance on the shareholder to provide funding for the company, a number of
stabilisation activities were implemented by both the executive management
and the board itself.

These activities particularly focused on achieving financial cash flow
stability through increasing the collections against the billings and
minimising actual expenditure and additional commitments for spending. In
support of this, the company also undertook additional internal mechanisms,
including improvements in internal controls and reviewed its business
processes and policies.

As a result of the execution of these measures, we now can report that the
company’s cash flow has improved significantly over the last two quarters.
It is clear from the figures available from the company. The company has
been able to turn around its cash flow position significantly and as a
result, it is now able to meet its operational financial obligations and it
is projected to continue to do so for the remainder of the financial year.

Ms N W A MICHAEL: Chairperson, hon Minister, following the receipt of
Sentech’s financial statements and its revelation of its continued
financial ill health, can you tell us if financial experts have been called
in to assist Sentech in their attempted financial turnaround? If so, who
are they? If not, will such experts be called in to assist Sentech in the
future?

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, I do not have the information
whether the experts that have been called in are available at this stage,
but I am reliably informed that the measures that were executed were
measures undertaken by the board.

May I also add the part which I omitted in the earlier part of the
question? There were two parts to the question. That was whether there was
any application made to National Treasury for bail-out funding. The answer
to that is no. The last part of the question was whether Sentech made any
applications to the National Treasury for a government loan, and the answer
is no.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Chairperson, Minister, the former Minister and director-
general visited Brazil and announced an about-turn on the European or
Digital Video Broadcasting-Terrestrial, DVB-T, standards for digital
migration. This about-turn of standards will, without doubt, also place
additional strain on Sentech’s financial viability. How should the
institution protect their more than R300 million investment in Digital Data
Transmitter, DDT, networks for European standards and how will they fund
the prolonged dual elimination period that the standards issue has caused?
How should the emerging manufacturers overcome this about-turn? Can the
Minister please help us and advise us as to how he would handle this
matter? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, hon Kilian has sneaked in a
question on the standards issue which is also on the Order Paper in
question 260. Let me just say that the matter of standards is open at the
moment. It is still under discussion. We are certainly awaiting a report
the from Southern African Development Community, SADC, which is meeting at
the end of November, I am told. The SADC community has instituted a special
task force to interrogate what might be the best and appropriate standards
for the region.

All the Ministers in the SADC countries are awaiting the outcome of that
particular report, which should be towards the end of November. That would
give us an indication of what the region should do. Until then, we are
continuing to assess and review what the position is, but I think we are
all guided by the portfolio committees in Parliament that have instructed
us to be very careful and assess the implications of the review. Should the
review recommend alternative standards to the current policy, we will have
to weigh these very carefully and come back and look at how we deal with
them.

Right now, we have a policy, we have a review in place and we are awaiting
the view of the region on all of this. Clearly, there are several lobbies
in the market place as to what we should do. The emerging manufacturers are
one such lobby, and they would have a preference for a particular standard.
There are others that are saying, developmentally, we are counselled to
have different kinds of standards, but at the end of the day, it is what is
in the best national interest of this country that will determine how we
move. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, the time allocated for
questions has expired. Outstanding replies received will be printed in the
Hansard.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The House adjourned at 16:48.
                                 __________

                     ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Correctional Services


          a) Correctional Matters Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33683 of 25 October 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Correctional Services of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Tax Administration Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance.


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance and the Select
        Committee on Finance.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

   (1)      The following changes have been made to the membership of
        Committees:

        National Assembly Rules Committee


        Discharged: De Lille, P
        Appointed: Greyling, L W

   (2)      The following changes to Committee membership have been made by
        COPE:


        Ad Hoc Committee on the Protection of Information Bill


        Discharged:    Shilowa, Mr MS
        Appointed:          Ngonyama, Mr LS
                       Dexter, Mr P (Alternate)

   2. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Tourism:

        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam
             on co-operation in the field of tourism, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
             Africa, 1996.
        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Socialist
             Republic of Vietnam on co-operation in the field of tourism.

     2) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts
        and Culture for consideration and report. The report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 12 - Department of
             Arts and Culture for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

     3) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance:

        (a) Amendments to Money-Laundering and Terrorist-Financing Control
             Regulations, 2002, in terms of section 77 of the Financial
             Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


        (b) Amendments to Schedule 1 (List of Accountable Institutions) of
             the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
             2001).


        (c) Amendments to Schedule 2 (List of Supervisory Bodies) of the
             Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


        (d)      Government Notice No R999, published in Government Gazette
             No 33717, dated 1 November 2010: Amendment of the Exchange
             Control Regulations made in terms of section 9 of the Currency
             and Exchanges Act, 1933 (Act No 9 of 1933).

  4) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Police:

        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Cyprus on Police
             Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

     5) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr F
             R Rambau, a regional magistrate at Polokwane, in terms of
             section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (b)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr L
             Skrenya, a magistrate at Cala, in terms of section 13(3)(b) of
             the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

        (c)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr M
             K Chauke, an additional magistrate at Pretoria, in terms of
             section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (d)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr W
             J M Prinsloo, a magistrate at Ermelo, in terms of section
             13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

        (e)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr I
             W O M Morake, a magistrate at Lichtenburg, in terms of section
             13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

        (f)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Ms A
             Maharaj, an additional magistrate at George, in terms of
             section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (g)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr N
             M Jassiem, an additional magistrate at Mitchells Plain, in
             terms of section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
     a) Report of the Auditor-General of South Africa to Parliament on an
        investigation at the Commission for Gender Equality – October 2010
        [RP268-2010]

        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
        to the Ad Hoc Committee on the Commission for Gender Equality
        Forensic Investigation for consideration and report in terms of
        their respective mandates.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Report No 28 of 2010-11 of the Public Protector on an investigation
        into an allegation of improper conduct by the Department of Public
        Service and Administration and Government Employees Pension Fund
        during the privatisation of the Venda Pension Fund.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report and to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on International Relations and
    Cooperation, on the Ratification of the African Charter on Democracy,
    Elections and Governance, dated 10 November 2010

    The Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation,
    having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
    Ratification of the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
    Governance, referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of
    section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Charter.

    Request to be considered.

 2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and  Land  Reform
    on the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B14B – 2010] (National  Assembly
    – sec 75), dated 10 November 2010:

    The Portfolio Committee on Rural  Development  and  Land  Reform  having
    considered the subject of the Sectional Titles Amendment  Bill  [B14B  –
    2010](  (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and  classified  by
    the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a section 75 Bill, reports that  it
    has agreed to the Bill[B14 - 2010] with amendments.

 3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform
    on the Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B13B– 2010] (National Assembly –
    sec 75), dated 10 November 2010:

    The Portfolio Committee on Rural  Development  and  Land  Reform  having
    considered the subject of the Deeds Registries Amendment  Bill  [B13B  –
    2010](  (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and  classified  by
    the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a section 75 Bill, reports that  it
    has agreed to the Bill [B13 - 2010] with amendments.

 4. Report of the Committee on Private Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and
    Special Petitions on the legislative proposal to  amend  the  Choice  on
    Termination of Pregnancy Act,  No  91  of  1996  (Honourable  C  Dudley,
    African Christian Democratic Party), dated 20 October 2010:

    The Committee on Private  Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and  Special
    Petitions, having considered  the  legislative  proposal  to  amend  the
    Choice on Termination of Pregnancy  Act,  No  91  of  1996,  and  having
    listened to the presentation by Honourable C Dudley and  consulted  with
    the  Portfolio  Committee  on   Women,   Children   and   Persons   with
    Disabilities, the South African Human Rights Commission, the  Commission
    on  Gender  Equality  and  the  Department  of  Health  recommends  that
    permission not be granted to the member to  proceed  with  the  proposed
    legislation.




    The committee wishes to make the following observations with regards  to
its recommendation:

       1. The legislative proposal was stated to be aimed at ensuring  that
          women are able to make fully  informed  decisions  regarding  the
          choice to terminate a pregnancy. The emphasis was placed on state
          support for women to realise this legislative  aim.  The  sponsor
          submitted  that  the  legislative  proposal  was  aimed  at   the
          amendment of the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act,  “so  as
          to ensure a woman or child is  able  to  make  a  fully  informed
          choice regarding the termination of pregnancy”.

       2. The proposed amendments can be appropriately dealt  with  in  the
          guidelines  and  directives   for   health   care   practitioners
          responsible for performing the terminations  of  pregnancies.  An
          amendment of the Choice on Termination on Pregnancy Act cannot be
          justified, as  the  proposal  addressed  mere  procedural  issues
          already broadly provided for in the Regulations to the Choice  on
          Termination on Pregnancy Act, as published GN R168 in GG17746  of
          31 January 1997.

       3. A woman’s right to choice must be  the  primary  concern  in  any
          legislative  amendment.  This  consideration  is  not  adequately
          reflected in the legislative proposal, specifically as it relates
          to the  proposed  viewing  of  electronic  images,  diagrams  and
          photographs of the foetus. This is also  reflected  in  the  fact
          that the term “unborn child” is used in the legislative  proposal
          and this is inconsistent with the use of the term “foetus” in the
          principal Act.  Although  counselling  has  positive  informative
          value, it remains the discretion of the  individual  whether  she
          wishes to see visual images of the foetus.

      4. The implementation of the proposed amendments would hamper  access
         to the proper facilities (in rural areas  primarily).  Ultimately,
         this would compromise the proper exercise of a  woman’s  right  to
         choice, as reflected in section 12(2)(a) of  the  Constitution  of
         the Republic of South Africa, 1996 that  states  that  “[e]veryone
         has  the  right  to  bodily  and  psychological  integrity,  which
         includes the right to make decisions concerning reproduction”.

      5. The proposed amendment of the Choice on Termination  on  Pregnancy
         Act would be costly,  due  to  the  related  financial  and  human
         resource implications. The proposed amendments would also  have  a
         great financial impact on facilities that are primarily  dependent
         on donor funds.



In light of the above, the committee is of the  view  that  the  legislative
proposal of Honourable C Dudley is not feasible and should not be  proceeded
with.



Report to be considered.




