---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 21 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-21
---

FRIDAY, 21 MAY 2010
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 09:35.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

  HECTOR PIETERSON PHOTOGRAPHER, SAM NZIMA, INVITED TO INTERNATIONAL PHOTO
                                 EXHIBITION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S S MAZOSIWE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes that Sam Nzima, the photographer who took the picture of the
         mortally wounded Hector Pieterson on 16 June 1976 during the Soweto
         uprising, has been invited as a VIP to an international photo
         exhibition;
      2) further notes that Nzima will be accompanied by other South African
         journalists who played a role during the riots in 1976 when the
         youth fought vigorously against the apartheid government’s
         violation of the rights of black South Africans, to be part of an
         exhibition that will also look at apartheid and where Denis
         Goldberg will launch his autobiography “The Mission” at the South
         African embassy in Berlin; and

      3) takes this opportunity to congratulate Nzima and the other South
         African journalists for being recognised for uncovering the
         atrocities of the apartheid regime, particularly when it attacked
         harmless children in 1976.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There were hands here. No, no, I am not
calling you. I just said that there were hands here. [Laughter.] I am just
checking where the hands are.

 TERMINATION OF ROAD RECONSTRUCTION IN CAMDEBOO AND IKWEZI MUNICIPALITIES IN
                              THE EASTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes that the department of transport in the Eastern Cape has
         terminated all road reconstruction and tarring operations in the
         Camdeboo and Ikwezi municipalities;


      2) further notes that –

          a) the following main arteries for economic development are
             affected, namely the R75 (Graaff-Reinet to Port Elizabeth),
             R337 (Jansenville-Klipplaat) and R338 (Aberdeen to Jansenville-
             Klipplaat Road);


          b) these roads would have been reconstructed and tarred with EPWP
             funding;


          c) the Aberdeen-Klipplaat Road will cut 37 km from the
             northwestern entrance to Port Elizabeth, wool and mohair trade
             port);

          d) this abrupt abandonment of these municipalities brings further
             unemployment into the area, limiting economic growth in the
             area; and

   (3)      calls on the Minister to investigate the sudden discontinuation
         of these projects as the above projects should be on a capital
         expenditure programme, which cannot just be disregarded.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 ANC ON DRIVE TO RECRUIT ONE MILLION MEMBERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes, from newspaper and radio statements, that the ANC is on a
        drive to recruit one million members;

  (2) further notes in view of the low membership of the ANC, the DA
        suggests that the ANC signs up new members in the towns where the
        people are demonstrating and rioting over poor service delivery,
        such as in Koffiefontein in the Free State province on 20 May 2010
        and that their councillors and legislature members rather purchase
        armoured vehicles to visit their constituencies instead of the
        luxury vehicles purchased at a cost of R11 million.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] Order! In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will become a notice of motion
and will be printed in the next Order Paper.

   LAUNCH AND ISSUE OF PARK-AND-RIDE AND PARK-AND-WALK TICKETS IN CITY OF
                     JOHANNESBURG FOR WORLD CUP MATCHES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B P MABE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes that yesterday, 20 May 2010, the City of Johannesburg
         launched and issued for the first time, park-and-ride and park-and-
         walk tickets for fans attending World Cup matches in Johannesburg;


      2) further notes that Metrorail will provide 10 trains dedicated to
         transport for matches across Johannesburg and 8 in Pretoria and
         that there will be 200 minibus-taxis operating from O R Tambo
         International Airport, Westgate and Pretoria stations; and

      3) takes this opportunity to congratulate the City of Johannesburg for
         its readiness to transport spectators to matches across the city
         and say to the people of South Africa and the global community,
         “Feel it, it is here. We are ready!”

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     PARENT TERRORISING PUPILS AND TEACHERS AT NOORDGESIG PRIMARY SCHOOL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes with utter discomfort reports of a gun-wielding parent who is
         terrorising pupils and teachers at Noordgesig Primary School in
         Soweto;


      2) further notes that school teachers and learners are traumatised to
         such an extent that some learners are refusing to attend school and
         teachers fear for their lives;


      3) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
         these lunatic and reckless acts as a blatant violation of the
         educational rights of the children; and

      4) calls on the MEC for police and the MEC for education in the
         Gauteng province to ensure the safety of the school and that the
         perpetrator of these cowardly acts is brought to book immediately.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

         RETIREMENT CONTRIBUTIONS NOT BEING PAID INTO HOLDING FUNDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Chair, I move without notice on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council —

      1) notes with grave concern that there are employers in South Africa
         who are deducting retirement contributions from their employees’
         pay packages but who are not paying the money into the appropriate
         holding funds;


      2) further notes that in the past the non payment of contributions was
         a criminal offence but that with the establishment of a financial
         services enforcement committee this had fallen away; and

      3) therefore calls on the Financial Services Board to name and shame
         such employers and request the regulator to begin to impose a
         severe penalty on errant employers through its enforcement
         committee.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     CORRUPTION IN GOVERNMENT AND LOOTING OF STATE COFFERS BY ANC CADRES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

  (1) notes that corruption in government has become so endemic that
        veteran journalist Allister Sparks was moved to remark that
        corruption is now in the bones of the ANC;

   (2)      notes further with despair the regularity with which ANC cadres
        are mindlessly and wantonly looting state coffers;

   (3)      also notes, as further proof of this systematic looting, the
        irregular and repeated awarding of a tender for catering to
        Nonkululeko Mhlongo without the KwaZulu-Natal government complying
        with the 21-day period for review or without gazetting the
        decision, as required by Treasury regulations; and

   (4)      calls on the government to clean up its act at once if it does
        not want to utterly betray the golden legacy of liberation and,
        through that failure, shame the nation.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] Order! In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will become a notice of motion
and will be printed on the next Order Paper.

  BAFANA BAFANA TO PLAY ANOTHER PREPARATORY MATCH BEFORE WORLD CUP KICK-OFF

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

     1) notes that Bafana Bafana will play another preparatory match
        against Bulgaria before the 2010 Fifa World Cup on 11 June 2010;


     2) encourages Bafana Bafana players to take this match as if they were
        playing for the World Cup trophy;


     3) recognises that the organisers struggled to get the buy-in of other
        overseas teams to be available for one more match before the kick-
        off of the first match in the World Cup; and

     4) wishes the team good luck and success in this match and that the
        spirit of the players and all their supporters could rise to the
        occasion. Go Bafana, go! Feel it, it is here!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     MODIKA SECONDARY SCHOOL BROKEN INTO FOUR TIMES IN PAST THREE YEARS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council —

      1) notes that thugs have broken into Modika Secondary School at least
         four times in the past three years and stolen groceries from the
         school’s nutrition programme, leaving 299 pupils without proper
         nutrition;


      2) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
         these selfish acts of people who have no regard for the law; and

      3) calls on the MEC for safety and the MEC for education in the
         Limpopo province to intervene to ensure that the school is
         protected and that the perpetrators of these crimes are brought to
         book and feel the full might of the law.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Nyambi and hon Mashile, you have one minute
each to move your motions.

      POLICE RECOVER STOLEN ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES NEAR SWAZILAND BORDER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A J NYAMBI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council —
      1) notes that after a tip-off by the community of Nkomazi Municipality
         in Mpumalanga, police recovered stolen electrical appliances in
         Mgobodzi near the border of Swaziland; and


      2) takes this opportunity to congratulate the people of Mgobodzi for
         their commitment to work with the police to fight crime in the
         area.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 LONG WAIT FOR OLDER MALES TO ACCESS STATE SOCIAL SECURITY GRANTS CUT SHORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B L MASHILE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes that the long wait for older males to access state social
         security grants was cut short yesterday when the SA Social Security
         Agency, Sassa, in Limpopo issued the first payments to male
         beneficiaries;


      2) further notes that in the past older men had to wait until they
         turned 65; and

      3) acknowledges that this important initiative and breakthrough is
         part of the ANC-led government’s commitment to look after the
         wellbeing of its senior citizens.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   RATIFICATION OF DECISION OF RULES COMMITTEE TO RECONFIGURE FUNCTIONS OF
                             HOUSE CHAIRPERSONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council ratifies the decision of the Rules Committee to
   reconfigure the functions of the two House Chairpersons as follows

      1) House Chairperson: Committees and Oversight; and


      2) House Chairperson: Intergovernmental Relations, Co-operative
         Governance and Members’ Support.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, that concludes the time for
motions. You should remember that only 20 minutes are given to motions. I
normally allow people extra time, but you should know that we allocate 20
minutes to do the motions. So the shorter your motions are, the better.

  DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A NOTICE OF A MOTION AND A MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE, AND
                    CLARITY ABOUT MR GROENEWALD’S MOTION

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Before the Secretary reads the first Order of
the Day, I would like to make a ruling. I don’t see Mr Watson and I don’t
see Mr Groenewald. The ruling is about Mr Groenewald’s motion and the
clarity asked for by Mr Watson. Do you want me to put it on hold or can I
give the ruling? Will you convey the message? Yes. Okay.

Hon members, I would like to make a ruling on a point of order raised by
the hon Watson on a notice of motion moved by the hon H B Groenewald on
Wednesday, 19 May 2010. The hon Watson sent me a note enquiring about the
impact of the notice, since, according to him, the notice gave figures and
facts but ended by calling on the House for an immediate investigation. I
indicated that I would make a ruling on the matter at a later stage.

Hon members, I would like to bring to the attention of the House that there
is a difference – I’m saying this very slowly now - between a notice of
motion and a motion without notice. There is a difference between the two.
A notice of motion is intended to inform the House that on the next sitting
day of the House, a member intends to move the motion. It does not require
any decision by the House. A motion without notice, on the other hand, once
agreed to by the House, becomes a decision of the House.

This means that any action that is required to be taken would be
communicated to the relevant authorities, and a report-back to the House
would be expected. I am explaining this to conscientise and to make members
aware that if they would like the House to take any steps on any motion,
they should move it as a motion without notice in order to afford the House
the opportunity to adopt it first.

Therefore, I rule that the notice of motion by Mr Groenewald does not
require the House to take any action. Furthermore, as I stopped Mr
Groenewald before he could finish reading his motion, the motion should be
printed in full on the next Order Paper. That is my ruling. Thank you very
much. [Applause.] I hope that will be communicated to Mr Groenewald. You
have a copy of the ruling if you want it.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 31 - Mineral Resources:

The MINISTER OF MINERAL RESOURCES: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP Mr Mahlangu,
hon chairperson of the select committee Mr Freddie Adams, hon members and
select committee members of the NCOP, officials of the Department of
Mineral Resources, ladies and gentlemen, it gives me pleasure to introduce
in the National Council of Provinces the debate on the Budget Vote of the
Department of Mineral Resources for the 2010-11 financial year.

On 10 May 2009, President Jacob Zuma announced the reorganisation of his
Cabinet and government departments. Amongst other things, the Department of
Minerals and Energy was split into two, namely the
Department of Mineral Resources, DMR, and the Department of Energy,
respectively.

Although the split was announced in May, it could only take effect
administratively from 1 April 2010, since the two departments shared one
budget. During the transitional period, the DMR entered into a shared
support services agreement with the Department of Energy in terms of which
the DMR provided support services to the Department of Energy until the end
of March this year.

I am happy to report that the transitional arrangements have now come to en
end. We have now restructured in line with our new mandate, but owing to
limited financial resources the Department of Mineral Resources will be
implementing the approved organisational structure in phases. We intend to
address our human resource challenges through a review of our integrated
human resource plan.

The process of splitting the Department of Minerals and Energy’s budget was
successfully finalised in January 2010. This process culminated in the
final allocation of R1,3 billion for the Department of Mineral Resources.

In response to shrinking financial resources, the department introduced a
number of cost-containment measures and stringent controls to achieve more
with less. These included scaling down the number of delegates on overseas
trips, suspending international conferences and seminars, hosting meetings
in close proximity to the department or in free venues, using Public
Service circulars or free advertising for positions below director level,
and so on. We will continue on this path.

My department remains committed to sound financial management and
discipline. We will continue the legacy of obtaining an unqualified audit
opinion as we did in the past five years under the erstwhile Department of
Minerals and Energy.

During 2009-10, my department managed to channel 45% of procurement towards
historically disadvantaged South Africans. We also conducted supplier
information sessions in all nine provinces. In future, we will be
developing a supplier development strategy in consultation with the
Department of Trade and Industry.

The mining industry continues to form the backbone of the South African
economy, accounting for more than half of all exports. The challenge,
however, is that most minerals are exported as ores rather than high-value
intermediate or finished products. In order to assist the country to
leverage long-term benefits from its substantial mineral endowment, we have
developed a mineral beneficiation strategy, which seeks to facilitate
further economic diversification, expedite progress towards a knowledge-
based economy and create decent and sustainable jobs. We are now finalising
our consultations on the strategy, which will soon be submitted to Cabinet
for approval.

Prior to 1991, mining houses in this country were not legally required to
rehabilitate the environment after mining had taken place. This has
resulted in a legacy of unrehabilitated, derelict and ownerless mines,
which now pose significant health and safety risks to nearby communities
and constitute a cumulative environmental impact on the surrounding
environment.

My department has prioritised the rehabilitation of derelict and ownerless
mines in Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Gauteng, the North West and the Northern
Cape. In prioritising our rehabilitation, we have been guided by the
proximity of derelict and ownerless mines to communities, the health and
safety risks for communities, as well as the environmental impact.

In the past, infrastructure development occurred with minimal consideration
for potential geohazards, such as sinkholes in dolomitic topography.
Examples of this include the Khutsong township in Merafong and Katlehong on
the East Rand, where both houses and a hospital are at risk of collapsing
due to these sinkholes.

To address these challenges, we will be introducing the Geoscience
Amendment Bill to Parliament shortly. The main focus of the Bill is to
effectively manage infrastructure development in dolomitic terrains, as
well as to empower the Council for Geoscience to be an advisory council in
respect of geohazards and to enable the council to become the custodian of
all geotechnical data and technical information relating to exploration and
mining.

In response to the harsh economic downturn that adversely affected the
mining industry, my department established the Mining Industry Growth,
Development and Employment Task Team, in short “Migdett”, a tripartite
initiative consisting of various government departments, business and
organised labour. The mandate of Migdett was to recommend short-term
interventions to mitigate the effects of the global economic crisis on the
mining industry and to develop interventions that will position South
Africa’s mining industry for sustainable growth.

The task team has completed phase one of its mandate, which has enabled the
industry to contain job losses to less than 50 000, representing half of
the initial estimate. At the beginning of this year, the task team began
working on the second part of its mandate. This has culminated in a mining
summit that was organised on 30 to 31 March under the auspices of Migdett
with the explicit aim of developing a strategy for the sustainable growth
and meaningful transformation of South Africa’s mining houses.

We have made great strides in identifying issues that need to be addressed
to enhance the growth, global competitiveness and transformation of South
Africa’s mining houses in a manner that meets the expectations of all the
industry’s stakeholders. Equally, it is encouraging that industry
stakeholders are prepared to rise to the challenge of the “greenification
of the mining sector”.

The issues of the green economy offer a new vision for mining activities of
the future as they require us to ensure that mining does not leave behind a
mix of negative social, environmental and human legacies - and we are
determined to ensure that mining does not leave a negative legacy on the
landscape of our country.
My department has embarked on an integrated intervention approach in
respect of conflicts between mining companies and communities and such
interventions are indeed yielding positive results. We have started this
process in Matlotlo, Sekhukhune and Mokopane in Limpopo. We are now going
to embark on the same process in Taung in the North West, and will proceed
to other affected areas.

The department will work closely with municipalities to improve integrated
development plans and this will lead to a significant alignment in
companies’ social and labour plans. The biggest service delivery hurdle
related to this area of our work is the time taken at municipal or
community level to finalise agreements on social and labour plans. From a
regulatory perspective, we will rigorously review social and labour plans
before approval and increase the frequency of monitoring.

Improvement of co-operative governance is an issue that my department will
henceforth focus on. It is of paramount importance that other departments
with whom we consult, eg Water Affairs, Rural Development and Land Reform,
and Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, interact with the
department in such a manner that synergy and common goals are achieved.

Improved mine water management, through environmental management programmes
and plans, is an issue that will receive more attention, specifically with
regard to water issues in, for example, Mpumalanga, Limpopo and the
Witwatersrand Gold Basin.

Hon members of the NCOP, the mining industry has suffered 45 fatalities in
the year to date compared to 57 for the corresponding period last year.
Although this represents a 21% decline in mining fatalities year-on-year
since the beginning of 2010, we are deeply concerned about the latest spate
of fatalities in which six employees died due to falls of ground and a
blasting accident within the first week of May.

These fatalities occurred at Simmer and Jack in the North West, Samancor
Eastern Chrome Mines in Limpopo and Harmony’s Joel Mine in the Free State.
The mining companies that have had the most fatalities since the beginning
of the year are AngloGold Ashanti, Harmony Gold Mines, Simmer and Jack,
Anglo Platinum, and Goldfields. This remains a concern for us.

The major causes of fatalities are falls of ground, and transportation and
machinery accidents. In dealing with these pressing occupational safety
challenges, the department will continue with the following interventions:
the sustained issuing of instructions for stopping either sections of a
mine or even the entire mine where necessary, in terms of the provisions of
section 54 of the Mine Health and Safety Act; improved enforcement and
prosecution in line with the recent amendments to the Mine Health and
Safety Act; and continued engagement with the CEOs of mining companies to
highlight our concerns regarding the current fatality trends and the demand
for tangible commitments to improving health and safety.

Work is also being done to integrate seismic networks and systems to
improve transparency and access to seismic information. This will ensure
that appropriate actions are proactively taken by mines in dealing with
high-risk areas that are prone to seismic events. A pilot project will be
carried out in Gauteng and the North West as these are the areas prone to
seismicity. This project will be extended to cover other regions.

Occupational health impacts are not immediate and hence difficult to
quantify. Silicosis remains a major cause of premature retirement and death
at South African mines owing to excessive silica dust exposure. On the
other hand, tuberculosis continues to be a serious challenge for the mining
industry, and HIV and Aids exacerbate this challenge. Lastly, noise-induced
hearing loss is also a significant health hazard owing to exposures to high
levels of noise in the working environment.

In dealing with health-related challenges, a new chief directorate for
occupational health has been established and additional occupational health
inspectors will be appointed in our regional offices. On TB, HIV and Aids
there are ongoing projects to evaluate the policies and programmes of mines
and to ensure alignment with the national strategic programmes of the
Department of Health.

The current legislation on compensation matters in the mining industry
needs an urgent overhaul in order to address issues relating to access to
services and information, turnaround time in payments and compensation
amounts. There are collaborative efforts between my department and the
Department of Labour and the Department of Health respectively to review
the compensation legislation and to develop an integrated compensation
system.

The health and safety problem goes beyond mine boundaries. We have been
receiving a series of complaints from communities located around mines
relating to blasting operations that cause damage to houses, nuisance dust
and noise. The major problem areas are in Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the North
West. These issues were also raised sharply during the NCOP’s public
hearings in Sekhukhune earlier this year.

We are continually engaging the affected mines to ensure compliance and,
where necessary, issue stoppage notices until such time that appropriate
measures are put in place to eliminate the impact of mining activities on
neighbouring communities. We are also developing a comprehensive strategy
to deal with problems related to blasting, ground vibration, noise and dust
control.

In ensuring further improvements on health and safety, the Mine Health and
Safety Council has budgeted R30 million to support the achievement of zero
harm to mineworkers through a comprehensive research programme. The key
research themes for the 2010-11 financial year include the prevention of
rock falls and rock bursts, and the eradication of tuberculosis and noise-
induced hearing loss in the mining industry.

The impact of illegal mining continues to be a concern in the mining
industry. My department has referred this issue to the interministerial
security cluster, as this is a criminal matter.

The Mining Qualifications Authority has allocated R280 million to support
the mining and minerals industry with skills development. In support of
artisan development, the Mining Qualifications Authority has increased the
grants for artisan development with effect from 1 April 2010.

The department will also discuss issues relating to the training of
artisans with the Minister of Higher Education and Training, the hon
Minister Nzimande. We may, for example, consider bringing back retired
artisans to train and transfer skills to young, aspiring artisans. I would
further encourage mining companies to play a proactive role in broader
skills development in the sector.

The Mining Qualifications Authority has forged partnerships with public
further education and training colleges, for various learning interventions
required in the mining and minerals sector. At least 23 further education
and training – FET - colleges were identified in all provinces as a support
learning base for the training of artisans. There is a need to partner with
FET colleges in areas where there is significant growth in mining.

In conclusion, hon members, I want to emphasise the important oversight
role that the National Council of Provinces can potentially play with
regard to the implementation of social and labour plans as they relate to
integrated development plans at provincial and local government levels.

Related to this, I must also caution against the increasing tendency of
communities to vent their frustrations with service delivery on mining
companies who operate close by. I raise these issues here in the hope that
you will assist us with your oversight duties to ensure that service
delivery takes place as it should.

For our part, as the department, we will ensure that the mining industry
contributes to socioeconomic development in South Africa and mines in a
responsible and sustainable manner.

When it comes to the 2010 World Cup, I would also like to join members by
saying: Feel it, it is here! I realise that most members today have not
adhered to the call by the national government to support “Football
Friday”. I hope this is just an oversight today and that in future we will
ensure that we are able to adhere to the call made by government.

Chairperson, one member says that they don’t have the T-shirts. We have to
buy the T-shirts, all of us! That is the way we must support and embrace
our team. We can’t say that we expect mahala [free] things. That is the
wrong culture. We must develop a culture of taking responsibility. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I think the message is loud and clear, hon
Minister. Thank you very much.

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, director-general, deputy
directors-general, staff and hon members, we have to unlock the wealth in
the ground of our country to the benefit of all our citizens. We need to
grow this industry in order to create decent, safe and permanent jobs for
South Africa. We have to turn around the relative decline of the past few
years, with diamonds taking a blow, and become more internationally
competitive in this regard. We have noticed growth in the local industry.

Our hon Minister and her team are doing just that, by collaborating in
trust and taking steps to transform the industry to become a crown jewel of
our country, and to build a stronger economy. The bar has been raised and
the budget estimate of just over R1 billion reflects that. We have also
noticed that the department is doing more with less money. We commend them
for their work and especially for the fifth consecutive unqualified audit
opinion. We also thank the Minister and her department for this budget
preparation and wish them everything of the best for the rest of the year
ahead.

We agree with the Minister that transformation is vital, and that the
industry still has a long way to go. We shall keep a keen eye on
developments in this regard.

Together with environmental representation, we also need to take a closer
look at transforming the industry to have more value added here in South
Africa as far as possible. New avenues should be explored to have secondary
industries turning more of our raw materials into higher-value products
that could earn more foreign exchange for our country and create jobs for
domestic labour.

More technology products need to be developed and produced here in South
Africa. As a leading mining country, our skilled and experienced workers
are drawn to exploration and operations all over the world. With this pool
of knowledge, we could surely start a secondary industry to feed some of
the global mining needs and develop new applications that would add to the
export value of all these mines utilising our people power.

We also have highly skilled people working on seismic and other information
technology that could be expanded. We therefore welcome the allocations for
research, geosciences and seismic understanding. This is not just to
understand and prevent landfalls, but also to add to a safer working place
for our much-valued workers. We do not only develop and train workers in
various ways, but we also really care for them. That is the work of the ANC
government.

We welcome the dedication and commitment to the health and safety of our
mining workers of whom we still lose too many every year due to fatalities
and disabling injuries. Every year more than 150 are killed, but we also
have a very worrying annual figure of hundreds who suffer serious injuries
that render them unable to continue their work in the industry.

We accept that the mining environment is risky, but we should also do
everything possible to limit the dangers and exposure of our workers to
these ills. Therefore, the Minister’s campaign of zero harm to workers,
other people, communities, or property around the mines is indeed a step in
the right direction, as is improving compensation.

Through regulation, through raising standards in the industry and through
deliberate attempts to raise safety awareness, we have seen improvements
and steady advances in stabilising the environment and protecting people
from harm. We have to increase our efforts, as we agree that any fatality
is one too many. Every minor injury or preventable disease erodes the
productivity of our industry.

We also welcome the no-nonsense stance of the Minister and her department
to end and bring to book those involved in illegal mining operations.
Besides robbing organised mining by stealing from them, they also enter a
specialised environment that is hazardous to uncontrolled operations and
could lead to very tragic consequences, as we have witnessed.

People risk their lives in unlawful enterprises that place the jobs of
other workers under pressure. These criminals indeed also steal jobs from
honest workers. Getting the criminal justice system and other departments
to assist in this matter is supported. We also welcome improved enforcement
and prosecution combined with compliance inspections.

We have to broaden the base of mining and make the most of our mineral
wealth. This means making it possible to prospect and mine. We therefore
welcome the Minister’s determination to halve the time to process
applications for rights. We also welcome the Minister’s resolve to give
more people a real opportunity to benefit from mining and guard against
fronting and other misrepresentations. The department is also commended for
channelling almost half of its expenditure to historically disadvantaged
South Africans.

With our planning to wind down operations and to rehabilitate the
environment to reduce and prevent leaching or spillage into the water, we
also need to concentrate on the end of life for a mine or mining in any
area.

Too often, we see decay, slums or ghost towns after the mine owners move
out. This leaves many people desperate for jobs. Of late, mining villages
have been turned into retirement opportunities, but a lasting and
sustainable solution must be found to have the benefactors contributing to
the support of host communities and those left behind when operations
cease, especially on the West Coast. Exploiting without putting in place a
lasting legacy is not on. We need only look at other areas to see that
people suffer after the mines close.

We mine almost 60 minerals, I understand. This includes a number of
minerals also taken from the earth here in the Western Cape. Many residents
believe that there are no mines in our province. Then there are special
breeds of people hellbent on not allowing any mining activity anywhere in
the Western Cape. With a special elite looking narrowly at their own
interests, these people have benefited and amassed reserves to fight, and
they cite many reasons why development would spoil and denigrate the
Western Cape, its mountains, winelands and other pleasing features. They
are totally opposed to any development aimed at unlocking the wealth of the
land. All they care for are their own pieces of land.
We have heard accounts of people who make it their job to oppose
developments. In one instance, the owner offered to retract his objection
at a handsome price of half a million rand. This amounts to extortion. Some
even object to developments while they themselves are into sand and
aggregate mining on adjacent properties. Perhaps we should look at
different mechanisms to identify and adjudicate exploration and mining
applications, especially with a view to supporting emerging mining
companies who cannot afford long and drawn-out fights to overcome short-
sighted objections. Perhaps the envisaged single, state-owned mining
company could play a role here, Minister.

We wish the department well in organising the first international
geological congress on the continent in 2016. Lastly, let me thank the
Minister, the members of the committee, the director-general, the deputy
directors-general, the staff in the Ministry, the department and the
committee secretary Ms Grace Dinizulu for a sterling job done so far. We
support the Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, the
mining industry is very big and contributes US$21 billion or 7% to the
South African gross domestic product. With the recession, this has shrunk
by 32%. Only China, the USA, Australia and Brazil have bigger industries
than what we have in South Africa, while Canada, Russia, India and Chile
have smaller mining industries. So South Africa has the fifth biggest
mining industry in the world.

Broad-based black economic empowerment has amounted to R150 billion in BEE
deals or 33% of similar transactions over the past 11 years. This has only
been possible because there has been a good balance between risk and
reward. Today I plead for transparency in the mining industry in South
Africa and the fact that we must stay within our legal framework without
abusing the system.

The six minutes that I have been granted will not be enough for me to say
all the things of importance that I should, but I will flash through a
couple with the Minister. I want to congratulate her on her “zama-zamas”
[illegal miners] arrests in Mpumalanga in December last year and early this
year. She has really followed up on her June and July appearance. Thank
you, Minister. We must not lose sight of this. Criminals are like children:
when they get quiet, you know they are busy doing something - and this is a
R10 billion industry, so we have to close in on the organised crime units.

With regard to nationalisation, Minister, you have given us your word that
you will not consent to it. I just want to say that if national mines are
going to be run like Alexkor, we will be in deep trouble because the
landscape looks like that of the moon - it is only bare bedrock and no
rehabilitation has been done.

The CEO does not occupy her office in Alexander Bay. She flies in from
Johannesburg once a month at a cost of R40 000 and that does not include
her Rosebank office facilities. The very next week, however, Alexkor came
to Parliament and asked for R7 billion for the company’s support. I know
this is not your baby, but you understand what I mean by nationalisation.

The environmental issues at Alexkor are appalling. But what I actually want
to spend time talking about today are the small-scale diamond miners and
their industry. At the moment, there are mining contracts being advertised
and the closing date is 11 June.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Nesi, your hand is up. Why have you put up
your hand?

Mr B NESI: I want to ask the member if she is prepared to take a question.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, are you prepared to take a
question?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: No. According to Rule 33, I think I am not allowed to
be interrupted.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: She is not prepared to take a question.
Continue, hon member.
Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: The chairperson of the community property association
said that he was prepared to assist with the financing of these
applications of R100 000 each if he could get a fair share.

The women’s group, the Witvoorkop Vrouegroep, named after a farm, sold a
90,3-carat diamond and 6,1-carat pink diamond in 2004, but, unfortunately,
they believe they didn’t get the full price as a result of the closed
system — and there is no way that they can get to the truth. The only thing
they can do now is to go to the Constitutional Court. This is in spite of
section E.3 of the De Beers Best Practice Principles, in terms of which
full disclosure at all levels of the diamond distribution chain must be
adhered to. That is exactly what they claim to be doing, but it is not the
truth.

There are certain illegalities in the BEE Mining Charter and Mineral and
Petroleum Resources Development Act. They concern the small-scale marine
mining community who have a rich ocean mining heritage dating back to the
1970s and who are world leaders in shallow-water diamond mining. They own
over 75 of the diver mining units and are 79% black-owned, but in spite of
these impeccable credentials, do not own one of the approximately 45 sea
mining rights in the Northern Cape.

Indeed, while some are being obscenely enriched in the mining industry, the
coloured small-scale marine miners in the Northern Cape have never been
worse off. There are many mining vessels lying on the Port Nolloth Beach,
an example of how bad things are for them. This whole industry is also in a
bad situation owing to a lack of equitable access to the market, something
we need to pay attention to.

Minister, I think my time is up. I would like to meet with you afterwards
and see what we can do to improve the situation. Thank you for whatever you
have done and we appreciate your presence here today. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Ms van Lingen, could you take your seat.
Order, hon members! Mr Harris, could you also take your seat. Just sit
where you are. Now, Rule 33 must be read properly. Rule 33, which Ms van
Lingen mentioned, says: “No member may interrupt another member who is
addressing the Chair, except to call attention to a point of order or a
question of privilege.” I just want people to understand it that way.

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chair, hon Minister, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, South
Africa is reported to be the most mineral-rich country in the whole world,
and it has been found that it also has the highest inequality in the world.
We were the last colonised country to gain independence and to usher in a
bloodless constitutional democracy in Africa, yet we have the highest
infant mortality rate in the world.
“The wealth of the country shall be shared amongst those who live in it.”
So says the Freedom Charter. But the wealth of the country continues to be
looted by the multinational companies, who come to Africa under the guise
of investment. Our mineral resources have been spirited away by the likes
of Anglo American, now called AngloGold Ashanti, which has moved its
headquarters to London and relisted on the London Stock Exchange.

There are a couple of other companies, such as BP and Shell, that are
pulling out of Africa for reasons best known to them. The question remains:
Is the wealth of this country shared amongst those who live in it?

As we put a stamp of approval on your budget, hon Minister, I would like to
argue that the broad-based black economic empowerment policy, as
implemented currently, is a double-edged sword that creates the black
middle class and upper class that live in leafy urban areas and on golf
estates, while the poorest of the poor, who live in Mandela Park in Thabong
in the Free State, are still looking forward to empowerment.

As much as we know that the policy does not mean that historically
disadvantaged individuals necessarily need to have equity in companies they
are working at or participating in, we cannot say that we have transformed
and deracialised the mining sector without black people being owners of
those mines.
I take solace in the fact that the mineral policy and promotion programme
has been allocated the biggest share of the budget: R429 million. We hope
that the Minister and the department will work hard to ensure that the
mining charter is implemented fully.

We do not know if the department will meet its target of 26% of the sector
being in black hands by 2014. That does not mean, in my view, black faces
in top management and on boards of directors in the industry. It means
ownership. We were informed that the department intends to fast-track the
upward mobility of black people in the industry through social labour
plans. That is, however, still not ownership.

The department will continue supporting small and medium enterprises with
funds and some technical skills. This is highly appreciated, as the mining
industry is a capital-intensive one. However, this can only be done with
small-scale mining. It appears that it is only in small-scale diamond
mining in the Northern Cape and the North West that the projects are
operational. This is simply because diamonds can be found in the gravel
close to the surface, or in streams - what are geologically known as
alluvial diamonds.

These can be easily separated from the host rock, in this case gravel,
through panning. As a result, small-scale mining is possible. It is,
however, different and it will be difficult for small-scale miners to mine
kimberlite pipes that extend vertically hundreds of metres into the ground.
This needs heavy equipment and is very expensive. To sink a shaft, in my
days when I was mining, cost R5 million. I wonder what it would cost today.

It will also be difficult to embark on small-scale mining in gold,
platinum, iron ore and any other mineral, which need heavy machinery and
equipment to mine and separate from the host rock, unless such projects are
adequately financed. We are therefore looking forward to the mineral
promotion and policy programme coming up with policies that will better
address the need that “the people shall share in the country’s wealth”.

Australia has taken a deliberate decision to impose a 40% tax on mines from
2012 onwards. It intends to spread the wealth of the country in that
manner. I am not saying we should follow suit, but what we should keep in
mind is that the mineral resources in the ground are not replaceable. And,
if we continue giving away this wealth without our country being developed
using our country’s natural endowments, we are definitely going to end up
at the IMF and World Bank’s door with a begging bowl. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson, mining has been the mainstay of South
Africa’s economy for centuries. There are, however, serious challenges that
need focused attention, for instance resource depletion, the ballooning
costs of mining, the high cost and uncertainty of power supply,
technological challenges, the threat of nationalisation, and undue
political interference.

The reassurance by the Minister on behalf of government on the subject of
nationalisation will have calmed the nerves, but it has left a lingering
doubt. As mining in our country is no longer done at the surface, mining
costs are rising steeply. In the last year, over 30% of miners lost their
jobs. Maybe the ANC Youth League should be encouraged to study the
economics of present-day mining. We know that the president of the ANC
Youth League is not very strong in mathematics. [Interjections.]

In 2004, government approved the Mineral and Petroleum Resources
Development Act. Its objectives were to provide for equitable access to
mineral resources, promote economic growth, achieve mineral resource
development, and provide for security of tenure in respect of prospecting,
exploration, mining, and production operations.

Hon Minister, some of these objectives are not being met owing to
administrative indiscretion, political gerrymandering and uncertainty in
the regulatory framework. A typical example is the fiasco involving Kumba
Iron Ore, ArcelorMittal and the reapplication for the mining licence. The
net result is that a few privileged, politically connected individuals
apparently stand to gain R8 billion without lifting a finger.

A lot has been said about unrehabilitated mines, and I think the best
example is Kimberley, where, indeed, it was proven that diamonds are not
forever. We need to address the issue of mining companies which place this
critical rehabilitation phase last on their to-do lists.

Cope would like to congratulate Migdett - the Mining Industry Growth,
Development and Employment Task Team - on managing to save almost 65 000
jobs instead of us experiencing the expected job loss of 100 000 during the
financial crisis. The Minister has already indicated what they intend
doing.

Beneficiation remains the nemesis of the South African mining industry. It
is unacceptable that the same hollow arguments are continually raised as to
why mineral resources cannot be beneficiated close to the source of
production. Government must think outside the box and seriously consider
initiatives like smelters for the Northern Cape and the relocation of the
State Diamond Trader back to Kimberley where it belongs.

Further, it is an indictment of government that single-sex hostels are
still in existence. According to some reports, 36% of mineworkers still
live in these circumstances. Although the figure has come down, it begs the
question: Why is it taking so long to do away with this practice?

It would also be appreciated if the hon Minister could pronounce herself on
the situation at the Aurora Grootvlei mining operation where three miners
died whilst waiting in a queue to receive their hard-earned wages.

Lastly, Cope wants to endorse the summoning of the Mine Health and Safety
Council to appear before the committee. There are many questions regarding
mining health and safety that still remain unanswered, and it is important
to ensure that the Mine Health and Safety Council does, in fact, enforce
compliance. At present, only 2% of the budget is allocated to the promotion
of health and safety. This is certainly not enough and we need to look at
that. I thank you, hon Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chair, hon Minister and hon members in this House, a
recent report found that South Africa is the richest country in the world
in terms of non-energy mineral wealth. The wealth underneath our land is
estimated to be in excess of US$2,5 trillion, almost double that of the
next wealthiest country, Russia, which has US$1,6 trillion of reserves.

This begs the question: Why is it that in a country that has a huge
potential to use its mineral wealth to improve the lives of its people,
more than half of our population continues to live in poverty? And why is
it that in spite of the fact that the struggle for political and economic
freedom was victorious, we are the most unequal society in the world? One
cannot help but wonder what happened to that part of the ruling party’s
Freedom Charter that refers to the people of our nation sharing in our
mineral wealth.

Hon Chair, not much has changed. Allow me to say this: The government can
produce all the spin it wants about how it cares for the poor and
marginalised, but nowhere else is its complete disregard for the people it
claims to represent clearer than in the arena of minerals. The government
and its successive governments have betrayed the mineworkers who have
worked the ground over the past centuries, and the past 16 years. Just as
bad is that they have betrayed the memory of the tens of thousands of
mineworkers who gave their adult lives to doing the same thing under
colonialism and apartheid.

The ID is deeply saddened to see how the government is allowing a small
cabal of people to benefit from the wealth of our country, while the
majority have to suffer lives of indignity. We should also be asking
questions about the fact that South Africa has 80% of the world’s manganese
reserves, yet we only account for 15% of current global production. The
mineral wealth in this country is being offered to foreigners, South
Africa’s manganese rights having been sold to a consortium which includes a
Russian oligarch.

Die minerale in die Noord-Kaap is nie regtig tot voordeel van die mense van
die Noord-Kaap nie. Hulle is maar net gewone werkers en glad nie
aandeelhouers nie. Ystererts word uitgevoer. Hoekom kan ons nie ons eie
staal in die Noord-Kaap produseer om werk te kan skep nie? Hoekom het ons
nie ’n breë, holistiese benadering om sodoende ons mense se lewens te kan
verbeter nie? Ons sê ons wil oorlog voer teen armoede, maar ons gee net
mense werk. Jy gaan nie iemand se armoede verlig as jy net werk gee nie. Jy
moet hom ’n aandeelhouer maak, want ons mense lewe op daardie grond, en ons
gee ons rykdom vir buitelanders. Wat van ons eie mense? Hoekom ontwikkel
ons nie ons eie mense nie? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The minerals in the Northern Cape do not really benefit the people of the
Northern Cape. They are just ordinary labourers and not shareholders at
all. Iron ore is being exported. Why can’t we produce our own steel in the
Northern Cape to create jobs? Why don’t we have a broad, holistic approach
in order to improve the lives of our people? We are declaring war on
poverty but we are only providing people with work. You will not relieve a
person’s poverty by only providing work. You must make that person a
shareholder, because our people are living on that land, and we are giving
away our wealth to the foreigners. What about our own people? Why don’t we
develop our own people?]

Chairperson, let me just conclude with this: The ID therefore calls on the
Minister to urgently hold a joint summit with the Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs so that we can find some synergy in resolving the
growing environmental issues coming from the mines. The ID supports this
budget. I thank you.

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson of the NCOP, firstly, the ANC supports this
Budget Vote. Secondly, we as a committee and as the ANC are very happy and
satisfied that the finances of the department are healthy.

After more than a century of mining activities in South Africa, the country
remains one of the most geologically and mineral-rich regions in the world.
South Africa’s mineral industry, largely supported by gold, diamonds, coal
and platinum group metals, has made an important contribution to the
national economy.

Mining continues to be South Africa’s principal earner of foreign exchange.
It has been said that it contributes about 7% of the GDP. Mining also
contributes approximately R140 billion to South Africa’s exports, and it
directly accounts for 6,5% of total fixed investment.

However, one other issue is the lack of skilled historically disadvantaged
South Africans, HDSAs, which should not be used as an excuse by the mining
companies for the failure to meet the employment equity targets. That also
includes the 2% employment of people with disabilities.

The department conceded that it has been busy with conversions of old-order
mining licences, and that it could not do inspections at the same time,
which we accepted. However, the department must ensure that it has an
adequate human resource capacity to do the inspections in 2010-11.

The department performed well in weathering the storm of the global
economic crisis. The Mining Industry Growth, Development and Employment
Task Team, Migdett, minimised some job loses.

The commitments of the charter are not intended for compliance purposes
only. They do not end in 2014, but are meant to transform the industry.

There are also the issues regarding mining, the environment and communities
– three major issues. A balance must be found among these. There are issues
that have been raised by communities, for instance in KwaMbonambi, KwaZulu-
Natal, about Richards Bay Minerals; in Madlankala about Exxaro; and in
Burgersfort in Limpopo, in the Sekhukhune district. Those issues need to be
attended to.

Patrick Bond in Looting Africa: The Economics of Exploitation, says:

  Given that mining houses have been central to looting Africa for at least
  a century and a half, it is fitting next to consider the damage done by
  depletion of minerals and other non-renewable natural resources.


  The central question is whether any of the financial capital that returns
  to Africa — by way of royalties on minerals or profits to local
  shareholders ... — is reinvested, or merely becomes the source of further
  capital flight.

The glittering history of the sector is well recorded. I do not want to
dwell on that. Today, I would like to hone in on one of the themes in the
Minister’s budget speech, and this is the issue of the proposed state-owned
mining company which would consolidate the mining interests of the state in
one vehicle.

Those who have fallen behind in following global trends will certainly
oppose this in the most fervent manner. A former public policy analyst of
the Chamber of Mines, by the name of Ricardo Hansby, recently pointed out
in an article in The Times that: it is now broadly accepted that more
meaningful state involvement in economies is inevitable and in fact
desirable. Now that the state wants to restore the glitter of the mining
industry, it is opposed by a number of industry and political leaders. In
the spirit of collaboration, we need to call on the mining companies and
their respective bodies to stop lamenting what the government is doing and
not doing. We need them to be proactive and suggest solutions. In their own
language, this is what they call value added.
The proposed state-owned mining company is one initiative, and the doors of
the government and the Ministry are wide open to suggest alternatives. When
the industry was asked on numerous occasions to come up with solutions to
the low beneficiation rate of mineral products that takes place in South
Africa, all we heard were excuses cloaked in technical jargon. These are
exactly the reasons why the state will explore its own options.

In short, we as the ANC believe that this budget will help in addressing
the backlogs and the issues that are faced by miners, more especially the
aftereffects – the health issues that take place when miners have long left
the mines.

We, as the ANC, support this Budget Vote with a big smile. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERAL RESOURCES: Thank you, Chairperson. Malibongwe
elamadoda! [Praise the name of men] I would like to take this opportunity
to thank members of the select committee for their positive input. Thank
you very much, chairperson, for the continual and support leadership you
have shown not just in this House, but also in the committee. My officials
appreciate your leadership in helping us to steer this ship in a positive
way. Thanks go to all the hon members and to hon Eliza.

I must indicate that matters raised by members — matters of transformation
— will remain at the centre of the department because a lot still needs to
be done. Regarding beneficiation, we cannot continue to behave as we have
in the past. We have to deal with it.

Hon Gunda, people saying no to beneficiation in our country is a thing of
the past. We have taken a policy decision and we are going to beneficiate.
It is not an individual choice, but a government’s policy and there is a
willingness and commitment by this government to beneficiate.

With regard to the point raised on the State Diamond Trader, may I indicate
that whilst we have a history of Kimberley being the main producer of
diamonds, South Africa is a unitary state and how we locate any asset in
our country becomes very important - it must be strategic and accessible.

The trader, which is in Johannesburg, is not there by default. We are
revisiting that, but, definitely, the issue of moving to the Northern Cape
does not make us competitive. South African diamonds attract global
interest. So we have to be located in a way that the interest globally can
make our diamonds accessible. This also means that we must be able to
create a hub: where having transport means that when those people come to
buy, they can easily access the hub. That is very important for us. But, if
you are going to look at this in terms of me and you, then it does not
recognise that we are a single country.

We must bear in mind that South Africa has no federal states; we are a
unitary state. We have to make sure that whatever happens in Kimberley
benefits the rest of the communities of South Africa. I must also indicate
that Gauteng and Limpopo have diamonds. Therefore, we get diamonds all
over, not only in Kimberley. What we have to move away from is the
distortion created by De Beers in the past.

I agree and acknowledge that whatever happened in the past must not happen
in the future. Kimberley must not be disadvantaged because it only has
diamonds. It has to benefit from what is in South Africa holistically like
any other community. Therefore, diamonds and all other minerals of this
country must benefit the rest of South Africa. The distortion can’t go on
and must be corrected. We cannot create jobs in Johannesburg alone. We have
to create jobs in the rest of South Africa – we have to create sustainable
jobs all over.

Hon Eliza, we will indeed look at the issue of Alexkor, because it is a
cause for concern.

Within this context, I also want to raise the issue, broadly, of small-
scale mining. When we deal with issues of small-scale mining, we must also
say what legacy it leaves for the country. We can’t just allow small-scale
mining to continue differently. There are major implications, and there is
a price to pay with regard to issues of the environment.

So, we can’t ignore those issues, Mr Mnguni, as if they don’t exist. They
are there. Even with small-scale mining, we can’t erode and degrade the
environment. We have to act responsibly - all of us, big or small. These
are the challenges we have to engage with. We have to ask ourselves how
best we can make sure that the future for our children is right; that they
are able to inherit a country that is still user-friendly. This applies to
all of us. I think we know that the issues of rehabilitation are a cause
for concern.

I must also indicate that we are going to have a strategy on
rehabilitation. One of the issues we are going to relook at is our current
system in terms of people contributing towards the rehabilitation fund. Is
it sustainable? Can it ensure that after mining the land can be reutilised
in a way that makes it good? We are going to revisit that because, in my
own view and in my own observation, it is not enough.

Currently, as members know, the challenge we have is that the derelict and
ownerless mines have left us with a cost of about R50 billion. Where will
it come from? Is this not the money which is supposed to improve the lives
of ordinary people and poor people? This is because when we pay tax, our
tax is supposed to pay for ownerless and derelict mines because that is a
current challenge.

I must also indicate that our system currently will continue to create
derelict mines, unless we become vigorous in ensuring that in the future,
as the policy says, the polluter pays. We must ensure that “the polluter
pays” is not just a slogan. So, we have to translate that into something
concrete.

Transformation is indeed not good, but I also want to indicate that, as we
deal with these issues, we must also bear in mind that these are not easy
matters. We ourselves, those who are trying to empower, also tend to create
problems because we want to offer ourselves as fronting people without
really making sure that transformation becomes a reality. So, those are the
real challenges we are facing. We have to address them.

In my own view, transformation of the mining industry will lie in the core
of people being operational. Therefore, this means we need to encourage
more people, especially young people, to go to school so that they can get
the requisite skills, join the mining industry and become future owners,
because equity cannot just be hanging. People are hanging on mining
companies, and hence it creates a lot of fronting.

Therefore, we have to correct that as part of the transformation process if
we want to ensure that in 25 years’ time it is different from today. We
must make sure that transformation is real, and not fronting: where people
come in but can be kicked out tomorrow, while other people are being rented
to the industry.

The charter, indeed, for me, is a living document. It is an instrument and
a tool that we will always use to measure our success. But the biggest
challenge we have is that we are far from the reality. There are many
issues that we have to deal with in order to ensure that matters of
fronting and transformation are real and concrete in South Africa.

Hon member, there is no political interference. I don’t know what political
interference you are talking about. We have laws in this country. I think
that what we have to do is to separate issues: for instance, my child
happening to apply or wanting to be involved in a particular business being
seen as political interference. I want to know what law in this country
says that the children of the leaders of political parties, including
yours, hon Eliza, cannot become involved in business. I want to know which
policy that is. Or, if that is what we want, why don’t we put it into law?
Also, are we not discriminating? Are we saying they are different from
other South Africans and must not have rights, and that as soon as I become
a Minister my kids forfeit their rights as equal citizens of this country?
These are issues that we must address, because we politicise issues in the
wrong way. That is why I am asking which law says they can’t in South
Africa?

I am a regulator. When I consider an application, I don’t check whose child
it is and who they are related to. What guides me is the law. I don’t even
look at the company or who owns the company. I look at whether the company
is compliant and at whether the procedures are followed. On that basis we
issue a licence; not on the basis of who is behind the application. That’s
not my responsibility. There is no law which says that I must scrutinise
individuals. You as Members of Parliament, you as the legislators, you are
responsible for oversight through the ethics committee to say, “If my
children are involved in business, have I declared?” That is your
responsibility; not my responsibility as the regulator. [Applause.] That is
not my responsibility.

I want to plead with this House: Let’s not mislead the world by saying
there are some who are better than others. That’s not true. We have laws
and if, indeed, there is a violation of the law, let’s point out where
there is that violation. Let us not generalise, because there is no law
that says the children of leaders, including your children, as Members of
Parliament, cannot become involved in business. There is no law that says
that. So let’s separate issues for us to be able to take these matters
forward.

With regard to the issue of Aurora, there are challenges with Aurora, but
as the regulator we don’t have authority over Aurora. Unfortunately, we
don’t have a relationship with Aurora. They are not the licence holder.
With any of these companies and the stories we read about, the licence
holder during liquidation is the liquidator. So, our focus, as Members of
Parliament, should be on the liquidator. We don’t have a relationship with
the liquidator. They are a management company. If you look at the licence
or at the permit, the right person is the liquidator.

I must also say that we have a problem with the liquidator. He is causing
many problems, not Aurora. Let us not follow what the papers say, because
as you play an oversight role you are missing the real target, the real
people who are causing problems and nightmares for the workers are the
liquidators, not Aurora. We don’t have a relationship with Aurora. We must
know the law. We must understand that the law says that the licence holder
is the one we have a relationship with.

With regard to health and safety matters, indeed, I agree with members that
we have to make sure that there is zero tolerance. We will increase our
oversight and our inspectorate when it comes to matters of fatalities. We
are not happy. I agree with you. We are not happy and we can’t be happy, as
long as people continue getting hurt in the mining industry.

Hon members, thank you very much for the support. I am happy that NCOP
members understand that illegal mining is not our competence. Illegal
mining is criminal. It is killing our country, hence we referred the matter
to the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster, because we felt that
it is something beyond us, and we can’t continue to entertain what is
really eating away at our economy. Thank you very much, Chairperson, for
this opportunity. I thank the members for their support.

Hon members, anyone who has an issue is welcome to discuss it with us. I am
open to this. Let’s find time to deal with the issues which are of concern
to all of us. This is not about the opposition or the ANC. These are
matters concerning the country. We have to make sure that working together
we correct all the negative implications for the mining industry.

In terms of the Freedom Charter, indeed, the mineral wealth beneath the
soil belongs to the people of South Africa as a whole. They have to benefit
- all of them. I agree that nationalisation will not help us, and this will
not take us in that direction, but we have to find innovative ways of
having our people benefit from the mineral wealth of this country. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
 RELATIONS — AGREEMENT BETWEEN EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AND MEMBER STATES, OF ONE
  PART, AND GOVERNMENT OF RSA, OF OTHER PART, AMENDING AGREEMENT ON TRADE,
                     DEVELOPMENT AND CO-OPERATION (TDCA)

Mr D D GAMEDE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, the Trade Development and Co-
operation Agreement, TDCA, was signed in 1999. It was the first bilateral
framework agreement entered into by both the democratic South Africa and
the European Union, EU. While awaiting ratification, it was partially
implemented in January 2000, and was fully implemented in May 2004
following the final ratification.

The TDCA includes chapters on political dialogue, trade, economic co-
operation, development co-operation and co-operation in other areas. Trade
liberalisation is asymmetrical in nature. South Africa is to eliminate
tariffs on 86% of imports from EU imports over a 12-year period, whilst the
EU is to eliminate tariffs on 95% of imports from South Africa over a 10-
year period.

The 2004 mid-term review, mandated in terms of Article 103 of the TDCA, led
to the realisation that an update was needed. Formal revision negotiations
were launched on 27 March 2007, led by the Department of International
Relations and Co-operation.

Negotiations included all relevant South African departments and were
conducted by three thematic negotiation groups, namely the political
dialogue negotiation group, the economic and other areas of co-operation
working group, and the development co-operation negotiation group.

Thirty-five new and revised articles were initiated by chief negotiators on
10 October 2007, while a process of revision of trade chapters is being
conducted separately under the Southern African Development Community
Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations process. An amending agreement
was signed by hon Minister Nkoana-Mashabane during the second South Africa-
European Union summit on 11 September 2009.

The TDCA has proved to be very beneficial to South Africa in terms of
trade. It has helped to facilitate a 234% trade increase between 2000 and
2004 and a 170% trade increase from 2004 to 2007.

South Africa’s inclusion of a reference to disarmament in the agreement is
an important point-of-principle victory, as it is the first time that the
EU has been forced into not only focusing on including the nonproliferation
aspect as an essential element in the framework agreement, but also adding
the disarmament issue.

Article 2 has been reworded to include the following essential elements of
the agreement, namely the respect for democratic principles and fundamental
human rights as laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
co-operation on issues of disarmament and the nonproliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. As essential elements, this means that any violation
of these principles could result in the termination of the agreement.

Article 57 was amended to place more focus on energy security, the
promotion of cleaner energy technologies, and regulatory co-operation.
Article 58 has been amended to allow support for policies and programmes
that promote the local beneficiation of minerals and that create
opportunities for collaboration in the development of the mineral
beneficiation sector, as we discussed in the previous debate.

In the new Article 65A the parties elaborate on their joint commitment to
meeting the Millennium Development Goals.

Article 86, which is on social issues, now allows for a broader dialogue in
the areas of employment and social policy, which will include questions
relating to social problems of postapartheid society, poverty alleviation,
decent work for all, social protection, unemployment, gender equality,
violence against women, children’s rights, persons with disabilities, older
persons, youth, labour relations, public health, safety at work, and
population.

Article 90, on the fight against drugs and money-laundering, has been
substantially altered and re-titled “Co-operation on Illicit Drugs”,
allowing for co-operation to ensure a balanced and integrated approach
towards addressing the drugs problem and reducing the supply of trafficking
in, and the demand for, illicit drugs.

The new Article 91C on money-laundering and terrorism financing commits the
parties to making every effort and to co-operating in order to prevent the
use of their financial systems for laundering the proceeds from criminal
activities and from offences related to illicit drugs and psychotropic
substances.

Following ratification, the inclusion of the reference to disarmament could
be used as a precedent going forward when dealing with the EU on linkages
between nonproliferation and disarmament. Nonratification by South Africa
of the TDCA revision agreement would send a negative signal to a key
strategic partner. I therefore urge this House to support this
ratification. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
     TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS — OVERSIGHT VISIT TO TSWAING LOCAL MUNICIPALITY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS — OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MADIBENG LOCAL MUNICIPALITY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS — OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NGAKA MODIRI MOLEMA DISTRICT
                                MUNICIPALITY

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS — OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MASILONYANA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Hon Chair and honourable House, in the Tswaing Local
Municipality, right from the beginning the committee was met with a state
of chaos. You could not separate the municipality from a liquor restaurant.
There was a general lack of discipline. Officials were not at work, while
those that were wore caps covering their eyes.

Other general observations by the committee and the report from the
administrator concerned water, sanitation, roads, local economic
development strategies, organograms, supply-chain management - everything
was in disarray. What was most unique about this municipality was its
grading system. The municipality was supposed to be at grade 3 or grade 4,
but, in terms of a resolution of the council, the municipality was placed
at grade 6. The implication of this was that councillors and officials were
earning amounts equal to those at a grade 6 municipality - which is just
next to a metro.

Other issues such as budgets, integrated development plans, institutional
development, and governance were also in a poor state. In terms of the
organogram, the report says there were 120 general workers who were
promoted to senior management posts. What does this imply? You can get an
answer by doing your own personal analysis. There were 19 section 57
managers – the biggest number, I’m sure, in the country and bigger than
some of the provinces in terms of a department.

The question is: What are they doing in terms of the five-year strategic
agenda of local government? Where are they placed? The other recommendation
that we would like to make here is to request the Select Committees on
Finance and Appropriations to spend a day or two with that municipality to
work on finances. This is important to make sure that the organogram is
reviewed and goes back to normality - financially, legally and politically.


The other worrying factor is that it is alleged in the report that this
municipality has one gardener and one cleaner. You can see this in its
appearance. Therefore, it is important that serious attention be given to
this municipality.

The committee, therefore, recommends that section 139(1)(b) of the
Constitution be applied. If there are still no improvements, then we will
do a review – the administrator should concentrate on making sure that
there is a database on every worker and their qualifications.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr S S Mazosiwe): Order, hon member Mokgobi! You
have covered one municipality so far, and you are supposed to deal with all
four of them in 10 minutes. Now, you have spoken for five minutes, and I’m
just making you aware that you have five minutes left.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: As long as your awareness does not take up my time.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr S S Mazosiwe): No, it won’t. [Laughter.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I plead that you give the hon chairperson 50
minutes to complete the report. [Interjections.] This is very important
because it is serious. It’s very serious. The North West is in chaos.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr S S Mazosiwe): Order, hon members! Thank you,
hon Bloem. Continue, hon Mokgobi.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Thank you very much for the House approving ... [Laughter.]
... that the administrator fast-track the database and that the Hawks be in
place. The administrator is to stabilise the local labour forum. Quarterly
reports should be in place. The SA Local Government Association, Salga,
must begin offensively to train councillors and officials. The Municipal
Demarcation Board must come into play with regard to the grading system,
and follow-ups must be made.

With regard to the Madibeng Municipality, it is a high-capacity
municipality with huge economic potential but less revenue income. It is
characterised by fraud, financial problems, poor management, and bad
governance. At one stage a tender was approved for R5 million, but
implementation came to R7 million. This is just to give you a brief idea of
what is happening.

There should be an investigation into the Oukasie Development Trust, which
was changed into something that could not be defined, to see who is
benefiting.

We therefore recommend approval on this matter and that the administrator
fast-track the reviewing of the database of qualifications of all section
57 staff and stabilise the administration in terms of labour relations
unrest, that the Hawks be in place, and that quarterly reports be given.

With regard to the Masilonyana municipality, here we would concur with
councillors. They have made several attempts with the province for
intervention, but it looks like the intervention came late as we are going
into the elections for next year. There is also bad governance here, and a
lack of adherence to financial systems in terms of which about R46 million
cannot be accounted for. We are calling for the House to give the
administrator a chance to ensure that there is planning, budgets,
institutional development and good governance.

We therefore recommend the approval of section 139(1)(b) in that the
administrator should make sure that there is skills training for all
involved; that there is functionality of the local labour forum; and that
Salga comes into play.

With regard to the Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality, we reported
on this municipality last year. I don’t believe we need to go into the
background. All that we request of the House is an extension precisely
because there are outstanding issues. Amongst these issues is making sure
that a municipal manager is in place, that other section 57 managers are
appointed, and that there is further improvement in the current
administrative situation.

We therefore recommend that the extension be approved by this House. This
is the extension in terms of section 139(1)(b). As a committee, we want to
urge, through you, Chairperson, that the committee speedily be given a
second researcher as the committee is working on its own. We don’t have a
researcher in this regard. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on the Oversight Visit to Tswaing Local
Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Oversight Visit to Tswaing Local Municipality accordingly adopted
in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Oversight Visit to Madibeng Local
Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Oversight Visit to Madibeng Local Municipality accordingly
adopted in accordance with section 65 of the constitution.
Question put: That the Report on the Oversight Visit to Ngaka Modiri Molema
District Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Oversight Visit to Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Oversight Visit to Masilonyana Local
Municipality be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Oversight Visit to Masilonyana Local Municipality accordingly
adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 11:35.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      (a)   Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
           Division of Revenue Bill for 2011-2012, tabled in terms of
           section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997
           (Act No 97 of 1997).


