---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 04 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-04
---

TUESDAY, 4 MAY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    _____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on the next sitting day of the
Council, I shall move:


   That the Council –


      1) notes that the Shikota express has derailed and is possibly on the
         verge of grinding to a halt as the disgruntled party battles to
         choose who among the three leaders should drive the derailed train;


      2) further notes the serious allegations levelled by the embattled
         leader of Cope, Mosiuoa Lekota, who publicly accused one of the
         fellow leaders, Mbhazima Shilowa, of mismanaging a R20 million
         party account and failing to produce party audited statements for
         more than a year; and


      3) calls on Parliament and the Secretary to Parliament to immediately
         institute a formal inquiry into the allegations of abuse of public
         funds and a possible case of fraud against the hon M Shilowa for
         seeking to mislead Parliament and the public by backdating the
         appointment letter of Anton Louw auditors to June 2009 when in fact
         they were appointed on 8 March 2010.

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek sal voorstel:

   Dat die Raad –


     1) met trots kennis neem dat die Minister van Onderwys in die Wes-
        Kaap, mnr Donald Grant, beplan om 26 skole oor die volgende 3 jaar
        in die Wes-Kaap te bou;


     2) verder kennis neem dat dit baie meer skole is as wat die vorige ANC-
        regering in die Wes-Kaap gebou het;
     3) ook verder kennis neem van die nuwe klaskamers wat gebou gaan word,
        asook die opgradering van bestaande skoolgeboue in die provinsie;
        en


   (4)      mnr Grant aanmoedig om so voort te gaan met die goeie werk.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, on the next sitting day of the Council,
I shall move:

   That the Council –

     1) notes with pride that the MEC for Education in the Western Cape, Mr
        Donald Grant, is planning to build 26 schools in the Western Cape
        over the next 3 years;


     2) further notes that this is more schools than the previous ANC
        government built in the Western Cape;


      3) also further notes of the new classrooms that are going to be
         built, as well as the upgrading of existing school buildings in the
         province; and


      4) encourages Mr Grant to continue the good work.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any member who wishes to give a
notice of motion? No? Let me just guide the members. You would understand
that we have two types of motions. Make sure which one you want to move. We
are now dealing with notices of motion. Do you want to give that? I saw
another hand here. Now we move to the other type of motion.

Does any member wish to move a motion without notice? That’s where I am. I
will then start with the member there. I am sorry. I sometimes forget your
name, sir. I am sorry.

       WISHING BAFANA BAFANA LUCK WITH THEIR FINAL 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP
                                PREPARATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr W F FABER: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennis voor:

  Dat die Raad Bafana Bafana voorspoed toewens met hulle finale
  voorbereidings vir die Fifa-Sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi in 2010. Suid-Afrika
  staan agter hulle soos een man!
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council wishes Bafana Bafana all of the best with their final
  preparations for the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. South Africa is united in
  its support for you!]


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr De Villiers, I am sorry to come back to
you. I just want to make sure what type of motion you moved?

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: The first one? It was a motion with notice – a notice
of motion, sorry.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: So, it is a notice of motion. Is there any
objection to the motion raised now? The motion is agreed to in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

          CONGRATULATIONS TO ANC ON ACTING AGAINST ANCYL PRESIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council congratulates the ANC for radically taking on the youth
  league president through a disciplinary process.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Does anybody object to the motion? The motion
is objected to. [Interjections.] Order! In light of the objection, the
motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become
a notice of motion.

          SEWERAGE PROBLEMS IN FREE STATE LEADING TO HEALTH HAZARDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes with concern the ongoing sewerage problems in Matjhabeng
        in Welkom, and Odendaalsrus in the Free State province; and

   (2)      urges that active intervention take place by the local
        municipalities and the Department of Water Affairs to prevent raw
        sewerage from flowing into pans, rivers and residential areas as
        this creates a health hazard and could lead to cholera and other
        diseases.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                     TRAGIC FIRE AT RUSTHOF OLD AGE HOME

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs R N RASMENI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –


  (1) notes that a blaze swept through the Rusthof Old Age Home on Saturday,
       1 May 2010, killing two residents, Mr Lodewyk Jansen who was 87 and
       Mr Gert van Rooyen who was 69, and injuring five others;


  (2) further notes that one of the senior citizens, Ms Jakoba Gelant, sadly
       passed away yesterday in the Paarl Hospital from smoke inhalation and
       burns;


  (3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to all the
       families of the deceased; and


  (4) calls on the people of the Western Cape, particularly the business
       community and the relevant authorities, to open their hearts and
       assist with the rebuilding of the destroyed section of the Rusthof
       Old Age Home.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     ANC GOVERNMENT TO BLAME FOR SERVICE DELIVERY PROTESTS IN DE DOORNS

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mnr J M BEKKER: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

  Dat die Raad kennis neem dat die optogte en ontevredenheid van die
  inwoners van De Doorns in verband met die swak dienslewering ten opsigte
  van behuising direk die skuld is van die ANC-regering se swak
  dienslewering wat behuising betref.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J M BEKKER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council notes that the march by and dissatisfaction of the
  residents of De Doorns with regard to poor service delivery in respect of
  housing is the direct result of the ANC government’s poor service delivery
  in respect of housing.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Any objection to that motion? There is an
objection to the motion. In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

   CALL FOR IMPROVED BUDGET ALLOCATIONS FOR HOSPITALS IN THE EASTERN CAPE
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –


     1) urgently debates the current budgets allocated to hospitals in the
        Eastern Cape in order to save South Africa from worldwide
        embarrassment;


      2) notes that –

          a) the hospitals were allocated an average of between 25% and 30%
             for goods and services and about 70% for staff salaries and
             wages;


        (b)      the allocated amount for the goods and services account
             will not last longer than three months;


        (c)      the budgets for staff covered the warm posts and a 70%
             budget allocation is moving backwards on “delivery of quality
             medical care to the people” and that it is difficult enough to
             find the staff to fill the positions as it is; and


        (d)      when hospital managers do not have sole control of their
             budget allocations and various departmental officials can move
             funds around in total contravention of national policy for
             delegation of financial powers, hospital managers cannot be
             held accountable for the services they are rendering, or for
             the finances of the hospitals;


      3) recognises that no proper financial planning can take place nor can
         food, medicine or medical supply orders be placed if one is unsure
         of available funding for the year;

      4) further notes that in the case of one hospital in particular, 25%
         of their budget was retained for the last quarter of the financial
         year and this hospital was stripped of its right to careful and
         diligent financial planning and management, thereby starting the
         new financial year with a deficit of outstanding accounts; and

      5) fears a shortage of medical supplies and food in the hospitals in
         the Eastern Cape by the end of June, and if this is not addressed
         immediately, the Eastern Cape will have a Fifa World Cup scandal of
         note.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes, hon Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, members should differentiate
between a statement and a motion. I think we should all be told that our
motions are only allowed to be one and a half minutes.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am watching the time. She is still in time.
Anyway, she moved it as a motion. Is there anybody objecting to that? Do
you object? In light of the objection, the motion may not be proceeded
with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of motion.

                  DEATH OF ANC COUNCILLOR MOTLATSI MOTLOHI

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M P JACOBS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes the sudden and tragic death of an ANC councillor, Comrade
        Motlatsi Motlohi who was the mayor of the Naledi Local Municipality
        in the southern Free State, which includes towns such as Wepener,
        Van Stadensrus and Dewetsdorp;

   (2)      further notes that Comrade Motlohi was viciously killed in front
        of his house in Wepener by unidentified men on Monday, 3 May 2010;

   (3)      takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to the
        Motlohi family, friends and comrades and wishes them strength
        during these trying times; and

   (4)      calls on the community of Wepener and the people of the Free
        State to work with the police to ensure that the perpetrators of
        this heinous crime are brought to justice and face the full might
        of the law.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 STATEMENT BY PRESIDENT ZUMA THAT APARTHEID CAN NO LONGER BE BLAMED FOR POOR
                              SERVICE DELIVERY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council acknowledges the remarks of the President of the Republic
  of South Africa, President Jacob Zuma, that after 16 years of democracy
  apartheid cannot be blamed for the non-service delivery.

I thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Any objection to the motion? There is an
objection to the motion. In light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a notice of
motion.

                  DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST JULIUS MALEMA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr M J R DE VILLIERS: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad –


   (1)      met sorg en dank kennis neem dat Julius Malema, President van
        die ANC-jeugliga, uiteindelik voor die ANC dissiplinêre komitee
        gedaag is;


   (2)      verder kennis neem dat hierdie stout, ongehoorsame en
        hardkoppige seun deur die ANC se gebrek en versuim om streng
        dissipline reëls toe te pas, geskep is;


   (3)      erken dat Julius Malema nie net die ANC in ‘n verleentheid
        gestel het nie, maar die goeie naam van die Regering van Suid-
        Afrika in gedrang geplaas het; en


   (4)      beoog om, saam met die mense van Suid-Afrika en die wêreld,
        hierdie verwikkelinge fyn dop te hou om te sien of die ANC nie net
        ‘n rookskerm gemaak het om die mense te bluf nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –
     1) notes with concern and gratitude that Julius Malema, president of
        the ANC Youth League, has finally been summoned to appear before
        the ANC’s disciplinary committee;

   2) further notes that this naughty, disobedient and stubborn boy was
      created by the ANC’s failure and neglect to apply strict disciplinary
      rules;


      3) concedes that Julius Malema has not only embarrassed the ANC, but
         has also prejudiced the reputation of the South African government;
         and

      4) intends, along with the people of South Africa and the world, to
         monitor these developments closely to establish whether the ANC has
         not simply created a smokescreen to bluff the people.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are there any objections? In light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion.

                      RAPE OF 3-YEAR-OLD EDENBURG GIRL
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes with utter disdain that a 3-year-old girl from Edenburg in
        Bloemfontein in the Free State was viciously assaulted and brutally
        raped by her aunt’s friend and that she is now fighting for her life
        in the intensive care unit at Bloemfontein’s Universitas Hospital;

   (2)      further notes that the girl’s aunt failed to report the incident
        because she says she was too scared;

   (3)      condemns in the strongest possible terms the senseless
        systematic attack and brutality waged against defenceless girl-
        children and women by people who are supposed to safeguard them in
        the families and communities where they live; and

   (4)      calls on the police to ensure that this case receives priority
        and that the perpetrator of this vicious and senseless crime is
        brought to book, put behind bars and removed from society.

Thank you.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 18 – Social Development:

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson and Deputy Chair of this
important House – by the way, I was once a member of this House – hon
Deputy Minister, hon MECs for social development present here today,
distinguished guests, representatives of development agencies and civil
society present here, hon members and all of you esteemed ladies and
gentlemen, a few days ago our people solemnly converged in their thousands
to mark the 16th anniversary of freedom and democracy in South Africa.

As we celebrate and continue our charted course, we again draw inspiration
from profound words so nobly uttered by our great icon and gallant freedom
fighter, Tata Nelson Mandela, when he said, “No South African should rest
and wallow in the joy of freedom”. These words remain relevant up to this
day. So, instead of wallowing in the joy of freedom, we use the 16th
anniversary of freedom as an opportune time for reflections on the journey
we have travelled so far.

The loss, pain and trauma of the apartheid decades must serve as a reminder
and strengthen our resolve to work together to defend our democratic gains.
The opportunity is now at hand for each one of us to join together in a
vision for a better and greater South Africa. As we celebrate our
democratic gains over the last 16 years, we remain mindful of the many
challenges that still lie ahead. However, we cannot allow cynics and the
prophets of doom to say that nothing has changed and that nothing will ever
change.

We are making steady progress on many fronts and, most importantly, we are
making a real difference in the lives of families, children, the youth,
older persons, and people with disabilities across South Africa. A report
entitled “Towards a 15-year Review”, which was recently tabled, clearly
shows that there has been a very significant decline in poverty,
accompanied by significant access by the public to basic services. Absolute
poverty among South Africans declined significantly.

Let me hasten to point out that none of these changes happened by accident
or chance; rather, it is the result of a deliberate action by the ANC to
move our country to a shared future. However, as I have said earlier, we
can never be complacent, and we can never take our success for granted
because we recognise that there is still a lot that remains to be done.
Many other challenges still remain to be tackled.

As we celebrate the 16th anniversary of freedom, we remain mindful that
democracy must bring its material benefits to all our people, particularly
the poor, the marginalised and vulnerable members of our society. From the
rural villages of Muyexe in Limpopo and Tshidilamolomo in North West to the
posh suburbs of Sandton in Gauteng, freedom must benefit our people. The
translation of freedom and democracy into measurable results is a task that
faces all of us. Today we take another major step in our pledge to restore
integrity, to renew hope, and to build a caring society.

Therefore, the Department of Social Development’s strategic objective is to
implement appropriate policy interventions so as to respond to the
immediate needs of individuals and communities, while at the same time
engaging in policy research and development that explore longer-term
solutions for addressing systemic poverty and inequality.

Guided by our theme “Working together we can do more”, and in line with
government’s key priorities, Budget Vote No 18 is an expression of our
electoral mandate to deepen and improve the quality of life of all those
who are impoverished and vulnerable. The pre-election commitments of the
ANC serve as a road map on this path. Our voters cast ballots for these
commitments: decent jobs, education, health, sustainable rural development,
and a crime-free society.

It is worth noting that I have already signed a performance agreement with
the President. Our Deputy Minister will also soon commit by signing. These
performance agreements will cascade to all our managers and staff in both
the department and our entities to strengthen the service delivery and
accountability that we are here to talk about.

This Budget Vote is focused on accelerating government investment in the
Department of Social Development’s three key programmes, namely social
security, welfare services and community development. As we all know,
poverty reduction continues to be the centrepiece of the ANC government’s
agenda. To this end, we have put in place a number of measures to address
poverty and its associated challenges, such as unemployment, social crime,
HIV/Aids and social exclusion.

As part of our contribution to the creation of a better life for all, the
Department of Social Development, working together with its provincial
counterparts and civil society organisations, has developed and implemented
an array of programmes that offer a protective shield against various
contingencies of life to many vulnerable individuals and households. We are
conscious that if we are to achieve the national goal of eradicating
poverty, we must ensure access to basic services and social protection
systems, particularly for vulnerable children, persons with disabilities,
and other disadvantaged groups in our society. Accordingly, the right to
social protection is embedded in the Constitution of our country.

During the debate in the National Assembly on 23 April, I indicated that
our envisaged comprehensive social security system has three pillars,
namely social assistance, social insurance and voluntary savings. While
significant progress has been made with regard to the first pillar, which
to date covers just over 14 million South Africans, we still have a long
way to travel with regard to the other two pillars.

The task that remains is the finalisation of policy and implementation of
our comprehensive social security system. This will be done through,
amongst others, linking contributory and noncontributory schemes and
improving access to these schemes. Our ultimate objective is the
establishment of a system of social security that protects our people
against particular vulnerabilities and risks, addresses retirement needs,
and promotes economic and social development.

As I indicated earlier, our government is determined to eradicate poverty.
It was with an enormous sense of solidarity and in line with our
Constitution that Cabinet approved the extension of the child support grant
to include all children born on or after 31 December 1993 and all those
born in the year of our democracy. These are the people that we are talking
about. The extension of the child support grant will be phased in to cover
over 2,1 million eligible children under the age of 18 years by the 2011-12
financial year.

With regard to a related development, I am happy to report that we have
made considerable progress with regard to age equalisation for the old age
pensions. From 1 April this year, men over the age of 60 years, who meet
the means test criteria, became eligible for the old age pension.
Hhayi shayani izandla bo! [Ihlombe.] [Please give a round of applause!
[Applause.]]

In this regard – especially this side - I want to express my gratitude to
our government and the National Treasury for making the necessary budget
allocation for implementation of the final phase of this process.

In spite of the impressive progress we have made on many fronts, adequate
protection for children, women, people with disabilities, and older persons
against violent crimes and abuse remains a serious concern to our
government. To this end, we will continue to work with our partners in the
social sector to expand and strengthen welfare services and interventions
targeting rural and underserviced areas.

Last year I informed this august House about two important pieces of
legislation, namely the Children’s Act, Act 38 of 2005 as amended and the
Older Persons Act, Act 13 of 2006. As many of us may know by now, these two
pieces of legislation came into operation on 1 April this year. The
Children’s Act, with its broader view to protect, care for, and ensure the
development of children, brings along major obligations on the social
sector. It also requires a total paradigm shift which we are determined to
go through.

We therefore remain committed to provide early childhood development
services for all our children as a major focus of our government. Pursuant
to the President’s clarion call, which he made in his response to the
debate on the state of the nation address, we will upscale our investment
in children through the early childhood development, ECD, programme. An
investment in children has proven to yield positive health and educational
outcomes. These include improvement in cognitive development through early
learning stimulation and improved health through inoculations and better
access to nutrition. This investment in our children is indeed an
investment in the future of our country.

While the primary responsibility for the care and protection of children
lies with the primary caregiver, our government firmly believes that
protecting our children is everybody’s responsibility. Therefore, we make a
clarion call to all parents and caregivers to ensure the enrolment and
attendance of our children at ECD centres, as these centres also provide
them with a protective environment.

That is why we will continue with our efforts to raise community awareness
of child protection issues. On 21 May this year, we will, together with the
Presidency and the President, launch the annual Child Protection Week
campaign. We will use this campaign to popularise the Children’s Act as
well as launch the national action plan to promote child safety during the
2010 Fifa World Cup and beyond. On 10 March this year, our Ministers and
Members of the Executive Council, Minmec, endorsed a joint national action
plan to co-ordinate and facilitate the safety and protection of children
during this tournament. The plan includes, amongst others, the
establishment of a national joint and provincial command centre, setting up
child-friendly spaces in four provinces, namely two in Gauteng, two in
Mpumalanga, one in the Eastern Cape, and one in Durban.

One of the issues we will focus on is the deployment of social service
professionals and foreign language interpreters at the public viewing areas
and in the host cities to provide counselling services to victims of human
trafficking and any other social problems that may arise. Let me assure you
that we are working together with other provinces, civil society
organisations and development agencies such as the United Nations
International Children’s Emergency Fund, Unicef, to ensure that the safety
of our children is not compromised. I appeal to all South Africans to be
vigilant and work closely with us, as well as the law enforcement agencies,
to stem the scourge of abuse of this particular nature in our country. It
does not mean that many others are not important, but we specifically talk
about this in relation to Fifa.

The rehabilitation of children in conflict with the law is a key priority
of this government. Consequently, over this Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework, MTEF, period, we will continue to implement the Child Justice
Act by scaling up appropriate diversion and alternative sentencing
programmes. The Deputy Minister will allude to these issues in her speech.

The other important piece of legislation that I would like to bring to the
attention of the NCOP is the Older Persons Act. This Act ushers in a new
developmental approach in support of older persons.

We live in a fast-aging world where older persons are playing a critical
role in families and communities. In our quest to build a society for all
ages, we will give priority to the implementation of this Act. I am
encouraged to note that all provinces have embraced the active aging
approach and have put in place measures to promote older persons’
participation in cultural, social life, and lifelong learning initiatives.
We look forward to your continued co-operation and partnership as we
implement the South African plan of action on aging.

We will formalise our partnership with Age-in-Action and continue to
implement programmes that promote intergenerational solidarity. At the
heart of our intervention is the need to promote the family as the first
line of care for older persons. I am sure that all of us will stand up to
the confidence bestowed upon us by our society and work together to
implement this Act. Regardless of our party affiliations, we all have a
single collective responsibility to work together to protect our senior
citizens. We say again that working together, we can do more.

Let me take this opportunity to extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of the two senior citizens who died in a fire that broke out at
the Rusthof Old Age Home in Paarl on Sunday. Our thoughts and prayers are
also with those hurt in the accident. We wish them all a speedy recovery.

The need to retain the current pool of social service professionals and
attract more to our sector is imperative, particularly in the light of new
pieces of legislation that we have promulgated. In this regard, we have
increased the budget allocation for the implementation of the recruitment
and retention strategy for social workers and the training and employment
of other cadres of the social service professions. The process for the
nomination of members of the SA Council for Social Service Professions,
SACSSP, and a professional board for social work has been completed. We
will install the new members later this year.

With regard to the occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, I am happy to
report to this august House that we have made significant progress in all
provinces. To date, all our social workers and community development
practitioners have received a salary notch progression in accordance with
the OSD agreement. We have also set up review committees in all provinces
to deal with individual complaints and other matters related to this
process. To date, the review committees are dealing with the remaining 200
of the 300 queries that we received from four provinces only, namely North
West, Gauteng, Western Cape and Northern Cape.

The regrading of community development practitioners has also been
completed. Part of Social Development’s responsibility is to facilitate and
encourage social and economic development through local action. In this
regard, we have begun working earnestly with our provincial counterparts to
implement integrated high-impact development projects as part of the
activation strategies to link the poor to sustainable livelihoods and
economic opportunities.

One such project is the Hemp Industrial Park in the Eastern Cape. Other
priorities in this regard include the following: working together with the
Soul City Institute to sustain and roll out the Kwanda community
development initiative; supporting the establishment of food bank networks
in four additional provinces to bolster household food security; capacity-
building of social service professionals on the toolkit for community
development practitioners, and to contribute to the work on the war on
poverty.

It is our government’s endeavour to redesign all rural development
programmes with a more pronounced antipoverty focus. To this end, and in a
further effort towards waging war on poverty, we have allocated R87,2
million to the National Development Agency, NDA, for disbursement to
antipoverty initiatives. On this note, I would like to encourage hon
members of this august House to look at the very impressive work done by
these community organisations.

As part of our contribution to the Social Protection and Community
Development cluster, we will give more attention to programmes that seek to
stimulate the rural economy to provide livelihoods for citizens who live in
rural communities. One such initiative which we are implementing in
partnership with the Cacadu District Municipality in the Eastern Cape is
the Vondeling upliftment project. This project has been making a real
difference in the lives of the poor by providing them with the opportunity
to build their assets and improve their quality of life.

The SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, has responded with a great sense of
urgency to President Zuma’s call to make government work better and faster
for our people. Reflecting the new ethos of effective and responsive
governance, the agency has begun to implement an innovative grant
administration process which will be rolled out over this Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework period. The overriding purpose is to improve the
total value chain of the grant administration programme.

We live in a world dominated by advanced information and communications
technology. Consequently, we must leverage information communications
technology to transform the way we do our work.

In this regard, I am pleased to announce that we will move towards the
implementation of the National Integrated Social Information System, NISIS,
over this MTEF period. This is done with the view to enhance the integrity
of our information on the delivery and impact of government services. This
system gives government a single view of a beneficiary of service and is
currently being used as part of the war on poverty campaign, as well as in
the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, CRDP. To date, 43 000
households have been captured and 60 000 individual referrals have been
generated through this system. Over this MTEF period, we will also focus
our attention on developing and implementing a comprehensive monitoring and
evaluation system to improve service delivery across the sector. The full
implementation of NISIS will contribute to the development and
implementation of a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system.

In relation to youth development, we will continue with the implementation
of the Masupatsela Youth Pioneer Programme which creates an opportunity for
every young person to become a valuable asset in our country. Through this
programme, we plan to nurture and foster the spirit of patriotism amongst
our young people and to ensure that we build activism and nation-building
among them. So far, we have recruited 2 099 young pioneers and 120 mentors.
We have trained 1 752 pioneers through the Masupatsela Youth Pioneer
curriculum. We have also deployed six Cuban experts in six provinces to
fast-track this particular programme.

Substance abuse is not a fight that government can win alone. It is
transversal in nature and requires the collective involvement of all
sectors. It is a fight that requires the participation and vigilance of all
South Africans. The Deputy Minister will allude to this programme, and I
will not get into details thereon.

As I conclude, I want to indicate that this budget that we are tabling
before this august House today brings much-needed relief and shows
compassion to the most vulnerable members of our society. With this budget,
we continue to invest in our children, the future of our nation, and to
strengthen families. With this budget, we convey shared hopes and dreams
for a better South Africa.

It is almost a year since I assumed responsibility for this portfolio. I am
encouraged by the enormous support given by the Chairperson of this august
House, the Deputy Chairperson, the Chief Whip of this House, members of the
Select Committee on Social Services, the MECs, members of civil society and
community-based organisations, as well as volunteers, staff of the
department led so ably by the director-general, the Sassa, and NDA, so ably
led by both the board and the acting chief executive officer.

I also thank my family and my political home most importantly, the ANC, for
their selfless efforts and support. Their unwavering commitment to the
cause of building a caring and compassionate government is the embodiment
of the new ethos that we want to address. This is the kind of ethos that we
are practising in the Department of Social Development. Surely, this spirit
of team work will continue as it should, and I have no reason to doubt that
it will so that, together, we can do more to improve the lives of our
people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs R N RASMENI: Hon Chairperson, members of the House and distinguished
guests, the objective of the ANC-led government is to improve both the
overall level of wellbeing of its citizens, as well as the distribution of
goods and services to promote the wellbeing of all members of society.

Social development is based on an integrated understanding of the
challenges facing South Africa. Although there are no simple or isolated
solutions to the challenges we face, the ANC has, over the past 16 years,
implemented a set of priority actions to help accelerate social progress in
supporting the attainment of the social development goals. Successful
implementation of planning requires both fiscal and political resources.
The social development strategy of the ANC-led government applies to all
sectors of society and reinforces the approach of all sectors working
together in partnership to achieve the common goal of creating a better
life for all.

Central to the task of social transformation is the role of the ANC in
government in confronting the challenges of poverty and underdevelopment.
At this juncture, we can and must reaffirm our commitment to redress
poverty and inequality. We are building a developmental state and not a
welfare state, given that in a welfare state dependency is profound.

Beyond poverty alleviation, interventions must seek to develop exit
programmes that capacitate households and communities to empower
themselves. It is the duty of the developmental state to achieve this. The
ANC, in adopting the 2002 Taylor Committee’s recommendation on
comprehensive social security, was seeking to address itself to a social
security system that included comprehensive social insurance schemes such
as the Unemployment Insurance Fund, UIF, the Road Accident Fund, RAF, and
the National Health Insurance, NHI, financed through contributions of
potential beneficiaries and subsidised by employers. Secondly, it spoke to
social assistance for those who cannot provide for themselves because of
circumstances beyond their control.

The restructuring of the social development sector, which was partly
triggered by shifting the social security function to the national sphere,
resulted in positive developments. Funding for the sector has grown and is
expected to grow over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period.
This enables the base for improved service delivery to the most vulnerable.
Given the growing budgets, the sector has to reposition itself to deliver a
comprehensive package of social services.

The 2002 51st national conference of the ANC called for care and support
for families to be elevated. As a result, care and support services to
families experienced increases over the medium term. At the 52nd national
conference of the ANC in Polokwane, concern over the negative impact of
poverty on our society was deeply debated. The following priority has
emerged: that a comprehensive social security net provides a targeted and
impeccable approach in eradicating poverty and unemployment, establishes a
mandatory retirement fund and ensures that retirement provisions cover low-
income groups, prioritises the welfare of children, and, in this regard,
develops services that seek to deal with child poverty.

The Department of Social Development should strengthen collaboration with
the department of Education and other departments involved in early
childhood development. The child support grant should be gradually extended
to the age of 18 years. The pensionable age must be equalised and set at 60
years, and a co-ordinated national drug campaign must be intensified to
combat substance abuse. We are glad to notice that, as the select
committee, the department is in the process of addressing all the issues
that were mentioned in this conference.

Within the national frameworks of poverty reduction and economic growth,
the ANC sees the social development sector supporting efforts to eliminate
hunger, improve food security, and develop appropriate feeding practices
for high-risk populations. For the ANC, food security is critical and part
of the ANC’s agrarian reform programme is designed to address this. In
addressing this, we welcome Social Development’s programme to provide
integrated food aid and nutrition to people who are not currently included
in the safety net. This includes, but is not limited to, incorporating the
homestead food gardening programme, nutritional support services to mothers
and babies, a nutrition and food safety programme available at early
childhood development facilities, school feeding schemes for poor learners
in primary and secondary schools, subsidisation of nongovernmental
organisations, NGOs, to provide food relief, and community self-help
initiatives, such as bulk buying of food through saving clubs,
organisations and co-operatives.

The provision by Social Development of social relief to individuals,
families and communities in distress and the provision of disaster relief
and emergency housing had one of the most profound impacts upon the
destitute and the unemployed. We must ensure that a comprehensive social
security net provides a targeted approach in eradicating poverty and
unemployment. In doing this, we will have to ensure that a minimum common
base on all social security intervention programmes by all departments must
be adhered to. Chairperson, the committee supports the departmental Budget
Vote. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, the key strategic
objective of the department is to implement appropriate policy
interventions that respond to the need of individuals and communities and
to do research in order to explore long-term solutions that will address
poverty, social security, welfare services and community developments.

In South Africa, there are 13 million people included in the safety net of
social grants; poverty remains a deep and daunting challenge. Poverty is
closely linked to the structural problems of unemployment and the lack of
skills. Social Development’s expenditure grew from R67,1 billion in 2007 to
R86,5 billion in 2009, an average annual rate of 11,9%. South Africa’s
economy will be crippled by social grants if the department does not come
up with a workable plan in the near future.

Parliamentary questions by the DA to the Minister have revealed a severe
backlog in the approval of the applications for social grants by the SA
Social Security Agency, Sassa. This leaves the poorest and most vulnerable
South Africans desperate for help but unable to get the assistance they
qualify for. To date, 27 633 applications have not been approved by Sassa.
The DA parliamentary questions revealed that, to date, there are 4 634
legal procedures against Sassa. A number of these cases have reached the
Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court. One Supreme Court judge
described the inefficiency of the state in the processing of social grants
applications as a war of attrition against the poor.

Currently, the bulk of Sassa’s expenditure goes to cash payment
contractors, which on average accounts for approximately 53% of the entire
budget. A figure of 27% is left to cover compensation for employees, while
the remaining 20% caters for essential operational expenses. The love Life
prevention programmes for youth take up 14,9% of the allocation for the
2010-11 financial year and are known not to be a success – this is
excluding social assistance grants and public entities.

The DA urges the Minister to facilitate and introduce cost containment
measures that will contribute towards avoiding inefficient spending. The
department must make sure that only eligible beneficiaries are being paid
to improve the integrity of data.

Children are at risk because the Act which was initiated to create the
register of persons who should not be allowed to work with children is not
yet fully operational. In a reply to the DA’s question on whether the child
protection register is fully operational, the department responded that
Social Development cannot obtain information on people who are unsuitable
to work with children from the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development. The response further states that the electronic integration
system for sharing conviction information from the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development and the Department of Police will be phased
in over a period of five years, making this child protection register
operational only from 2014.

Hon Minister, the DA finds it unacceptable that it will take nearly 10
years for this Act to be created, given the shocking record of child abuse
in South Africa and the fact that a budget of R2,9 million has been
allocated for the financial year 2009-10. Funding is not the issue but the
problem appears to start from a lack of political will to get the job done.
Children should be given priority over the integration of a cumbersome
system.

Quite soon we will also have a dilemma surrounding the extension of orders
for foster care grants as they need to be updated every two years to allow
Sassa to pay beneficiaries effectively. Are the Departments of Justice and
Constitutional Development and Social Development aware of the very
important role they now play in the reviewed extension of foster care
grants orders? Foster care parents play an important role in keeping foster
care children in their care and can surely not afford the cancellation of
these foster care grants. The DA would like to suggest that we explore the
avenue of adoption. Adoption should always be the preferred option.

If we fail to address poverty, we will fail to build and defend democracy
in South Africa. The primary mandate of the National Development Agency,
NDA, is to contribute towards the eradication of poverty by granting funds
to civil society for the purpose of implementing development projects for
the poor as well as strengthening their capacity. The amount of R87,2
million was given to the NDA; only a few a true success stories were
recorded. The NDA is failing to uphold its mandate as it has poor
monitoring systems in place. The institution is also suffering from a lack
of constant strategic leadership.

Minister, the DA acknowledges the progress made in the fight against fraud
and corruption with regard to social grants but it is not enough to just
sign the acknowledgement of debt for repayment. South Africa wants to see
justice being done. The criminals must be prosecuted and sentenced.

In conclusion, the intentions on paper by the department and its entities
are more desirable but the implementation and monitoring remains a
challenging issue. The DA urges a speedy implementation to change the
situation. It is within this context that the DA raises its concerns. I
thank you, Chair.

Ms M G BOROTO: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Minister of Social Development,
hon Deputy Minister of Social Development, hon Members of Parliament,
special delegates from provinces, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, last year the whole world experienced the effects of the global
financial crisis and its dire socioeconomic consequences, especially for
the developing countries. Despite the economic and social effects of the
crisis, coupled with the legacy of apartheid - deprivation for the majority
of the South African people - the Department of Social Development
continued to prevail. Through its programmes grounded in social security,
welfare services, and integrated developmental services, the department
continued to provide hope and brought stability to many families and
communities.

We agree with the Minister that the ruling party and government believe in
the social transformation of our society. Central to this task is
confronting the challenges of poverty and underdevelopment. Confronting
poverty means that our efforts should seek to empower people to enable them
to improve themselves. The department has been allocated a budget of R95,9
billion for the current fiscal year. Of this total budget, 93% goes towards
social assistance, which is the payment of social grants. This allocation
will assist the most vulnerable in line with issues raised by the President
in the state of the nation address this year. It shows the government’s
commitment to helping the poor people.

Empowering communities to get out of poverty is one of the major pillars of
the social transformation agenda. The department demonstrated this
understanding by allocating R83,5 billion to the National Development
Agency, which has a primary mandate of eradicating poverty and its causes
by granting funds to civil society organisations for the purpose of
implementing development projects for poor communities and strengthening
the capacity of civil society organisations that provide services to the
poor.

All the developmental and antipoverty initiatives depend on an adequate
number of social auxiliary workers as well as development for practitioners
both in government and nongovernmental organisations which fall under the
NGO sector. This reminds me of people who gave of themselves to be
volunteers, like Charlotte Maxeke, who was one of the first black social
workers. Hon Faber, coming from the rural areas myself, and doing
constituency work, we have noted that this sector is understaffed. Our
programme of Taking Parliament to the People has echoed the same
sentiments.

What makes us happy is that there is an acknowledgement by the Department
of Social Development to address that challenge. That has been shown by the
way the department has responded to the challenge, by allocating R2,26
million in bursaries for the training of more social workers. With more
social workers, the department will be able to maximise its effectiveness
in contributing towards poverty alleviation. However, the challenges facing
auxiliary social workers need to be addressed comprehensively. There must
be upward mobility and a career path. We also have to recognise their prior
learning. Whilst I am speaking about the social workers, I must also say
that we applaud the Department of Social Development for giving stipends to
our caregivers who started as volunteers.

Begodu, mhlambe ngingaba nesibawo, Sihlalo, ukuthi kulabo abanikela
ngesizo, ama-caregivers, asazi bona singeza nawaphi amaqhinga ukuze sisize
ukuthola abobaba ngombana lapha ngihlala khona kunomraro wokuthi abobaba
abafuni ukuzinikela ekusizeni, babebanikeli ngesizo, ama-caregivers. Begodu
ngesikhethu, baba, akukghonakali bonyana umma asize ubaba ngokumhlambisa.
Asisizaneni nanyana singazi bona bunjani. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[And maybe I can make a request, Chairperson, especially to those who
provide assistance, the caregivers. We don’t know what kind of strategies
we can come up with to help them in bringing men into the fold, because
there is a challenge where I come from in that men do not want to make
themselves available to provide assistance, and helping caregivers. And
according to my culture, it is not acceptable for a woman to help bathe a
man. Let’s help each other although we don’t know how. [Applause.]]

The ANC is committed to fighting against all forms of human trafficking.
Most of the victims of human trafficking are women and children. We need to
create comprehensive national and provincial antitrafficking strategies and
also ensure that these strategies are well resourced. We must intensify our
partnerships with other role-players and fellow departments. I know that we
have been championing these strategic tasks. Indeed, the task to combat
human trafficking requires significant resources. Our partnership momentum
is relevant more than ever before in the light of the Fifa Soccer World Cup
and the dangers that this can bring as well, in complicating human
trafficking.

The President has declared 2010 a year of action. This is a clarion call to
the ANC-led government to do things differently and with a new sense of
urgency and compassion for the poor. This call for action should
characterise the approach to social services, the speed at which we do our
work and demonstrate its quality, especially that of the department. In
building a caring society together, let us improve the quality of life of
the people of South Africa by working together with the department and
other important stakeholders. Working together, we can do more. The Select
Committee on Social Services fully supports this Budget Vote. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr I MEYER (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister of Social Development,
hon Deputy Minister Dlamini, hon members, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, I would like to start by thanking the Minister for delivering a
budget speech that was significantly filled with direction and was focused
on enhanced service delivery. I specifically wanted to thank her for
visiting Mitchells Plain and the Horizon Development Centre during the last
Minmec held in Cape Town. During that visit, the Minister spoke to the
youth about the dangers of substance abuse. I will say more about that
later.

I would also like to express my gratitude for being part of a team whose
mandate was to contribute to the fulfilment of our constitutional
responsibility. In her budget speech, the Minister also outlined her
department’s programme for the next financial year. It is important that we
embark on a road that has, as its commitment, our dedicated service to the
people of our country, especially the poorest of the poor.

Her commitment to uproot fraud, to eradicate corruption and to ensure that
no effort will be spared to bring to justice those who compromise the
integrity of the social grant system must be commended. The implementation
of the Children’s Act, Act 38 of 2005 as amended, the Child Justice Act and
the Older Persons Act, is welcomed as they are future instruments to be
expedited.

The migration of the current grant system to financial institutions is long
overdue and is welcomed in this House. I think all members of this House
noted and have had personal experience of how older persons and the
recipients of grants are being abused by gangsters and drug lords during
payouts, when receiving their social grants. I believe that the migration
to a banking system will eliminate many of these social ills that we have
witnessed in the past number of years.

In complimenting the government’s programme, we in the Western Cape are
also deeply concerned about the state of abuse against children in our
province. It has reached crisis proportions, and we are currently mapping
out our strategic response to the abuse of children. Our first priority,
for now, is to implement the 2010 child protection plan in time for the
soccer World Cup.

Therefore, I am pleased to announce in this House that we are ready to
implement the national 2010 child protection plan across the Western Cape
in general but specifically at the five public viewing areas. We would also
like to inform the members of this House that, in the next few days, we
will be announcing the school safety plan. As we know, schools will be
closed during the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup period, which would put an
added responsibility on all of us, as well as the Department of Social
Development and the various municipalities across South Africa. We are
committed to showcasing that we are ready to implement the child protection
plan.

In the Western Cape, we also have moved from the premise that to realise a
self-reliant society, opportunities need to be created for all the citizens
of the Western Cape that are poor, vulnerable and have special needs. This
fits into the programme, as announced by the Minister today. In the Western
Cape, we believe in social entrepreneurship. Last year in this House, the
Minister referred to social entrepreneurship. We believe that that is one
of the key tools to create self-reliance without compromising on the
developmental role of the state. Therefore, in the Western Cape we have
committed ourselves to four broad goals: to modernise the services, to
improve financial governance, to increase social entrepreneurship, and to
create a caring society.

Speaking about improving financial governance, the Western Cape funds 1 800
NGOs. On a daily basis, I have been confronted with complaints that many of
those organisations do not comply with good systems of financial
governance.

Hon Minister, tomorrow the standing committee on social development in the
Western Cape will join the local SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, to visit
some of the service delivery points to get first-hand experience and to
test whether service delivery is indeed improving on the ground.

Hon members in this House as well as the Minister referred to the old age
home that burnt down over the past weekend in Paarl. Thank you for the
messages of condolence. I was there this morning and on Saturday night when
the place was burning. I personally witnessed the caring culture of the
people of the Western Cape. Many times we speak – also in this House –
about ubuntu, but we rarely see it in action. I want to mention to this
House that I have personally seen ubuntu in action, through the staff, the
municipality, and the law enforcement agency; everybody engaging to ensure
that we create a caring society.

Today, I will be engaging with the insurance company to make sure that they
pay out so that we can reconstruct the old age home. Therefore, I am also
thankful for the support we have received in this House today.

Hon Minister, I think we need to do something more specific right across
this country. We need to put measures in place at all the old age homes
across South Africa and all the crèches, in order to make sure that health
and safety standards are in place all over the country. I have already
issued such an instruction to my head of department to make sure that all
the old age homes comply with the safety standards across the province.

Hon Minister, I would like to report that yesterday I received a letter
from your office stating that we should have a dedicated focus on early
childhood development. I want to report to this House that I have already
indicated in the House and in the meeting yesterday with my HOD that we
will comply with your request to have a dedicated focus on early childhood
development. I also want to state that last month, during my budget vote,
we made special priority allocations in the budget for early childhood
development, and we will certainly co-operate with your request to have a
dedicated focus on early childhood development.

We also believe that we need to give the youth hope. We have launched
Project Hope in the Western Cape. Hope is an acronym for Higher
Opportunities for People to Excel. Therefore, on 16 June we will not be
involved in handing out T-shirts and caps but create opportunities for
people to excel.

I would also like the Minister to investigate the role of local government
in social development as we frequently get people who question the role of
local government in terms of social development. As a Minister for social
development in the Western Cape, I have no doubt about the important role
that local authorities have, and I have no doubt about the developmental
role of social development within a municipality. Secondly, I would like
the Minister to inform us whether any impact assessment was done of the
sustainable livelihood projects of the National Development Agency.
Thirdly, I would like the Minister to inform us how the Central Drug
Authority will assist provincial governments with the issue of substance
abuse.

I want to congratulate the Minister on many of the initiatives that she has
indicated here today in this House. However, I also want to inform the
House that the current process of social workers going into the field,
writing a report with a pen, going back to the office to type it and
eventually emailing it to the supervisors is long, bureaucratic and
cumbersome. We in the Western Cape have developed a “smart pen” whereby a
person, in the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, for
example, can visit any farm and write up a report with the pen. That pen
sends that handwritten information into a text format. Via satellite, the
text format then immediately goes back to your office. The supervisor would
have access to the whereabouts of the farm worker or the field worker
working on the farm. [Applause.]

Hon Minister, we are now investigating the possibility of whether we could
use the “smart pen” for social workers and probation officers, particularly
in the courts, in order to fast-track the diversion options, so that when
the social worker writes the report in the court, that information would
already be with the supervisor. This will help us get smarter and work
smarter in government.

Mr D V BLOEM: [Inaudible.]

Dr I MEYER (Western Cape): Lastly, I want to ... Thank you. Lastly, I want
the NCOP – Mr Bloem – to investigate the abuse of elderly persons, right
now in the street outside Parliament. I believe that they are being abused
by the system and the people within government. In addition, I would like
to thank the NCOP for the opportunity to take part in this debate. I thank
you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sekela Sihlalo wale Ndlu, mama uMemela, mhlonishwa
Ngqongqoshe nephini lakho kanye noNgqongqoshe Bezifundazwe zakithi.
Bodadewethu uMnyango wenu ubhekene nezinselelo zokondla labo bantu
abangakwazi ukuzondla ezweni lonke. Izinselelo okufanele nizibhekisise
kahle ukuthi zihamba kanjani kulezi zifundazwe zethu eziyisishiyagalolunye.
Kunezinto eziba yizinselelo ekwenzeni umsebenzi ekutheni uhambe kahle,
njengokungabambisani kweMinyango kahulumeni, kanti uMthethosisekelo ukubeka
kucace ukuthi iMinyango kufanele ixhumane.

UMnyango wakho Ngqongqoshe wenza umsebenzi omkhulu wokuthi wondle
izinkedama nezaguga zakithi kuleli lizwe lakithi. Kodwa uma uMnyango
Wezasekhaya uhambela ekudeni, ungakwazi ukusondela eduze koMnyango wakho,
abantu bakithi njengezingane zethu ezizala izingane zingenabo ngisho
omazisi ziba nenkinga yokuthola izibonelelo zikahulumeni ezisuke zikhishwa
uMnyango wakho Ngqongqoshe.

Ngiyacela ukuthi nihlangane ninonke njengoNgqongqoshe uma nibamba
imihlangano emincane eniyibambayo, nikwazi ukuthi nithathe iMinyango yenu
nenze uhlelo lokusiza umphakathi. Nisebenzisane niyiMinyango
kahulumeni,isibonelo, uMnyango Wezefundo, uMnyango Wezasekhaya, uMnyango
Wezenhlalakahle, niphinde nivakashele izikole zethu ndawonye. Ngiyawubonga
umsebenzi eniwenzayo wokuthi nehlise izinga lokulamba ezinganeni zakithi
nakomama bethu emakhaya.

Ngimangazwa ukuthi ninezinselelo enibhekene nazo ezifundisweni zakithi
ezifana nosonhlalakahle. Akubona-ke kodwa osonhlalakahle kuphela abangenza
lo msebenzi uphumelele, ngisho nabantu abenza umsebenzi wasemahhovisi nabo
bangabantu okufanele nibheke emkhakheni wabo ukuthi niyakwazi yini ukufaka
isandla kubo, bakwazi ukufunda ngoba yonke leMinyango izosebenzisana kahle
uma kukhona abantu abafundile.

Enye inselelo onayo eMnyangweni wakho ukuthi Umnyango Wezobulungiswa
Nokuthuthukiswa KoMthethosisekelo kufuneka ubheke ukuthi imiyalelo
yenkantolo yokuthi kusizakale izingane ngokushesha iyenzeka yini
ezinkantolo, yizo zonke izinselelo ezibhekene nalo Mnyango. Okokugcina bese
niba nendlela yokuhlola u-SASSA kuzwelonke ukuthi usebenza kahle yini
njengesikhungo. Siyi-IFP siyasesekela isabelomali sanamhlanje, Nkosikazi.
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Deputy Chairperson of the House, hon Memela, hon
Minister and your Deputy and MECs, and hon colleagues, this department is
faced with the challenge of feeding all those people of this country who
cannot feed themselves. You must carefully look at the direction that this
challenge is taking in all our nine provinces. There are things that become
obstacles when one is doing one’s job; they are issues like the non
collaboration of state departments although the Constitution clearly states
that the state departments should work together.

Your department, hon Minister, is doing a great job of feeding the orphans
and the aged of our country. But if the Department of Home Affairs operates
separately from your department, and cannot operate closer to your
department, our people - I mean our children who bear children without
having any form of identity - encounter problems when they try to acquire
government grants that are issued by your department, hon Minister.

I request that you hold brief meetings as Ministers so that you are able to
draw up a programme across your departments that will play a role in
assisting the communities. You need to work together as the state
departments. For example, the Departments of Education, Home Affairs and
Social Development should work together and also visit our schools
together. I am grateful for the work you are doing in eradicating poverty
in respect of our children and our mothers back home.

I am surprised that you encounter problems from our learned people like the
social workers. But it is not only the social workers who can make this
work a success; you also need to look at the level of education of office
administrators and see if there is anything that you need to do to enable
them to study because all these departments would work well together if
they had educated people in office.

Another challenge that is facing your department is that the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development needs to see if court orders that
call for children to receive assistance in time are carried out. These are
all the challenges facing your department. Lastly, you need to have means
to investigate how the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, operates as a
structure. As the IFP we support today’s Budget Vote, Madam. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy House Chairperson, hon
Minister of Social Development, hon Members of Parliament, MECs for social
development and chairpersons from provinces, distinguished guests, ladies
and gentlemen, a week ago democratic South Africa turned 16 years of age.
Many of our citizens celebrated the occasion throughout the country because
they believed that, in our time-honoured tradition, we will continue to
implement the agenda of change that we promised when this nation was born
anew on that glorious occasion in April 1994. This is the path on which we
continue to travel.

On this occasion, our duties are defined not by the words we use but by the
achievements we have made in the last decade and a half. Yet, despite many
remarkable achievements in meeting the aspirations of our people, the
experience of some remains far short of their expectations. That there are
people in our society who continue to live in desperate poverty is well
known and understood. That families and communities continue to break apart
is at odds with the dream of creating strong, cohesive communities.

This dream cannot be achieved by government alone, because a huge part of
building an inclusive society is to involve communities in shaping their
own destinies. The future is theirs to decide. We will, during this year,
continue to strengthen our community mobilisation campaigns to ensure that
communities take ownership of the work we do with them as government. As
most of us know, the creation and survival of cohesive families and
communities increasingly depend on actively involving communities in
interventions that make all South Africans feel that they too have a place
in the evolving South African story.

The prevention of social crime, especially as it relates to children, is
one of the cornerstones of building a caring and prosperous society. The
breakdown of families has the potential to expose some children to
situations where they are in conflict with the law. This cannot be allowed
to continue unabated, and we will, during this year, ensure that we fully
implement the Child Justice Act as an expression of our commitment to the
realisation of children’s rights as set out in the Constitution.

In order to effectively implement the Child Justice Act, we have trained
over 800 probation practitioners to provide services to children in
conflict with the law across the country. We have, thus far, established 33
fully functional secure care facilities which accommodate children awaiting
trial. In addition to this, we have established at least 53 reception
assessment centres where children in conflict with the law will be assessed
within 48 hours of arrest.

There are many of our children who are on their own, without any visible
parental or adult supervision. Some can still be found roaming the streets,
some playing truant from school, with others not enrolled at school at all.
Some of these children don’t even have a place they can call home. This is
unworthy of a humane society such as ours. This is something we need to
address urgently. We will continue with our social mobilisation campaign
through which, in the spirit of ubuntu, we encourage South Africans to
adopt orphans and other needy children, for they too bear the image of the
Creator. They too have rights and are of matchless value to our society.

I note with vicarious pride the role played by civil society organisations
and other individuals who have taken up the remarkable task of establishing
and registering early childhood development, ECD, centres. I am happy to
announce that an increasing number of our children are being enrolled in
these facilities. These are organisations and individuals who know what
South Africa is all about: a caring and humane society which looks after
the welfare of its children.

The scourge of substance abuse poses a serious threat to our efforts to
build healthy and cohesive communities. This is creating a nagging fear
that our communities are falling apart. We remain a young nation, so this
cannot be allowed to continue. It is my fervent intention, in the spirit of
the Polokwane resolutions, to intensify the fight against substance abuse
in our society. We will, during this year, reposition the Central Drug
Authority, CDA, in order to strengthen its efficacy and to co-ordinate the
implementation of the National Drug Master Plan. All provinces, hon MEC
Meyer, are represented in the CDA, and we think that the Western Cape, as
one of the provinces that has been most severely hit by this scourge, is
going to benefit enormously from this programme.

Our greatness as a nation also flows from our commitment to the welfare of
our elders. We have already announced that we will, as part of accelerating
the implementation of the Older Persons Act, Act 13 of 2006, continue to
ensure that our elders receive the best care this society can offer. My
department will work with the South African Older Persons’ Forum to ensure
that we create intergenerational networks which will enable the elderly to
transfer their indigenous knowledge and skills to the youth, more
particularly life skills through storytelling ...

... ngesintu esikubiza ngokuthi izinganekwane. [... which we call fables in
our indigenous languages.]

They can teach them negotiation ...

... ukuziphatha kwabafana namantombazane, ngoba ukuziphatha akufuneki
emantombazaneni kuphela nabafana futhi kufanele baziphathe ngendlela
ehloniphekile, bakwazi futhi ukuthi bahloniphe abantu besifazane ngoba
ngokwesintu umuntu wesifazane uhlonipheke kakhulu. Ngakho-ke abantu abadala
bangakwazi ukuthi uma behlezi nabantwana abancane baxoxe nabo ukuze bakwazi
ukuzenza zonke lezi zinto. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[... good behaviour in boys and girls, because it is not only expected from
girls; boys should also behave in a respectful way, and they must know how
to respect women because culturally a woman is highly respected. Therefore,
adults should be able to talk to their youth when they are sitting together
in order to enable them to do all these things.]

Our commitment to fighting poverty and building cohesive communities and
strong families is, in part, a recognition of the fact that all is not well
in our society. Many vulnerable people, especially women and children,
continue to experience the scourge of abuse in society. In this regard, we
have developed a victim empowerment programme which aims to protect and
provide services to victims of domestic and gender-based violence.

On the eve of the kick-off of the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament,
excitement across the country is already in the air. During the tournament,
incidents of human trafficking are likely to increase, as hon Boroto has
said. As part of our contribution to an outstanding tournament, we have
already identified 12 shelters which will admit victims of human
trafficking. Our social service professionals have also been trained to
manage and assist such victims during the tournament.

All of these initiatives are inspired by our enduring belief that the
eradication of poverty and the creation of strong functional families is
only a prelude to the realisation of the dream that started over 15 years
ago. It is, indeed, a prelude to the rebirth of a new society - one that
cares for its children, its youth, its elders and its persons with
disabilities. We believe that for our democracy to be sustainable
destitution, hopelessness and despair have to make way for hope and
prosperity.

Our government has obligations that are often difficult to fulfil, but that
cannot be an excuse for failure. Accordingly, we assure all South Africans
that the provision of comprehensive services to all vulnerable groups
remains uppermost in our minds. We will ensure that we attract into our
ranks strong, dedicated, professional and special cadres who will deliver
on our mission. By special cadres we mean that we want revolutionary and
exemplary cadres. These would be cadres who understand and implement
government policy under all conditions, who seek to improve their capacity
to serve the people, and who should win the confidence of the people on a
day-to-day basis at work in the frontline offices. We encourage civil
society organisations that render welfare services to do the same.

As I conclude, I wish to extend my words of thanks and appreciation to
Minister Edna Molewa, members of the Select Committee on Social Services,
especially the chairperson, hon Nomonde Rasmeni, for her understanding,
MECs for social development, and the director-general as well as staff of
the Department of Social Development and its agencies for their
determination and hard work. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, allow me to present the Budget Vote on behalf
of the MEC for Gauteng. We continue to be confronted with challenges,
including unacceptable levels of unemployment, the growing gap between the
poor and rich, extreme poverty alongside opulence, and the increasing
erosion of societal values. These challenges occur as we emerge from the
global economic meltdown which put a strain on already limited resources. I
will therefore use this policy debate to outline interventions that we will
embark on to address these challenges.

Last year, we embarked on an exercise to reprioritise service delivery in
line with the ANC manifesto called the Gauteng provincial government
priorities. We have therefore allocated resources in order to achieve these
priorities. As the Gauteng government, we have prioritised reducing poverty
levels by half in 2014. Our interventions continue to be focused on
creating a more inclusive economy, by expanding opportunities for the poor
to access the labour market and broadening the impact of growth as well as
ensuring that the benefits reach all sectors of society, particularly the
poor and marginalised. These interventions also include support for small
and micro enterprises and co-operatives.

We have targeted young people in our efforts to create decent jobs and thus
grow the economy. We have prioritised investment in youth development
through the provision of skills such as electrical skills, plumbing, life
skills, computer training, business skills and carpentry. We aim to prepare
our young to enter the labour market with skills and confidence. To promote
sustainable development, each of our 26 development centres will continue
to run income-generating programmes.

Through the Masupatsela Youth Pioneer Programme, young people will receive
training on, for example, action research, communication skills and project
management. This programme will focus on mobilising teenagers to serve
their country by promoting activism and a spirit of patriotism in
preparation for future leadership roles. It will also provide Gauteng with
an exclusive opportunity to foster and groom a cadre of social scientists
who will assist with the multitude of programmes planned to expand the
rapid delivery of services to households and communities.

Our interventions are now narrowed down to municipal wards and households.
This approach will make it easy for us to monitor and evaluate the impact
of our interventions. We have come to realise that we need to move away
from focusing on inputs. We will be judged by how the outcomes changed the
lives of the poor. We will assist to establish 200 co-operatives in
previously disadvantaged communities. These co-operatives will be empowered
in school uniform production and the rendering of cleaning, security,
laundry, catering and gardening services.

We are committed to building human capital in order to improve the quality
of human resources of our province. This we will achieve through, among
others, skills development and early childhood development. This programme
promotes social protection and ensures the reduction of our vulnerability.
Investment in early childhood development is not only a means of giving
children a good start in life but also a way of developing their families
and contributing to the socioeconomic development of the province. The
service focuses on children in the age group of 0 to 4 years. We will
continue to assist unregistered early childhood development centres, ECDCs,
to comply with registration requirements. Our approach is very
developmental; we will therefore expand and strengthen the relevant
training provided to unregistered ECDCs. Efforts will also be made to
ensure that the level and pace of training of ECD practitioners meets the
need. Collaboration with municipalities to provide health certificates will
continue, as this is a prerequisite for funding and the registration of
these sites.

The HIV/Aids pandemic has visited untold misery on children and those who
provide care for them. Our programmes are aimed at building and
strengthening governmental, family and community capacities to provide a
supportive environment for orphans and girls and boys affected by and
infected with HIV/Aids. This will include programmes to address the
psychosocial problems encountered by children affected by HIV/Aids. The
integration of the Departments of Health and Social Development has begun
to facilitate the streamlining of the funding of community-based service
sites and to synergise delivery of psychosocial support services and the
necessary medical interventions.

We have devised a multipronged strategy, which is aimed at addressing,
among others, investment in human capital, development of local economic
opportunities, and food and income security through income-generation
activities by providing safety nets for the most vulnerable. Targeted
households will be assisted to benefit from a pro-poor basket of services
such as free basic water and electricity, rates rebates, social grants,
free health care, free education, indigent burials, free scholar transport,
home-based care for those infected with and affected by HIV/Aids, and food
security for targeted children. Indeed, this is an integrated assault on
poverty.

The ANC government has always prioritised children. The Bana Pele programme
is the provincial response to poverty afflicting children. This programme
comprises an integrated package of services targeting orphaned and
vulnerable children through a single window. This package includes child
support grants, school fees exemptions, free health care, school uniforms,
school feeding and psychosocial support. We have developed an electronic
referral of children between the Departments of Education, Health and
Social Development. The highest numbers of children living in poverty are
African, followed by children living in coloured households. If we do not
intervene, generational poverty is perpetuated. Among Africans, households
that are headed by women are worse off than those that are headed by men.

The school uniform project is not only focused on the provision of school
uniforms to needy children, but also focuses on empowering communities by
job creation through the creation and support of sewing groups in the
communities. The school uniforms are manufactured mainly by 200 nonprofit
organisations registered as sewing groups. These projects create decent
jobs as these school uniforms are produced by local women.

Construction of 17 early childhood development facilities is under way in
Mamelodi, Kagiso, Munsieville, Ratanda, Refilwe, Daveyton, Duduza,
Katlehong, Tembisa, Tsakane, Kwa-Thema, Wattville, Ga-Rankuwa, Soshanguve,
Boipatong, Sharpeville and Alexandra. We have also identified a need for
facilities which provide after-school support and drop-in facilities to
orphaned and vulnerable children, including those attached to child-headed
households.

We are committed to deracialising old age homes. In this regard, we will
focus on accessibility of services in old age homes and the development of
more community-based services. We acknowledge that there is an urban bias
in the location of residential old age facilities. Key to the issue of
accessibility is the admission of older persons from the townships to
residential old age facilities located in the suburbs or urban areas.
In conclusion, we have developed psychosocial services for people with
disabilities and are in the process of developing and implementing a
strategy to roll out sign language and Braille training for targeted
families. We have decided to mainstream disability issues in order to
ensure recognition of the contribution that people with disabilities can
make in society, including in the Public Service. We will ensure employment
of black women and people with disabilities in terms of the Employment
Equity Act. We will not falter in our quest to comply with Gauteng
provincial government broad-based black economic empowerment and
affirmative action targets. We are determined and ready to break the back
of poverty. Gauteng supports Budget Vote No 18. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I am rising on a point of order concerning a
very serious issue.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, what’s your
point of order?

Mr D V BLOEM: This House is supposed to do oversight over the executive. I
don’t think it is proper for any member to represent either a Minister or
an MEC. How will we do our oversight if we are representing that person?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Mr Bloem, may I just
explain one thing to you: You are out of order. [Applause.]
Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, old people
and poor women and children, despite the help they get from the government,
are in limbo in a state of poverty. They cannot forego their grants,
because then they will starve. They cannot improve their situation in life,
because then they will lose their grants. They are between a rock and a
hard place, and the government is confining them there. To add to their
problems, there is an acute shortage of competent, qualified and dedicated
social service professionals, and those that are in the employment of the
department are despondent and demoralised. We need to have a proper
solution to a problem that is clearly out of control. They have just too
much to contend with.

Last year, the Minister pointed out that over 6 420 students had been given
bursaries to register for courses in social work at several institutions of
higher learning. How have these students been doing, and what more has been
done since then to improve the situation in this regard?

On the unemployment side, the situation remains as bleak as ever. Using the
narrow determination of unemployment, over a quarter of the economically
active population in our country is unemployed, but if we use the broader
definition, we have more than 40% of the people unemployed. Government
knows the extent of the problem, but the measures it is implementing are
totally inadequate. Any reforms regarding the retirement provisions for old
age are vitally important. We then support the reforms and look forward to
contributing to the discussion on this issue.

Even though recipients of social security in the two poorest provinces, the
Eastern Cape and Limpopo, increased, there are women-led households that
are experiencing food insecurity in the rural areas of these provinces. Of
all households often and always experiencing hunger, the majority are not
receiving the social relief grants for which they are eligible.

We also realise that there are challenges with regard to the older people
receiving grants at banks. We are also aware of the failure of the
department in meeting the target regarding this. For the department to only
concentrate on working with the Post Office is myopic. Cope believes that
older people need patience and reassurance and easy access to services.
Cope also supports the redefinition of disability and hopes that this will
lead to the formulation of an exit strategy for those who do not fall into
the category.

The SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, was established to facilitate
proactive service delivery and the Integrated Community Registration
Outreach Programme, ICROP, was initiated to improve the turnaround times
for the processing of applications. Have these agencies lived up to these
expectations? Is the Minister willing to assure the House that she is
totally satisfied with the functioning of these agencies?

Hon Minister, a community newspaper in Cape Town recently reported that a
syndicate from the Department of Health, the Department of Home Affairs and
Sassa was funnelling grants to parents in respect of bogus children. Is
this so, and can the Minister say with conviction that such a problem does
not exist?

The Minister in her speech in 2009 did not mention the ICROP. Instead she
talked about a new ... Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Before I call the next
person, hon Bloem, about your point of order: I think that matter will have
to be referred. The Whippery has to deal with it but actually you are not
the one to judge. Thank you. I will repeat that to you after this, if you
did not hear.

Ms F NAHARA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,
MECs and all members of the NCOP ...

Cha! Sihlalo weNdlu ehloniphekile mangisho ukuthi ke ngiyezwa ukuthi
akumelelana lapha kodwa umkhumbi wokunethezeka ubhajwe lana emanzini
kepha ngoba izikebhe zokuhlenga zibakhona. Yisikebhe sokuhlenga lesi esimi
phambi kwenu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)
[No, Chairperson of this august House, let me say  I understand that no one
should take someone else’s blame but service delivery is stuck here;
nevertheless the workers are there to help. What you see before you is the
rescuer.]

I wish to concur with the Minister that indeed the issues of floods,
drought, fires and disease are really affecting our country. In the
province of KwaZulu–Natal, we have experienced a number of natural
disasters which have claimed the lives of our people and destroyed their
houses, social security documents and many other belongings. It is of vital
importance that the ordinary citizens of our country are educated about
issues of global warming and its consequences.

I wish to support the Minister on the issues she has raised about people
living with disabilities, and the elderly. These people should be protected
against abuse and be given special care. They should be provided with their
basic needs and their rights, which are human rights, should be protected
and respected. It is much appreciated that the Department of Social
Development has delivered on its core mandate and continues to implement
priorities of government.

Kuyahlupha Sihlalo uma ubona abantu abadala bengasabathandi. Umuntu
angamfuni umzali wakhe ngoba esekhulile. Kuyasikhathaza ke thina
njengamaLungu ePhalamende. [It is worrying, Chairperson, when you see
elderly people not being loved. Somebody does not want his or her parent
because he or she is now old. It worries us as Members of Parliament.]

There are challenges that do exist where people are fraudulently accessing
social grants, but I also wish to state that the provincial department of
social development is making its efforts in eradicating fraud and
corruption.

Oxamu siyazama ukubakhipha impela noma bese baningi kodwa sizama konke
okusemandleni e-KZN ukubakhipha. [Ihlombe.] [We are really trying to root
out fraudsters although they are many, but we try by all means to remove
them in KZN. [Applause.]]

We also support a giant step taken by the President to establish a hotline.
It is working very well, and people on the ground are making use of this
facility. We do get feedback from the public through our call centre, and
any queries raised are followed up immediately.

Suffice it to congratulate the department for fulfilling its promise of
extending the child support grant to children born before 31 December 1993
and for the envisaged further extension over the following financial year.
The implementation of the equalisation of the old age pension to all
eligible citizens of this country should also be seen as a milestone, as a
number of males elderly will benefit from this giant step. We are indeed a
caring government.

Kukhombisa ngokusobala Sihlalo ukuthi uma sikhuluma ngokuthi lo hulumeni
owabantu ubona ngezenzo. [It clearly shows, Chairperson, that if we say
that this government is for the people, you see this by its actions.]

We also appreciate the fact that the department has earmarked R140 million
for social relief of distress, and we hope that this will be of benefit to
vulnerable people and families. KwaZulu-Natal has a vast number of child-
headed families who, I believe, will also benefit from this allocation, as
the Minister alluded to the issue of cascading the implementation process
of this programme to the provinces. We trust that the whole process will be
fast-tracked so that our people on the ground will, without delay, reap the
fruits of this programme.

There has been an outcry on the issue of appeals in the KwaZulu-Natal
province, as the Minister has indicated in her presentation, but the
constitution of the appeals tribunal is highly appreciated, and it gives us
hope that this outcry will be something of the past very soon.

The hon Minister, in her speech, alluded to the comprehensive social
security policy options with the aim of alleviating poverty. This system is
of vital importance as it is noticeable that vulnerable people do not
normally have access to life cover insurance and funeral cover. They then
approach loan sharks for assistance, who in turn exploit them and charge
them exorbitant or high interest rates.

Esifundazweni saKwaZulu-Natal nje sisodwa simbonile uBhungane umkhumbi
wokunethezeka ... [In the province of KwaZulu-Natal alone, we have seen
Bhungane [clan name] the comfort ship, ...]

... exposing some of these sharks and reporting them to the police.
Singagcini ke lapho. [We are not ending there.]

He makes sure that the police also do their work, by taking further action
and bringing them to book. We strongly believe that the introduction of
this system will solve this problem.

The implementation of the Child Justice Act is a huge achievement and will
benefit a number of children who are in conflict with the law. This
legislation will protect their statutory rights and also ensure that they
are rehabilitated and integrated into society. One of the problems is that
you sometimes wonder whether we still have children in this country, when
you see some of the things these children do on the street corners,
especially at night. So, we really hope that this will be one of the
solutions to that.

I really concur with the Minister that the nonprofit organisations, NPOs,
are playing a crucial role in the implementation of social welfare
programmes. The NPOs are a vehicle through which the department is able to
reach the vulnerable people and provide them with care and support. That is
why we give these organisations financial support. It is also equally
important that they comply with section 38(1)(j) of the Public Finance
Management Act and Treasury regulations. All NPOs that could not comply
with these pieces of legislation have been assisted and are now fully
complying – that is in KwaZulu-Natal. We have done our best to put them
back on track.

The government and the Department of Social Development, in particular,
should be congratulated for interacting with our Cuban counterparts, which
has resulted in the formation and implementation of a number of projects,
including the Masupatsela Youth Pioneer Programme, which has seen a number
of matriculated youth and unemployed graduates being provided with job
opportunities. The programme is very effective and helps a great deal
towards minimising the workload of social workers. Three hundred and forty-
seven youth cadres and 61 team leader graduates have benefited from this
programme in KwaZulu-Natal, particularly most of those from rural sites.

In conclusion, I wish to report to this House that the correspondence
regarding the orphans identified at Falaza High School in KwaNongoma by the
standing committee on social services was received, and the department is
working on it. A preliminary report in this regard has been sent to the
Minister’s office. The provincial department will provide further details
on this issue. Let me indicate that this report is also in my hands, as the
chairperson of the portfolio committee, and I will be tabling to the
portfolio committee when it sits. Let me also indicate that there is also
another report that the department has forwarded which came through the
hotline of the President, where I’m also in a position. It has been
acknowledged, and the department is working on that.

Uyabona into uma iphethwe ngomama isezandleni ezinhle. Kuthiwa intandane
enhle umakhothwa ngunina. [You see, if something is headed by women, it is
in good hands. As the isiZulu proverb goes: An orphan who is left to be
cared for by his or her mother is always taken care of.]

The province of KwaZulu-Natal supports this budget of Minister Molewa ...

... ngokukhulu ukuthokoza. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [... with great pleasure.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mna T A MASHAMAITE: Morena Modulasetulo, Tona yo a hlomphegago le
Motlatšatona, maloko a lekgotlaphethiši ao a lego fa kamoka go tšwa
diprofenseng tša rena, ke leboga sebaka se sa go tšea karolo dingangišanong
tša ditekanetšo tša kgoro ye ya gešo. Mokgatlo wa gešo, e lego ANC, o re
matsenong a rena a go bolela ka ditekanyetšo tša Kgoro ya tša Tlhabollo ya
Leago, re gapeletšega go thoma ka go lebelela ditokomane tša mokgatlo.

Mokgatlo wa gešo wa ANC ge o tšwetša boitlamo pele setšhabeng sa Afrika-
Borwa o gana nnang ya basadi gore mohlako le tlala bathong ba gaborena ke
mpho yeo ba belegwego le yona. Re a e gana taba ye gomme re re rena re le
batho baso ga se re belegwe re hlaka gape ga se re belegwe re le badiidi.
Boemo bja rena tabeng ye ke gore tokomane ya rena go tša tlhabollo ya leago
e tla hlohleletša gore ditirelo go tša leago di tšewe bjalo ka kagoleswa,
tšwelopele le matlafatšo basading, basweng, bahloking le bašoming.

Dipoledišano goba dingangišano tšeo re di swerego ga bjale re di swere ka
lebaka la dinyakwa tša batho ba gaborena. Re thabišwa gape ke gore
ditekanyetšo tša kgoro di hlatlošitšwe gore kgoro e kgone go tiišetša thušo
ya tša leago bathong ba gaborena.

O boletše Mopresidente Morena Zuma polelong ya gagwe ya go bula Palamente
gore tšhireletšo ya tša tlhabollo ya leago e swanetše go fiwa kokeletšo
pele ka šedi ka maikemišetšo a go fa tša leago tšhireletšo ye e
tseneletšego ka ge moswana a boletše a re “feta kgomo o sware motho”. Re
thabile ge Mopresidente wa rena a tšwetše pele go tlama mmušo gore o oketše
thekgo ya bana ya ditšhelete baneng ba ka godimo ga mengwaga ye lesomenne.

Kopanokgolo ya mokgatlo wa gešo wa ANC ya masomehlano-pedi ka ngwaga wa
2007 le dikopano tše dingwe tšeo di fetilego di tšere sephetho sa gore
kgodišo ya bana e bohlokwa. Setšhaba le mmušo ga di a swanela go metša mare
tabeng ye ka lebaka la gore motse wa tlala ga o dulwe. Mmetlašapo la tlala
o betla a lebišitše gabo.

Thekgo ya tša leago la bana ke ye nngwe ya tšeo di tšweletšego
kopanongkgolo ya ANC ya masomehlano-pedi ngwageng wa 2007. Sephetho se ile
sa tšewa fao gore bodiidi bjo bo aparetšego setšhaba sa rantsho bo
fokotšege goba bo fedišwe. Re thaba kudu ge ditekanyetšo tša kgoro di
hlatlošitšwe gore bana ba setšhaba sa rantsho ba holege. Bana ba rena ga ba
swanela go ba bo “phutiana ya boya bontlha magola ka go ikilela”.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister,  MECs
from various provinces, thank you for giving me an opportunity to take  part
in the department’s budget debate. Our party, the ANC,  strongly  recommends
that we start by scrutinising the party  documents  as  we  start  with  the
Budget Vote for the Department of Social Development.

The ANC, in its manifesto, stands firm against poverty  and  hunger.  We  do
not agree on this issue - as the black nation we were not  born  to  suffer.
Our stance is that  our  document  on  social  development  encourages  that
social services must constitute reconstruction, development and  empowerment
for the women, the youth, the poor and the workers.

The discussions or debates that are now on  are  outcomes  of  the  people’s
needs. We are grateful  that  there  is  an  increase  of  budget  for  this
department which will make it easy to render social grants to the people.

In his state of the nation address, hon  President  Zuma  pointed  out  that
there should be an  increase  in  the  Department  of  Social  Development’s
budget since human  life  is  crucial.  We  are  happy  that  our  President
continued to encourage the government to extend the child support  grant  to
children over the age of 14.

In the 52nd annual general meeting of the ANC in  2007  and  other  previous
meetings, the decision was taken to prioritise child  growth.  There  is  no
way that the nation and the government can fold their arms and  not  act  on
this matter,  because  hunger  is  a  threat.  Let  us  show  patriotism  by
providing good service delivery to the people.

The child support grant is one of the issues that  emanated  from  the  52nd
national general council of the ANC in 2007. The idea  is  to  eliminate  or
eradicate poverty among the black nation. We  are  very  grateful  that  the
departmental  budget  has  been  increased  to  meet  that  obligation.  Our
children are not supposed to keep quiet even when things fall apart.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Bua ntate, bua! [Speak, honourable member, speak!]

Mna T A MASHAMAITE: Ka lebaka la bohloki bjo bo aparetšego setšhaba sa
rena, rena, mmušo, kgoro le setšhaba ka kakaretšo re swanetše go tiiša
lenaneo la go ngwadiša batho ba gaborena gore ba humane thušo ya tša leago.

Ke fetša ka gore a re bofeng dieta di tie, leeto e sa le le le telele. A re
šomeng ka bothakga, ka maatla le ka lebelo. Re le ba ANC le ba komiti, re
thekga ditekanyetšo tša kgoro ye. Re a leboga. [Legoswi.] (Translation of
Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Due to the hovering poverty  among  our  people,  we  as
government and the Department of Social Development as well  as  the  nation
at large must come up with a programme that will ensure that our people  are
registered for social grants and that they actually get the grants.

In conclusion, I recommend that we pull up our socks, because we still  have
a long way to go. Let us work with diligence, put in more effort  and  speed
up the process. As the ANC and a committee, we support the budget  for  this
department. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, allow me firstly to
acknowledge with appreciation the inputs made by hon members in this
debate. This is indeed a very important House and a very important debate.
I also appreciate the fact that all hon members have actually voiced
support for this Budget Vote. It is indeed important for our people’s
lives.

I want to start by also acknowledging the good work that is being done in
provinces. I stated in the main speech that we are indeed working very
closely with our provinces to deliver services. I think it is evident from
the inputs made on behalf of MECs and by MECs who are here, that, indeed, a
lot is happening and a lot is being done. I think we have to express our
appreciation to all of you. We really appreciate that from the bottom of
our hearts.

Having said that, I also want to say that we appreciate all the comments
made that are intended to strengthen the functionality of the department as
well as the work that we do because, indeed, we understand this debate to
be about strengthening the services we render and the functions we perform.

I would like, however, to get into some of the details of issues raised. I
hope that, within the allotted time, I will do justice to the majority of
the issues raised. I want to start by just reminding hon members that we
are still in a situation where the world financial crisis has not actually
left us. It is still here until such time that all of us can say with
confidence, yes, indeed, we are out of it. We can never even think that we
have actually begun making a dent in poverty, because the more we act, the
more situations of that nature affect our people. Just to illustrate: Only
last year, almost 900 000 people in South Africa lost formal jobs. We are
not undermining this figure as the Department of Social Development or
indeed as government; we understand the magnitude of the problem that we
face.

As we move, we need to ensure that we do two things: firstly, support those
of our people who are most vulnerable by giving grants and any form of
support they need; and, secondly, at the same time, implement programmes
and projects that we have identified for ourselves. This is the second area
of our work. The President has alluded to some of the measures that have
been introduced to cushion the impact of the financial crisis. Yes, an
impact has been made in cushioning that problem, but it is still not
eradicated completely.

Having said that, I want to just now move into... and I thought that I
should remind those hon members among us who keep on raising this matter of
impact not happening. On issues related to the programmes and projects, as
hon Meyer said, we have to develop entrepreneurship. We are not under the
illusion that that will take a short period of time, the reason being that,
indeed, we have come a whole long way as South Africans. We know that
skills are not overabundant in our communities. We know that many of our
people are still illiterate and poor. So, it will take us time, and it is
for that reason that we are glad that we can point to some of the
statistics that show where the success stories are in the country and where
an impact has been made.

I want to cite just a few of those areas. I have indicated some of them –
just two projects – in the main speech, as I spoke earlier on, but I think
that it is also important to indicate that we also have success stories
that have happened elsewhere, which we may not necessarily be able to talk
about here today. It is incumbent upon us that, as we engage, we really
look at these success stories.

Within the National Development Agency, NDA, itself for instance, there are
success stories. For instance, in an area of the Northern Cape, there is
project called Tshwaraganang Hydroponics, which is quite a success story.
In Mpumalanga, there is a project that actually exports flowers. The Marang
Women in Agriculture in the North West province produces honey. They
actually add value to that honey and then generate income by selling it to
various outlets throughout the country. The Gijima project in Gauteng, that
the hon member spoke about, produced 70 000 pairs of shoes for the Gauteng
department of education.

There are many, many success stories we can talk about. The reality is that
those success stories may not be felt in the context of the challenges we
continue to face, especially in the context of the financial crisis.

I now want to move to an issue that I think is quite important, namely the
issue of how Sassa functions. Many hon members raised this matter. We have
said it before, and we are saying it again here today: Our duty is to
ensure that we respond to the clarion call made by President Zuma, here in
Parliament as well as throughout this country, when he said that this is
the year of action. Regarding Sassa, many of us may think that, yes, as we
are looking at a particular problem somewhere in a corner, it is actually
doom and gloom all over. It is not like that. At Sassa we know that, in
processing our grants, there is a movement towards ensuring that we
authorise an application for a grant in one day. That is our target.
Currently, in some areas, we are standing at 21 days; in some areas, we are
standing at 70 days, and so on.

However, we are mindful of the fact that, even as we want to process and
authorise in one day, the law in this country says you are to respond
within 90 days. So, there is no claim or application at Sassa – even the
27 000 that we are talking about that are delayed – that is beyond the 90
days referred to. Legally, we are still correct. However, we want to be
fast and help our people to move fast.

The same applies to the implementation of the law or especially the
register, the Children’s Act, which, we hear said, is not fully
operational, maybe because of a lack of political will. If there is
anything that I need to say, standing here before you, hon members, it is
the fact that the ANC is the organisation that actually invented this law.
Therefore we can’t sit back and not implement it. We want to implement it
faster.

However, as hon members, we should also take note that there are certain
prescriptions in the same law, and one of the prescriptions with regard to
that register is that there should be a register of children within 18
months of the implementation of the Act’s promulgation. Promulgation
happened now, on 1 April. Eighteen months have not yet passed, so that
register will definitely be here. We will work day and night with the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development to ensure that that
register is available. So, again, we are still within the law. However, we
want to move fast.

There are issues that are raised about the foster care cases. I think we
must acknowledge that, in that regard, yes, there are challenges with which
we have to deal.

Regarding corruption and fraud, I think, hon members, all we can say is
that we require your full and undivided support. This is something that you
know very well we are moving on.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, though, as well
as the Special Investigating Unit, SIU, are the sole determinants of who is
to be prosecuted, when and how. Within this particular instance of cases
that are being referred to, where the allegation is that there has not been
any action, the reality of the matter is that there are indeed people who
are actually benefiting from that grant who were not necessarily defrauding
the state. Somehow, their status, their environment and their lives changed
for the better, so they were not removed from the grant. This is one of the
things that we want to address via the improved grants application process,
Igap, and by cleaning the system – even this Nexus – and all other systems
that we are introducing as we speak now. We want to clean all the systems
so that people who are not supposed to be on the grant system, but who are
there fraudulently, should actually be removed. So, I really hope that hon
members will be with us at all times as we move to implement these
measures.

This brings me to entrepreneurship and the issue of the self-help
programme. Whilst we appreciate that that programme is very important, the
slight challenge we have is that we think that it is necessary that, as a
society, we not only focus on individuals but also on communities and
society. We have a societal problem. Yes, uplifting one person is good, but
it may not be quite as impactful as uplifting a society. It is for that
reason therefore that we have these programmes affecting or dealing with
communities in general.

I agree with you, hon member, that there is a need to, let me say,
emphasise the implementation of safety standards that already exist.
Remember, the Department of Labour has to take care of every building and
every structure in the country. The safety standards are there. All we have
to do is ensure that they are upheld.

An hon member raised the issue about the role of local government in social
development. Indeed, I think this is something that we have to talk about.
It has been raised at our Minmec meeting. It is a constitutional issue
because, in the schedules of the Constitution, where you have exclusive
functions of provinces and national government, this is not one of the
functions that have been allocated to a municipality, per se. However, we
know the discussion about the future of provinces, the future of functions,
the sharing of functions, the redistribution of functions and the location
of functions is taking place in the Department of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs right now, as we speak, and that will help us a
great deal.

We appreciate the issue raised about social workers and, indeed, all hon
members without exception indicated that this is a challenge. We know it is
a challenge but we are also, in the same vein, very appreciative that you
are actually accepting or agreeing that, indeed, the steps you are taking
are steps in the right direction.

The model of the Western Cape may help us. Again, we will share it at the
right time on the right platform, which is Minmec. There is certainly an
element of teamwork within the family of the Department of Social
Development. We are sharing. The hon member was already in two provinces
with us, and he was quite impressed with the work that is done in both
KwaZulu-Natal and I can’t remember what the other province was but, yes, we
are going to North West next time around. We are going there to learn from
them. So, we learn from one another. We will look at those as well.

I think that we really need to appreciate the work and the issues that were
raised. Hon member Nahara from KwaZulu-Natal, we appreciate the work that
is being done in that area in that province of ours. We really need to
indicate that we are very serious and committed to dealing with the issue
of the backlog on appeals. We have allocated staff, and we have allocated
resources to wipe out that backlog. We believe that, as you say, it will
indeed be a thing of the past.

Hon member Plaatjie, I don’t know where these statistics come from. Are
they official or unofficial? Are they official or unofficial statistics?
Let’s not just create things as we are moving towards the podium, so that
we sound nice. There is no such statistical report in the... Is it from
Cope? [Interjections.] It must have been manufactured from the provincial
executive committee last week or the national executive committee last
week; I don’t know. We don’t have such statistics. Indeed, we acknowledge
that the rate of unemployment in our country is quite high. We are doing
something about it, as government. That’s why the President of this country
is so serious about actually wanting all of us to account – even on a daily
basis – for what we are doing. We hope that the Western Cape will join us
in that accounting as well.

We really want to express appreciation, and with 27 seconds to go, I want
to thank hon members very much for the wonderful and lively debates. We
hope that we will meet again as we do our constituency work out there, and
we hope that you will be there exercising oversight at all times. We
appreciate your visits to provinces. Thank you.
Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:11.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 29 APRIL 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    a) Government Notice No 114 published in Government Gazette No 32951
       dated 19 February 2010: Exemption granted to Cape Winelands District
       Municipality in terms of the Local Government:  Municipal Finance
       Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

    (b)     Government Notice No 168 published in Government Gazette No
        32993 dated 1 March 2010: Commencement date of sections 39, 40,
        41(a), 42, 43, 54 and 55 in terms of the Insurance Laws Amendment
        Act, 2008 (Act No 27 of 2008).
    (c)     Government Notice No 169 published in Government Gazette No
        32994 dated 1 March 2010:  Withdrawal of regulations to calculate
        the tax payable in terms of a small retailers VAT package in terms
        of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of 1991).

    (d)     Government Notice No R. 211 published in Government Gazette No
        33036 dated 19 March 2010: Regulations:  Prescribing the period
        within which the  tax payable in terms of section 8 (2) of that Act
        shall be paid in terms of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89
        of 1991).


    (e)     Government Notice No 230 published in Government Gazette No
        33047 dated 23 March 2010:  Stopping and reallocation of conditional
        allocations in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2009 (Act No 12
        of 2009).


    (f)     Government Notice No 257 published in Government Gazette No
        33037 dated 23 March 2010:  Publication of proposed amendment of
        regulation 28 of the Regulations:  For public comment in terms of
        the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).


    (g)     Government Notice No R. 218 published in Government Gazette No
        33042 dated 26 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/324), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (h)     Government Notice No R. 219 published in Government Gazette No
        33042 dated 26 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/325), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (i)     Government Notice No R. 256 published in Government Gazette No
       33070 dated 31 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1. Part 5A (No
       1/5/147), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
       1964).


    (j)     Government Notice No R. 257 published in Government Gazette No
       33070 dated 31 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1. Part 5B (No
       1/5/148), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
       1964).


    (k)     Government Notice No R. 258 published in Government Gazette No
        33070 dated 31 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 6. (No 6/16), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (l)     Government Notice No R. 266 published in Government Gazette No
       33083 dated 1 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1. (No 1/1/402),
       in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (m)     Government Notice No R. 267 published in Government Gazette No
        33083 dated 1 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 10. (No 10/13),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (n)     Government Notice No 240 published in Government Gazette No
        33059 dated 1 April 2010: Listing of public entities: Safety and
        Security Sector Education and Training – Amendment of Schedule 3,
        Part A, of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999).


    (o)     Government Notice No 241 published in Government Gazette No
        33059 dated 1 April 2010: Listing and delisting of public entities:
        Free State Youth Commission and Western Cape Provincial Youth
        Commission  - Amendment of  Schedule 3, Part C, of the Public
        Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


    (p)     Government Notice No 242 published in Government Gazette No
        33059 dated 1 April 2010: Technical changes of public entities:
        South African Rail Commuter Corporation – Amendment of Schedule 3,
        Part B, of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999).


    (q)     Government Notice No 281 published in Government Gazette No
        33100 dated 13 April 2010:  Allocations to municipalities and
        schedule 8 allocations to provinces 2010/2011, in terms of the
        Division of Revenue Act, 2010 (Act No 1 of 2010).

2.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Medium Term Strategic Framework of the Department of Justice and
        Constitutional Development for 2010 – 2014.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Trade and International Relations
   on the Medium-Term Strategic Framework (2010-2013) and Budget Vote 35 of
   the Department of Trade & Industry, dated 21 April 2010.

      The Select Committee on Trade and International Relations, having
      considered the Medium-Term Strategic Framework (2010-2013) and Budget
      vote 35 of the Department of Trade & Industry, reports that it has
      concluded its deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Trade and International Relations
   on the Medium-Term Strategic Framework (2010/11-2012/13) and Budget Vote
   34 of the Department of Tourism, dated 21 April 2010.

      The Select Committee on Trade and International Relations, having
      considered  the Medium-Term Strategic Framework (2010/11-2012/13) and
      Budget Vote 34 of the Department of Tourism, reports that it has
      concluded its deliberations thereon.

                             TUESDAY, 4 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (1)    South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by
         the Minister of Finance.


      Referred to the Standing Committee on Appropriations and the Select
         Committee on Appropriations.

COMMITTEE REPORT

National Council of Provinces

1.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON  CONSIDERATION  OF  THE  2007/08  REPORT  OF  THE
    WESTERN CAPE MUNICIPALITIES’ PERFORMANCE: DATED 04th APRIL 2010

1.    Background and Overview
1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
     Affairs having considered the directive  of  the  National  Council  of
     Provinces (NCOP) to consider  and  report  on  the  2007/08  Report  of
     Western Cape Municipalities Performance tabled by  the  MEC  for  Local
     Government and Housing in  terms  of  the  requirements  of  the  Local
     Government Municipal Systems Act (Act 32 of 2000), reports as follows:

1.2   Municipalities are required to produce annual performance  reports  in
      terms of section 46 of the Local  Government  Municipal  Systems  Act.
      Based on these reports, the MEC responsible for local  government  has
      to compile a consolidated report on the performance of  municipalities
      in the province and submit to the NCOP in terms of section 47  of  the
      Act. This report provides an analysis of the municipal performance  in
      the  Western  Cape  Province  and  also  makes   recommendations   for
      corrective measures to be undertaken in that regard.

1.3   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred  the  2007/08  Report   of   Western   Cape   Municipalities’
      Performance to the Select Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

2.    Introduction

2.1   On the 20th August 2009, the Western Cape  MEC  for  Local  Government
    and Housing tabled a report to the Office of the Chairperson of the NCOP
    on the Performance of Municipalities in the Western Cape for the 2007/08
    financial year, in terms of section 47 of the Local Government Municipal
    Systems Act. Subsequent to the tabling, the  report  of  performance  of
    municipalities was referred to  the  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative
    Governance and Traditional  Affairs  for  consideration  and  report  in
    accordance with Rule 101. In compliance with the Council  referral,  the
    Select Committee had a briefing meeting on the 19th February  2010  with
    the Western Cape Department of Local Government and Housing to  consider
    the referred report by the NCOP.

3.    Presentation on 2006/07 Western Municipality Performance Report

  . 3.1     Mr C Mitchell and Mr L Jacobs, the officials of  the  Department
    of Local Government and  Housing  presented  the  Western  Cape  2007/08
    Municipalities Performance Report to  the  Committee.  The  presentation
    focused on the key five performance areas of local  government  such  as
    Municipal  Transformation;  Basic  Service  Delivery;   Local   Economic
    Development; Municipal Financial Viability and  Management  as  well  as
    Good Governance and Public Participation.

4.    Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

4.1   The major  municipal  transformation  and  organisational  development
      challenges presented to the Committee related to the high vacancy rate
      in financial and technical posts, as  well  as  employment  of  female
      employees in Section 57 management positions.

4.2    The  2007/08  Auditor–General  reports  and   information   submitted
      indicated that most municipalities in the Province has implemented  or
      were in the  process  of  implementing  their  Performance  Management
      Systems (PMS).


5.    Basic Service Delivery

5.1   The  critical  basic  service  delivery  challenges  reported  to  the
      Committee related to the escalating costs  of  service  provision  and
      infrastructure  development  and   maintenance,   costs   of   backlog
      eradication, reliance on capital grants fund  capital  expenditure  as
      well as considerable shortage of funds  for  maintenance,  mainly  for
      roads, storm water drainage and sewerage.


5.2   Despite  the  major  challenges  reported,  some  of  the  significant
      improvements presented related to improved capital spending  from  66,
      7% in 2005/06 to 76, 2% in 2007/08. The main  reason  cited  for  non-
      spending of capital budget by  the  municipalities  was  the  lack  of
      capacity   and   technical   skills   in   the   Engineering/Technical
      Departments. Furthermore, the  Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)
      spending declined from 100% to 84% in the reported period.


6.    Local Economic Development (LED)

6.1   The Department reported that the unavailability  of  the  majority  of
      LED  plans  have  hampered  the  analysis  on  the   status   of   the
      municipalities.   Despite   the   unavailability   of   the   required
      information, all municipalities were reported  to  have  approved  LED
      plans to inform their 2007/08 Integrated Development Plans (IDPs), and
      without exception, these plans were deemed  to  be  the  result  of  a
      transparent formulation process.


6.2   The implementation of the  LED  in  most  of  the  municipalities  was
reported to be limited due to a
     shortfall in available funding, co-operation between stakeholders;  low
     economic development potential and capacity.

7.    Municipal Financial Viability and Management


7.1   The Department reported that the  average  performance  for  the  past
      three financial years  against  revenue  and  expenditure  operational
      budgets stood at 99,3% and 96,6% respectively, of which  salary  bills
      formed the majority  at  around  30%.   Overall,  performance  against
      conditional grants received decreased from 73% in 2006/07  to  66%  in
      2007/08 financial year, and most of the municipalities relied  heavily
      on conditional grants such as MIG.

7.2   Some of the improvement reported  related  to  the  huge  progress  in
      respect of unqualified reports from 11 to 23 from the 2006/07  to  the
      2007/08 financial year. The key findings that were indicated the  most
      by the Auditor-General, were non-compliance with laws and  regulations
      and internal control/internal audit weaknesses.

8.    Good Governance and Public Participation

8.1.  The Department reported that during the 2007/08  financial  year,  98%
     of Municipal Councils and  Executive/Mayoral  Committees  achieved  the
     requisite quorums for meetings. That most municipalities adopted  codes
     of conduct for  Council  and  staff.   However,  eleven  municipalities
     reported councillor and staff arrears, and that mechanisms  were  being
     put in place to resolve these arrears.

8.2    Considerable  progress  has  been  achieved  in   establishing   ward
     committees, despite numerous challenges confronting municipalities  and
     ward committees. Furthermore, there  has  been  a  general  improvement
     (97%) in the development of Anti-Corruption Strategies and Plans across
     municipalities in the Province.

8.3   However, high level of non-compliance  were  observed  in  matters  of
     good governance according to the Auditor-General  reports  –  31%  non-
     compliance with regards to operation  of  audit  committees;  45%  non-
     compliance  with  regards  to  the  fulfilment   of   audit   committee
     responsibilities; 69% non-compliance with regards to the fulfilment  of
     internal audit responsibilities; 47% non-compliance with regards to the
     implementation of previous external audit recommendations; etc.

9.    Committee Observations and Opinion

9.1    The  Committee  observed  that  the  unavailability   or   incomplete
     information supplied by municipalities to the  Department,  created  an
     incorrect or distorted picture of service delivery in the Province. The
     Committee is of the opinion that political instability as a  result  of
     coalitions  has  hampered  service  delivery  in  the   Western   Cape.
     Furthermore, the Committee observed  that  no  municipality  was  under
     administration during the period under review, although Kannaland  pose
     a challenge to the Province.

10.   Recommendations

10.1   Having  deliberated  on  the  2007/08  Report  of  the  Western  Cape
     Municipalities  Performance,  the  Select  Committee  on   Co-operative
     Governance and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:
      10.1.1      The NCOP should endorse the 2007/08 Report of the  Western
           Cape Municipalities Performance.


      10.1.2      The  Western  Cape  Department  of  Local  Government  and
           Housing should assist the  municipalities  in  the  Province  to
           improve their spending capacity on capital budgets and MIG.


      10.1.3      The  Western  Cape  Department  of  Local  Government  and
           Housing should assist municipalities in the Province to  improve
           critical skills shortages and the filling of vacant positions.


      10.1.4      The quality of data compilation  with  regard  to  service
           delivery in the Province should be improved by the Western  Cape
           Department of Local Government and Housing.


      10.1.5      The  Western  Cape  Department  of  Local  Government  and
           Housing should provide a comprehensive report on the allegations
           that the City of Cape Town has violated residents' rights by not
           building  walls  around  toilets  in  the  Makhaza  section   of
           Khayelitsha.
      10.1.6      The Western Cape MEC  for  Local  Government  and  Housing
           should table quarterly progress reports to the NCOP  in  respect
           to municipal performance in the Province.

Report to be considered.

2.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON CONSIDERATION OF THE 2007/08 REPORT OF  THE  KWA-ZULU
NATAL MUNICIPALITIES’ PERFORMANCE: DATED 04TH APRIL 2010

1.    Background and Overview

1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs having considered the directive of  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report on the 2007/08 Report of  Kwa-
      Zulu Natal Municipalities’ Performance  tabled  by  the  MEC  for  Co-
      operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs  in  terms   of   the
      requirements of the Local Government Municipal Systems Act (Act 32  of
      2000), reports as follows:

1.2   Municipalities are required to produce annual performance  reports  in
      terms of section 46 of the Local  Government  Municipal  Systems  Act.
      Based on these reports, the MEC responsible for local  government  has
      to compile a consolidated report on the performance of  municipalities
      in the province and submit to the NCOP in terms of section 47  of  the
      Act. This report provides an analysis of the municipal performance  in
      the  Kwa-Zulu  Natal  Province  and  also  makes  recommendations  for
      corrective measures to be undertaken in that regard.

1.3   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred  the  2007/08  Report   of   Western   Cape   Municipalities’
      Performance to the Select Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs for consideration and reporting.

2.    Introduction

2.1   On the 29th October 2009, the  Kwa-Zulu  Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs tabled a report to  the  Office  of
      the Chairperson of the NCOP on the Performance  of  Municipalities  in
      KwaZulu-Natal for the 2007/08 financial year, in terms of  section  47
      of the Local Government  Municipal  Systems  Act.  Subsequent  to  the
      tabling, the report was  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on  Co-
      operative Governance and Traditional  Affairs  for  consideration  and
      report in accordance with Rule 101. In  compliance  with  the  Council
      referral, the Select Committee had a  briefing  meeting  on  the  19th
      February  2010  with  the  MEC  of  Kwa-Zulu  Natal  for  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs.

   3. Presentation on Kwa-Zulu Natal Municipal Performance Report

3.1   The MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs  presented
      Kwa-Zulu  Natal  2007/08  Municipalities  Performance  Report  to  the
      Committee. The presentation focused on the key five performance  areas
      of local government such as Municipal Transformation;  Basic  Services
      and Infrastructure;  Municipal  Financial  Management  and  Viability;
      Local Economic Development and Good Governance.

3.2   The MEC reported that in assessing the performance  of  municipalities
      in  the  Province,  the   Department   has   developed   a   Municipal
      Institutional Performance Model  in  order  to  differentiate  between
      municipalities  based  on  the  development  of  their   institutional
      capacity  and  performance  for  provincial  monitoring,  support  and
      capacity programmes could be appropriately  targeted.   The  model  is
      indicated below:

|          |EXPLANATION                                                |
|LEVEL     |                                                           |
|1         |A level 1 municipality is fully compliant, has audited data|
|          |to measure its performance and its performance and is      |
|          |performing generally at or above the performance           |
|          |expectations of sustainable municipalities.                |
|2         |A level 2 municipality is mostly compliant, has accurate   |
|          |data to measure its performance and is performing generally|
|          |at or above the performance expectations of consolidated   |
|          |municipalities.                                            |
|3         |A level 1 municipality is partially compliant, relies on   |
|          |rough estimates to measure its performance and is          |
|          |performing generally below expectations of consolidated    |
|          |municipalities.                                            |
|4         |A level 0 municipality is significantly non-compliant, is  |
|          |not measuring its performance and is performing generally  |
|          |very poorly from what is known. If not under intervention  |
|          |already, they should be.                                   |

3.3   In general, most municipalities in the  Province  were  performing  on
      average with regard to data quality. There was still a great need  for
      municipalities to do better record keeping and have systems  in  place
      to collect, store and manage data so that they can measure and  report
      accurately   on   their   performance   indicators.   Only    thirteen
      municipalities were able to provide good quality data  for  reporting.
      Six municipalities provided  the  poorest  quality  due  to  different
      reasons including  unwillingness  to  co-operate  with  the  reporting
      process. Only 14 municipalities out of 61 are  mostly  compliant  with
      the legislative  requirements.  The  majority  of  municipalities  are
      performing poorly to very poorly (scoring below 50%), and there was  a
      need to put more efforts in fulfilling their legislative requirements.




4.    Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

4.1   It was reported that  only  two  municipalities  have  been  found  to
      perform  at  level  3.  The  majority  of  municipalities  were  still
      performing at level 2 whilst  fifteen  were  still  at  level  1.  The
      largest number of vacancies occurred within the Metro and B1  (cities)
      municipalities at 54% and 33% respectively. The average  vacancy  rate
      in the Province  was  at  20%.  Half  of  the  engineers  employed  at
      districts  and  B1  Municipalities  (water  and  sanitation  provision
      authorities) were registered professionals.  Although  CFOs  positions
      were not an apparent challenge (most are filled), the challenge relied
      on the skills of the individuals.

4.2   Furthermore, employment  equity  was  progressing  well  with  83%  of
      Section 57 Managers being from the previously disadvantaged group  and
      18% being women. Less than half of the municipalities have  functional
      Performance Appraisal Committees for Section  57  Managers  in  place,
      with the challenging areas being B3 and  B4  municipalities  (semi  to
      mainly rural). Implementation  of  the  Work  Place  Skills  Plan  was
      challenging as the provincial average stood at 0, 5% of the  operating
      budget (the norm is 1%). The worst performing areas were  B1  (cities)
      and B3-B4 (semi to mainly rural) municipalities.


5.    Basic Service Delivery

5.1    The  performance  assessment  has  indicated  that  there   were   no
      municipalities  performing  at  level  3   on   basic   services   and
      infrastructure. There were only two municipalities performing at level
      2.  The  majority  of  municipalities  were  performing  as  level  0,
      therefore warranting urgent attention for support after the underlying
      issues have been investigated.

5.2   All water and sanitation services authorities managed to  spent  their
      allocated  budgets  for  water.  The  rate  of  addressing  water  and
      sanitation backlog was  exponentially  higher  in  the  Metro  and  B1
      (cities) municipalities. Within the district  municipalities  covering
      vastly and dispersed rural areas, slower progress was noted.

   6. Municipal Financial Management and Viability

6.1   A total of four municipalities were performing at level 3 in terms  of
      Finance. The majority of municipalities were performing at level 2  to
      1, which was indeed a concern. Most municipalities were able to  spend
      their allocated operating budgets. What was of concern was that in the
      B2-B4 municipalities, the salary bill comprises more than 35% of  that
      operating budget and in B4 municipalities (mostly rural) reached  47%.
      The challenge arises with spending the capital budget. The  Metro  and
      B1 (cities) municipalities spent 100%, whilst C2 (districts) spent  on
      average 80%. The B2 to B4 municipalities only managed to spend  up  to
      70% of their capital budgets.
6.2   Most municipalities manage to collect cash from the  bills  they  send
      out. The challenge arises in how quickly they manage to  collect  that
      cash (debtor days). The average  debtor  days  (age  of  debt)  in  B4
      municipalities (mostly rural) are 224. This means they take up to  224
      days  to  collect  a  billed  amount  from   the   consumer.   In   B3
      municipalities it is 162 (not much better), in B2 municipalities it is
      107(not better), in the B1 municipalities it is 92 (not better) in the
      Metro it is 80 (getting better)  and  in  districts  it  is  164  (not
      better). This means that municipalities at some stage will face  cash-
      flow challenges as more  money  was  being  paid  out  than  what  was
      collected in billable revenue. And this was evident  more  rapidly  in
      the B1 and B2 municipalities due to more overheads.

   7. Local Economic Development (LED)

7.1    There  was  generally  poor  reporting  that  could  enable  a  sound
      assessment on this indicator. There were no  level  3  performers  and
      only 2 municipalities at level 2. Much on the poor performance on this
      performance  indicator  could  be  attributed  to  poor  reporting  on
      associated indicators. Municipal contributions to LED were measured by
      collecting information on the preferential procurement policies.  Only
      a few municipalities managed to keep record of this information, those
      who did report indicated that on average 66% of  goods  were  procured
      from local SMMEs and 67% procured from BBBEE suppliers.

7.2    The  number  of  jobs  created  (per  10  000  unemployed)   by   the
      municipalities capital budget shows that the  Metro  and  B1  (cities)
      municipalities managed to create 395 and 699  jobs/10  000  unemployed
      respectively.  This  number  reduces   when   data   from   the   B2-4
      municipalities are recorded. This demonstrates that economic  activity
      was still predominantly focused around the urban nodes.
8.    Good Governance and Public Participation

8.1   There are 14 municipalities that are performing at level 3.  The  vast
      majority are  performing  at  level  2,  which  is  considered  to  be
      generally at or just above the consolidation phase. Ten municipalities
      are performing at level 1 which is generally below the expectations of
      the consolidation phase and effectively are showing characteristics of
      a municipality still struggling with establishment issues.

8.2   Council meetings were not held as regularly as the statutes  prescribe
      (at least 4 times/year).  This  again  was  more  evident  in  the  B4
      municipalities where only half of municipalities  managed  to  hold  4
      Council meetings. The absence of a Roles and Responsibility  Framework
      is of concern in 30 of the municipalities in the  Province,  and  this
      was most evident in the B1, B3 and B4 municipalities.

8.3   Most municipalities have  their  auditing  structures  in  place.  The
      effects of this can be seen in  a  substantial  improvement  in  audit
      outcomes since 2005/06 to 2007/08, with  an  increase  in  unqualified
      reports from 16/61 to 38/61 and disclaimers from 17/61 to  only  9/61,
      respectively.

8.4   Anti-Corruption Strategies and Structures were a challenge  with  only
      38% of municipalities indicating that these were in  place.  The  best
      performers  are  the  Metro  and  B2  (urban)   municipalities.   This
      accompanied by a lack of oversight and  reports,  are  challenges  the
      Department aims to address in the coming years.

8.5   On average 66% of the  771  ward  committees  in  Kwa-Zulu  Natal  are
      functioning (meet quarterly and document their issues to Council). The
      most  challenging  areas  are  B2  (urban)  and  B4   (mostly   rural)
      municipalities, with  only  54%  and  64%  of  committees  functioning
      effectively.

9.    Committee Observations and Opinion

9.1   The Committee observed that  there  was  slow  progress  of  municipal
      processes in preparing Annual Performance Reports in terms of  section
      46 of the Local Government Municipal Systems Act, as  part  of  Annual
      Report in terms of section 121 of MFMA.  Furthermore, it was  observed
      that  the  Department   has   capacity   constraints   in   supporting
      municipalities in the Province.

10.   Recommendations


10.1  Having deliberated  on  the  2007/08  Report  of  the  Kwa-Zulu  Natal
      Municipalities  Performance,  the  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:

        1. The NCOP should endorse the 2007/08 Report of the Kwa-Zulu Natal
           Municipalities Performance.


        2. The Kwa-Zulu Natal Department  of  Co-operative  Governance  and
           Traditional Affairs should  assist  the  municipalities  in  the
           Province to improve their spending capacity on  capital  budgets
           and MIG.

        3. The quality of data compilation with regard to service  delivery
           in the  Province  should  be  improved  by  the  Kwa-Zulu  Natal
           Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs.

        4.  The  Kwa-Zulu  Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative   Governance   and
           Traditional Affairs should table quarterly progress  reports  to
           the NCOP in respect to municipal performance in the Province.

Report to be considered.

3.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON BUDGET VOTE 11: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND
ADMINISTRATION (DPSA)

The Select Committee on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
having considered Budget Vote 11 of the DPSA, reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

1.2   On the 16th April 2010, the  Committee  met  with  the  DPSA  to  hear
      briefings on their medium-term budget and strategic plans for the 2010
      /11 financial year. This was done as part of the Committee’s  role  in
      conducting   parliamentary   oversight    and    ensuring    executive
      accountability, especially with regards to the budget  expenditure  of
      the Department.

2.    Background
2.1   The Senior Departmental Officials who appeared  before  the  Committee
      included the Acting Director-General, Acting Chief Operation  Officer,
      Acting Chief Financial Officer and other departmental  officials.  The
      main objective of the briefing session was to allow the Department  to
      brief the  Committee  on  its  2010/11  medium-term  budget,  priority
      projects per programme and how the Department intends to  address  the
      challenges encountered with regards to the realising  its  vision  and
      mission.

3.    DPSA Budget Vote

3.1   An apology was given for the absence of  both  the  Minister  and  his
      Deputy. The Acting Director-General presented the Department’s 2010/11
      Budget Vote. The presentation focused on previous year’s  achievements
      and challenges, Medium-Term Strategic Plan, Annual Performance Plan as
      well as the Medium Term Budget for the  2010/11  financial  year.  The
      table below gives a breakdown on the budget’s economic  classification
      with respect to the departmental programmes:
|Programmes                          |2010/11      |2011/12     |2012/13  |
|1. Administration                   |138, 787     |140, 559    |147, 358 |
|2. Human Resource Management and    |48, 903      |39, 175     |41, 503  |
|Development in Government           |             |            |         |
|3. Labour Relations and Compensation|57, 220      |57, 166     |58, 076  |
|Management in Government            |             |            |         |
|4. Information and Technology       |45, 357      |45, 202     |47, 320  |
|Management in Government            |             |            |         |
|5. Service Delivery Improvement     |186, 663     |188, 314    |195, 118 |
|throughout Government               |             |            |         |
|6. Governance and Public Service and|174, 554     |186, 729    |194, 732 |
|Administration                      |             |            |         |
|TOTAL                               |651, 484     |657, 145    |684, 107 |


2010 MTEF Allocations as in the Estimate of National Expenditure (ENE).

3.2   For the purpose of this report, the measurable objectives achieved  by
      the Department for each programme are outlined below:

(A)   Human Resource Management and Development (HRM&D)


   3. Some of the major achievements reported by the Department  in  respect
      of the  above–mentioned  programme  included  the  development  of  an
      integrated Health Risk Assessment and Management  System  (OHASIS).  A
      curriculum for HR practitioners has been implemented by PALAMA (Public
      Administration Leadership and Management Academy), learning  materials
      for the JobACCESS has been developed. Furthermore, a  draft  strategic
      framework for performance management system was developed, and a blue-
      print on performance measures will also be developed. The  HR  Connect
      programme was rolled out to 56 departments and the  programme  was  on
      track.

(B)   Management of Compensation (MOC)

   4. The significant achievements in relation to MOC programme reported  by
      the  Department  included  the  completion  of  preparatory  work  for
      monitoring  and  evaluation  of  nurses,  and  the   development   and
      implementation of HR module of the Information of Financial Management
      System (IFMS). The module was currently under pilot in Free State  and
      DPSA.  It was reported that a Public Sector  Summit  was  held  and  a
      declaration was signed. The main purpose being  to  strengthen  social
      partnership for good governance and revised policy on post  retirement
      medical assistance  and  implementation  of  pension  policy  on  past
      discriminatory practices.

(C)   Information and Technology Management (I&TM)


   5. Achievement registered under this proramme related to the  development
      of  a  Government  Wide  Information  Security  Governance  Framework,
      connection  of  46  Thusong  Service  Centres  to  a  centralized  ICT
      infrastructure. A report on the ICT Expenditure patterns in the public
      service  was  concluded,  with  recommendations   on   strategies   to
      save/reduce costs/expenditure. In addition,  the  Department  reported
      that an Architecture blue-print for IT was still work in progress  and
      provinces were being consulted.


(D)   Service Delivery Improvement (SDI)

3.6   The Department  reported  that  it  has  provided  assistance  to  the
      departments with  regards  to  the  development  of  service  delivery
      models.  The  Community  Development  Worker  Policy   Framework   was
      developed, with norms and standards and guideline being  finalized.  A
      total of 500 officials were trained in developing and  implementing  3
      year Service Delivery Improvement Programmes and Standards (SDIPs).


(E)   Governance for Public Service and Administration


   7. The major achievements in relation  to  this  programme  included  the
      development of a  monitoring  and  evaluation  training  programme  to
      support consolidated system for “one time” reporting on various public
      service regulations. Equally, the Conflict of Interest  Framework  was
      implemented as well as  the  completion  of  compliance  audit  in  36
      national departments. Lastly, the Department has  developed  an  anti-
      corruption  capacity  building  programme  with  PALAMA,  and  it  was
      indicated that an Anti-Corruption Summit and experts’  roundtable  was
      hosted to approve the Programme of Action requirements.

4.    Annual Performance Plan (2010/11)

4.1   The 2010/11 Annual Performance Plan tabled by the Department is  based
      on  the  10  strategic  priorities  identified,  and  are  linked   to
      performance  outcomes.  These  strategic  priorities  include  service
      delivery  quality  and  access;  effective  systems,  structures   and
      processes; leverage ICT as a strategic resource; effective  employment
      entry into public service and HRD;  effective HRM Practices, norms and
      standards; healthy, safe working environments for all public servants;
      appropriate  governance  structures   and   decision-making;   citizen
      engagement, stakeholder and public participation;  corruption  tackled
      effectively and lastly, contributing to  improved  public  service  in
      Africa and international arena. The strategic priorities are discussed
      below:

      Priority 1: Service Delivery Quality and Access
   1.  The  intention  of  this  strategic  priority  is  to   enforce   the
      requirements the  SDIP’s  as  well  as  conducting  user  satisfaction
      surveys of  government  services.  During  this  financial  year,  the
      Department aim to forge social compact with labour to improve  service
      delivery. Together with relevant  institutions,  the  Department  will
      develop standards for waiting time for pensions, hospital  queues  and
      vehicle licensing centres.

      Priority 2: Effective Systems, Structures and Processes
   2. Part of the Department’s goal under this priority  is  to  centralised
      Expert/Specialist PERSAL and directing departments to improve  quality
      of PERSAL information  and  monitor  progress  of  the  data  clean-up
      processes  involved.  The  Department  will  then   train   all   line
      departments and issue certificates of competence to HR end-users.

      Priority 3: Leverage ICT as a Strategic Resource (Enabler)
4.1.3 The Department will oversee the  turn-around  strategy  for  SITA  and
      work collaboratively with the GITOC to improve the service delivery of
      mandatory IT services by SITA. Furthermore, it will also implement the
      roll-out of skills database to all line departments.

      Priority 4: Effective Employment Entry into Public Service HRD
4.1.4 A comprehensive funding model for public  sector  training  linked  to
      skills development legislation will be  established,  with  a  minimum
      levels of training  per  annum  for  the  public  sector  in  specific
      competency areas.  The  Department  will  also  introduce  a  national
      integrated public sector training system covering the three spheres of
      government,  as  well  streamline  the  government-wide  institutional
      landscape for public sector training.

      Priority 5: Effective HRM Practices, Norms and Standards
   5. A revised PMDS Strategic Framework for public service  in  all  levels
      which links organizational  performance  with  individual  performance
      will  be  developed.  Significantly,  the   Department   will   revamp
      performance management system for senior managers and levels 1-12.  It
      will also review and strengthen the performance management system  for
      HOD’s, and linking them to the outcome of performance  audits  by  the
      Auditor-General. Lastly, it will support departments  that  repeatedly
      obtain qualified audits.

      Priority 6: Healthy, Safe Working Environments for all Public Servants
   6. Under this strategic  priority,  the  Department  will  focus  on  the
      implementation of  EHW  policies  through  guidelines,  handbooks  and
      training. In addition, it  will  also  implement  the  monitoring  and
      evaluation tool to measure EHW policies.

      Priority 7: Appropriate Governance Structures and Decision-Making
   7. The Department aims to support departments to improve their  financial
      capability and also monitor progress in signing  of  delegations  from
      Ministers to Director-Generals on HRA Monitor, as well as reporting on
      the implementation of HR and Finance delegations at  service  delivery
      points.

      Priority 8: Citizen Engagement, Stakeholder and Public Participation
   8. The Department hopes to promote Nation Building through,  Imbizos  and
      service delivery  visits,  as  well  as  facilitating  social  compact
      through agreements on service delivery standards.

      Priority 9: Corruption Tackled Effectively
   9. Support will be provided to  departments  in  building  minimum  anti-
      corruption capacity as well as investigate allegations  of  corruption
      from  National  Anti-corruption  Hotline.  An   anti-corruption   risk
      assessments and training on education  ethics  will  be  conducted.  A
      strategy to prosecute and charge public servants involved in tendering
      and other fraudulent activities will be developed, as  well  financial
      disclosures analysed and monitored to verify honest disclosure.
      Priority 10: Contribution to Improved Public  Service  in  Africa  and
      International Arena
4.1.10      Under this strategic  priority,  the  Department  will  only  be
      developing a strategy for ensuring  quality  outputs  in  multilateral
      agreements.

5.    Committee Observations

5.1   The Committee has observed that the Department’s medium-term  strategy
      has been aligned to the new and established mandate. The  new  mandate
      of the Department included those priorities emanating from the  macro-
      reorganisation, State of the Nation Address and Cabinet Lekgotla.  The
      Committee noted that the Department was  however  in  the  process  of
      reviewing its strategy in order to identify gaps and  to  reprioritize
      its resource allocation. In this regard the Department  will  hold  an
      operational review session to ensure the alignment of strategy and its
      operational plan for 2010/11.

5.2   The Committee has further observed that the Department’s  mandate  has
      evolved over the years from developing policy towards implementing and
      facilitating   service   delivery    improvement    through    support
      interventions, ICT and community development workers.  The  Department
      also participates in and plays  a  critical  role  in  various  public
      administration and  management  structures  in  the  Southern  African
      Development Community (SADC) region and the rest of the world.

6.    Recommendations

6.1   Having considered and deliberated on the Department of Public  Service
      and Administration 2010/11 Budget Vote and  Annual  Performance  Plan,
      the Committee  recommends  as  follows  to  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces, that the Department should:

      6.1.1  Provide  the  Committee  with  progress  reports  on  all   the
           municipalities that  have  failed  to  comply  with  the  policy
           frameworks developed by the Department.
      6.1.2 Provide the Committee with progress reports on  the  development
           of a Single Public Service Bill.
      6.1.3 Provide the Committee with  a  comprehensive  list  of  all  the
           summits and conferences schedule for 2010/11 financial  year  to
           be hosted by the Department.
      6.1.4 Provide the Committee with progress reports on a quarterly basis
           on the achievements made by the Department  in  respect  to  its
           2010/11 medium-term priority projects per programme.


6.2    The  Committee  further  recommends  that  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces should approve Budget Vote 11 of the  Department  of  Public
      Service and Administration.

Report to be considered.


